CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted, October 15, 2007 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GROSSE POINTE WOODS, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert E. Novitke 
Mayor 
____________ 
Allen G. Dickinson 
Victoria A. Granger 
Lisa Pinkos Howle 
Dona DeSantis-Reynolds 
Darryl A. Spicher 
Peter N. Waldmeir 
City Council 
____________ 
Mark Wollenweber 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Don R. Berschback 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lisa K. Hathaway 
City Clerk 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GROSSE POINTE WOODS, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Robert E. Novike 
Mayor 
____________ 
Victoria A. Granger 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Arthur W. Bryant 
Kevin Ketels 
Michael Koester 
Todd A. McConaghy 
Richard Shetler, Jr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Al Fincham 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Lisa Hathaway 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1997 Code, as supplemented through March 7, 2005, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 and 1997 Codes, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation that represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Michal Stallworth, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Chip Berschback, Assistant City Attorney, Gail Reardon, Administrative Assistant, Lisa Hathaway, City Clerk, Mark Wollenweber, City Administrator and Louise Warnke, former City Clerk for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan 2007. 
ORDINANCE NO. 819 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING THE CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN THE CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through, 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All Ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 24, 2007, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Code or State law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 24, 2007, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired, or incurred at the time this ordinance takes effect are saved from repeal and may be consummated according to the law in force when they commenced or occurred. This ordinance shall not be construed to affect any prosecution pending or initiated before the effective date of this ordinance, or initiated after the effect date for an offense committed before such effective date. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective November 4, 2007. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 15th day of October, 2007. 
First reading: 06/18/07 
Second reading: 10/01/07 
Published by title: 09/20/07 
Adopted: 10/15/07 
Effective: 11/04/07 
ORDINANCE NO. 874 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING, ENACTING, AND RECODIFYING THE CITY CODE FOR THE CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING THE CODE; PROVIDING FOR A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF, AND PROVIDING WHEN THE CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through, 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Code or State law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 3. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code. 
Section 4. Ordinances adopted after August 7, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 5. All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired, or incurred at the time this ordinance takes effect are saved from repeal and may be consummated according to the law in force when they commenced or occurred. This ordinance shall not be construed to affect any prosecution pending or initiated before the effective date of this ordinance, or initiated after the effect date for an offense committed before such effective date. 
First reading: 08/07/17 
PROPOSED: 
Scond reading: 09/11/17 
Published by title: 08/24/17 
Adopted: 09/11/17 
Effective: 10/01/17 
Published Final: 9/28/17 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 831  7-12-2010 Include 4 832  7-12-2010 Include 4 833  8-16-2010 Include 4 835 10- 4-2010 Include 4 836  1- 3-2011 Include 4 834  9-20-2010 Include 5 837  2-28-2011 Include 5 838  4-18-2011 Include 5 839  4-18-2011 Include 5 840  7-11-2011 Include 5 841  9-12-2011 Include 5 842  9-12-2011 Include 5 843  9-12-2011 Include 5 844  2-27-2012 Include 6 845  2-27-2012 Include 6 846  5- 7-2012 Include 6 847  7-16-2012 Include 6 848  8-20-2012 Include 6 849  8-20-2012 Include 6 850 12-17-2012 Include 6 851  1-28-2013 Include 6 852  1-28-2013 Include 6 853  1-28-2013 Include 6 854  7- 1-2013 Include 7 855  7- 1-2013 Include 7 856  7-15-2013 Include 7 857  8- 5-2013 Include 7 858  6-16-2014 Include 8 859  6-16-2014 Include 8 860  2-23-2015 Include 8 861  4-13-2015 Include 9 862  4-13-2015 Include 9 863  5-18-2015 Include 9 864  7-13-2015 Include 9 865  9-21-2015 Include 9 866 11-16-2015 Include 9 867 12-21-2015 Include 9 868  7-11-2016 Include 10 869  7-11-2016 Include 10 870  7-11-2016 Include 10 871 12-19-2016 Include 10 872  2-27-2017 Include 11 873  5- 1-2017 Include 11 874  9-11-2017 Include 11 875 10- 2-2017 Include 11 876 12- 4-2017 Include 11 877 12- 4-2017 Include 11 878  2-26-2018 Include 11 879 10-15-2018 Include 12  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Wayne County, Michigan, formerly known as the Village of Grosse Pointe Woods, by virtue of authority of the Constitution and of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended, do hereby ordain and establish this home rule charter for the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, as adopted by the electorate on December 11, 1950, and effective on December 13, 1950. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Name and Boundaries. 
    The name of this organized city is "City of Grosse Pointe Woods." It is a body corporate, and embraces the following described territory in the townships of Grosse Pointe and Gratiot in the County of Wayne, State of Michigan, constituting the former Village of Grosse Pointe Woods, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto, and less such territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom, in accordance with law: 
    Beginning at the intersection of the old center line of Mack Avenue, 66 feet wide, and the southerly line of Private Claim 617 and proceeding thence northwest along said southerly line, said line being also the boundary of the City of Detroit, 1793 feet to the easterly boundary of Gratiot Township; thence north along said boundary, being a line 1650 feet west of and parallel to the old center line of Mack Avenue, 1307.59 feet to the line between Private Claims 617 and 618, said line being also the southerly boundary of Grosse Pointe Country Club Woods Subdivision, as recorded in Liber 59 of plats, pages 63 and 64, Wayne County Records; thence along the boundary of said subdivision, northwest, 805.65 feet and northeast, 1256.47 feet to the line between Private Claims 618 and 619; thence northwest along said line, 2161.57 feet to the center line of Harper Avenue; thence northerly along said center line, 628.38 feet to the line between Private Claims 619 and 620; thence southeast along said line, 2176.1 feet to the easterly boundary of Gratiot Township; thence northerly along said boundary, being a line 1650 feet west of and parallel to the old center line of Mack Avenue, approximately 7700 feet to the north line of Wayne County; thence east along said county line, approximately 9200 feet to a point on the westerly boundary of the Village of Grosse Pointe Shores, said point being 1026.57 feet (measured along said County line) west of the westerly line of Lake Shore Road, 120 feet wide; thence southerly along said westerly Village boundary, approximately 5110 feet to a point in Vernier Road distant westerly 1920 feet (measured along Vernier Road) from the westerly line of Lake Shore Road, 120 feet wide; thence continuing southerly along said westerly Village boundary approximately 7370 feet to a point on the southerly line of Private Claim 619, distant westerly 1944.32 feet (measured along said southerly line) from the westerly line of Lake Shore Road, 120 feet wide; thence northwest along said southerly line, being also the northerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe Farms, approximately 6060 feet to the old center line of Mack Avenue, 66 feet wide; thence southerly along said old center line, being also the westerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe Farms, approximately 2680 feet to the point of beginning. 
State Law reference- Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.6 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - General Powers. 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the city and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their Charters under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including all powers, privileges and immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in their charters by Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended, as fully and completely as though these powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
    The city and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated herein or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the general laws of the state and the provisions of this charter. 
Section 2.2. - Further Definition of Powers. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the city under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, and those set forth throughout this charter, the city shall have power with respect to and may, by ordinance and other lawful acts of its officers, provide for the following, subject to any specific limitations placed thereon by this charter: 
(a)  The acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction, or in any manner permitted by statute, of private property of every type and nature for public use, which property may be located within or without the County of Wayne and which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purposes, powers and duties of the city, either proprietary or otherwise; 
(b)  The maintenance, development, operation, leasing and disposal of city property subject to any restrictions placed thereon by statute or this charter; 
(c)  The refunding of money advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions; 
(d)  The installation and connection of conduits for the service of municipally owned and operated electric lighting plants; 
(e)  The purchase or condemnation of the franchises and of the property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in the cemetery, hospital, almshouse, electric light, gas, heat, water and power business; 
(f)  The use, regulation, improvement and control of the surface of its streets, alleys, public ways and other public places and of the space above and beneath them, whether such be located within or without the limits of the city; 
(g)  The use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys and public places, in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation to the owners thereof; 
(h)  A plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the municipal limits; 
(i)  The use, control and regulation of streams, waters and water courses within its boundaries, subject to any limitations imposed by statute; 
(j)  The securing by condemnation, by agreement or purchase, or by any other means, of an easement in property abutting or adjacent to any navigable body of water for the purpose of securing the privilege and right to construct, own and maintain along or adjacent to any navigable body of water an elevated structure of one or more levels for use as a vehicular or pedestrian passageway, or for any other municipal purpose; 
(k)  The acquiring, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
(l)  The acquiring, constructing, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the docking of water craft, hydroplanes and seaplanes, within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for use thereof, and for such purpose or purposes, to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
(m)  Regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of oil and gasoline stations; 
(n)  Establishing of districts or zones within which the use of land and structures, the type, character, height, area, size and location of buildings and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population may be regulated by ordinance in accordance with statutory provisions governing zoning; 
(o)  Regulating of trades, occupations and amusements within the city, not inconsistent with state and federal laws and for the prohibition of such trades, occupations and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of its inhabitants; 
(p)  Licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the city; 
(q)  Preventing injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city from anything which is dangerous, offensive or unhealthful, and for preventing and abating nuisances and punishing those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue or remove the same; 
(r)  Prescribing the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended or revoked; requiring payment of reasonable sums for licenses; and requiring the furnishing of a bond to the city for the faithful observance of the conditions under which licenses are granted, and otherwise conditioning such licenses as the Council may prescribe; 
(s)  Regulating all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety and welfare, controlling and regulating the use of the air above the city by aircraft of all types; 
(t)  Prohibiting or regulating the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers within the city, and the right of the city to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever; 
(u)  Requiring an owner of real property within the city to construct and maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements or if the owner is unknown, to construct and maintain such sidewalks and assess the cost thereof against the property in accordance with Section 11.9; 
(v)  Requiring an owner of real property within the city to abate public hazards and nuisances which are dangerous to the health or safety of inhabitants of the city within a reasonable time after the Council notifies him that such hazard or nuisance exists, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, to abate such hazard or nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such property in accordance with Section 11.9. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for acquisition of public buildings and grounds, MCL 117.4e(1); permissible that Charter provide for condemnation, MCL 117.4e(2); permissible that Charter provide for maintenance and disposition of city property, MCL 117.4e(1); permissible that Charter provide for zoning, MCL 117.4i(c); permissible that Charter provide for police powers, MCL 117.4i(j); permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades and occupations, MCL 117.4i(d); permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public ways, MCL 117.4h(1); permissible that Charter provide for plan of streets and alleys, MCL 117.4h(3); permissible that Charter provide for vehicle parking facilities, MCL 117.4h(6). 
Section 2.3. - Inter-governmental Contracts. 
    The city shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency, or with any number or combination thereof by contract or otherwise as may be permitted by law to have performed (a) jointly, or (b) by one or more of them for or on behalf of the other or others, or (c) by any other person, firm or corporation, any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed by, or imposed upon, each such governmental unit or agency. 
State Law reference- Authority to enter into intergovernmental contract, MCL 124.1 et seq. 
Section 2.4. - Outside Fire Protection. 
    In exercise of the powers contained in Section 2.1 herein, the Council shall have the right to contract with persons, firms, corporations or governing bodies to furnish fire protection to property outside the corporate limits of the city for a fair consideration, if the Council shall find that the financial interests of the city are advanced by obtaining payments therefor; and/or that the prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants are advanced through preventing a conflagration which might spread within the city limits or through protecting industrial or commercial properties at which residents of the city are employed, from fire. 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Section 3.1. - Qualification of Electors. 
    The residents of the city having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan, and no others, shall be electors of the city. 
State Law reference- Qualifications for registration as elector, MCL 168.492; mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors generally, MCL 168.491 et seq. 
Section 3.2. - Election Procedure. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Section 3.3. - Wards and Precincts. 
    The City of Grosse Pointe Woods shall consist of one ward. The Council shall from time to time establish by ordinance convenient election precincts. The precincts into which the Village is divided on the effective date of this Charter shall be the precincts of the city until otherwise provided for by the Council. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e). 
Section 3.4. - Election Date. 
    A Regular City Election shall be held on the first Monday in April of 1965 and on the first Monday in April of 1966 and each even year thereafter. 
Section 3.5. - Elective Officers and Terms of Office. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor, six Councilmembers and the Municipal Judge. At the Regular City Election in November of 1997, there shall be elected from the City at large, a Mayor for a term of four years and three City Councilmembers for a term of four years, and at the Regular City Election in 1999 there shall be elected from the City at large three City Councilmembers for a term of four years. In the year 2001 and each four years thereafter there shall be elected from the City at large a Mayor and three City Councilmembers, and in the year 2003 and each four years thereafter there shall be elected from the City at large three City Councilmembers. 
    At the Regular City Election in 1999 and every fourth year thereafter there shall also be elected the Municipal Judge for a term of four years, commencing on the 1st day of January next following such election. 
(Adopted by electors 4-2-1956, 4-6-1964, 11-5-1996) 
Section 3.6. - Special Elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least thirty days in advance of such election, or when required by this charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more than two special city elections shall be called in any one year. 
State Law reference- Special elections, MCL 168.631 et seq. 
Section 3.7. - Notice of Elections. 
    Notice of time and place of holding any city election and of the officers to be nominated or elected and the questions to be voted upon shall be given by the Clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided in the state election law for the giving of notice by township or city clerks. 
State Law reference- Notice of election, MCL 168.653a. 
Section 3.8. - Voting Hours. 
    The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections, subject to any statutory right of the Council to adjust these hours to local time. 
State Law reference- Opening and closing of polls, MCL 168.720. 
Section 3.9. - Nominations. 
    The method of nomination of all officers provided for in this charter which are to be filled by the electors of the city shall be by petition. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than two hundred (200) nor more than two hundred and fifty (250) registered electors of the City. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at said election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than there are candidates to be elected to said office, the signature of such individual on all such petitions shall be invalidated. 
    Nomination petitions shall be filed with the city clerk at his office not prior to August 1 and not later than the second Monday in September preceding the date for holding the regular city election; and in case of a special election to fill a vacancy, not later than 30 days prior to the date fixed for holding such special election. No nomination petitions shall be received by the City Clerk after 5:00 o'clock P.M. prevailing time on the last day fixed for receiving nomination petitions. The clerk shall publish notice of the last day permitted for filing nomination petitions at least one week and not more than three weeks before such day. 
    In the event the provisions hereof shall, at any time, conflict with the provisions of the "Michigan Election Law," as the same may be hereafter amended, relating to [the] last day upon which such nomination petitions can be filed, the Council shall thereupon adopt an appropriate ordinance to provide the last day upon which nomination petitions for city offices may be filed in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Michigan relating thereto. 
(Adopted by electors 8-7-1962, 11-5-1996) 
State Law reference- Preparation and filing of nominating petitions, MCL 168.542 et seq. 
Section 3.10. - Form of Petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary of State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Section 3.11. - Approval of Petition. 
    The Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform with the forms provided and maintained by him, and which, considered together, contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the respective elective city offices by this charter. All petitions shall be accompanied by the affidavit of qualifications provided for in Section 5.1. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, notify in writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. Within five days after the last date for filing petitions, the Clerk shall make his final determinations as to the validity and sufficiency of each nomination petition and whether or not the candidate has the qualifications required for his respective elective city office by this charter and shall write his determinations thereof on the face of the petition and shall notify in writing the candidate whose name appears thereon of his determinations. However, no petitions shall be determined to be valid unless the affidavit of qualifications provided for in Section 5.1 shall be filed with such petition. The names of the candidates who file valid and sufficient nomination petitions shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission to be place [placed] upon the ballot for the next subsequent regular city election or at the next special election for the filling of vacancies in office, as the case may be. 
Section 3.12. - Public Inspection of Petitions. 
    All nomination petitions filed shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
Section 3.13. - Election Commission. 
    An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the Clerk, the Attorney and one member of the Council who shall not be a candidate for elective office at the election for which he serves as a member of the Election Commission, such member to be appointed by the Council not less than fifteen days before each election. The members shall serve without compensation. The Clerk shall be chairman and two members of such board shall be a quorum. The Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by statute and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
State Law reference- Duties of election commission, MCL 168.719. 
Section 3.14. - Form of Ballot. 
    The form, printing and numbering of ballots or the preparation of the voting machines used in any city election shall conform as nearly as may be to that prescribed by statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear. In all city elections, the names of qualified candidates for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated systematically in the manner prescribed by statute for rotation of names. 
    If two or more candidates for the same office have the same or similar surnames, the Election Commission shall print the occupation and residence address under the respective names of each of such candidates on the ballots (or on labels or slips to be placed on voting machines when used), provided, that for any of such candidates who is an incumbent of such office, the occupation shall be designated as "Incumbent." Except as provided in this section there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates on the ballot. 
State Law reference- Preparation and distribution of ballots, MCL 168.559 et seq.; preparation, printing and delivery of official ballots, MCL 168.684 et seq. 
Section 3.15. - Canvass of Votes. 
    The Clerk and the members of the City Council shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the votes at city elections, except that if any of such persons are candidates for office at the election to be canvassed such persons shall not serve as a canvasser at such election. A majority of the members of such board shall be a quorum. The board of canvassers shall convene on the Thursday next succeeding each city election at the usual time and place of meeting of the Council and determine the results of the city election upon each question and proposition voted upon and what persons are duly elected to the several offices respectively at said election, and shall notify in writing the successful candidates of their election. The number of candidates for each office equal to the number to be elected to such office who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected. The Clerk shall make under the corporate seal of the city duplicate certificates of the determinations of the board and shall file one certificate with the County Clerk and the other in his own office. 
State Law reference- Canvass of returns, MCL 168.323. 
Section 3.16. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be ad in accordance with the general election laws of the state. Unless otherwise provided by statute the petition for a recount of the votes cast at any city election shall be filed with the Clerk within six days after the board of canvassers has made its official report of the result of the election at which such votes were cast, and any counter petition shall be filed within twenty-four hours thereafter. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq. 
Section 3.17. - Recall. 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the city in the manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by the recall of any elected official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by statute. 
State Law reference- Recall, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
CHAPTER 4. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 4.1. - The City Council. 
    There shall be a Council of seven members, consisting of the six elected Councilmen and the Mayor, who shall be deemed a member of the Council for all purposes. The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this charter or by law, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word "Council" is used in this charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word "Commission" or any other term used in any state or federal law in referring to municipal legislative or governing bodies. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 4.2. - Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen. 
    Each Councilman and the Mayor shall receive as compensation fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each regular/special meeting of the Council which he attends, but the compensation so paid shall not exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00) in any year, such year to be determined as commencing as of the Monday following the Regular City Election. The Mayor shall, in addition, receive the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for each year of his term of office served. 
    Such salaries shall be paid monthly and except as otherwise provided in this Charter shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid the Mayor or Councilmen for the discharge of any official duty for or in behalf of the city during their term of office. However, the Mayor and Councilmen may, upon order of the Council, be paid such necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city as are authorized and itemized. 
(Adopted by electors 4-2-1956) 
Editor's note- Compensation of elected officers is now determined by the Local Officers Compensation Commission under Code of Ordinances § 2-251 et seq. 
Section 4.3. - Election of Mayor: Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The Council shall, at its first meeting following each regular city election, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem, for a term expiring at the first Council meeting following the next regular city election. In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
Section 4.4. - Duties of Mayor. 
(a)  Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the city. He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Council, equal with that of other members of the Council, but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Council. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and disorder, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder. 
(c)  The Mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Council, this charter or the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States shall require. 
(d)  Except as may be required by law, the Mayor shall exercise only such powers as this charter or the council shall specifically confer upon him. 
(e)  In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the designated Acting Mayor shall perform such duties. 
Section 4.5. - Administrative Service. 
    The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Administrator, Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, Attorney, Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Superintendent of Public Works, and if the Council deems necessary a Health Officer, City Engineer, Water Superintendent and Building Inspector. The Council may by ordinance create additional administrative offices and may by resolution combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
    The City Administrator, Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and Attorney shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. All administrative officers of the city except the City Administrator, Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and Attorney shall be appointed or selected by the City Administrator for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and hold office at the pleasure of the City Administrator and shall have their compensation fixed by the City Administrator in accordance with budget appropriations and any pay plan adopted by the Council. Appointments of administrative officers by the City Administrator shall be subject to confirmation by the Council, but he may discharge such officers without such confirmation. 
    Except as may be otherwise required by statute or this charter, the Council shall establish by ordinance such departments of the city as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein the functions of each department and the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the officers of each department, but the Council may not diminish the duties or responsibilities of the office of City Administrator. The City Administrator may prescribe such duties and responsibilities of the officers of those departments responsible to him which are not inconsistent with this charter or with any ordinance or resolution. 
    All personnel employed by the city who are not elected officers of the city or declared to be administrative officers by or under the authority of this charter shall be deemed to be employees of the city. The head of each department shall have the power to hire and discharge the employees of his department without confirmation by the Council. Any employee who has been discharged may within ten days thereafter petition the Council to hear the facts regarding such discharge, and in any such case the Council may, in its own discretion, hold a hearing and inquire into such facts and may make such recommendation in the manner as it considers proper. 
Section 4.6. - City Administrator: Appointment and Qualifications. 
    The Council shall appoint a City Administrator within ninety days after any vacancy exists in such position. The City Administrator shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the Council, but he shall not be removed from office during a period of thirty days following any regular city election except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council. He shall be selected on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his training and experience and without regard to his political or religious preferences. 
Section 4.7. - City Administrator: Functions and Duties. 
    The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government. His functions and duties shall be: 
(a)  To be responsible to the Council for the efficient administration of all administrative departments of the city government except the departments under the direction of the Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and Attorney; 
(b)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(c)  To appoint, with the consent of the Council, the heads of the several city departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified in this charter, and to discharge such department heads without the consent of the Council, and to direct and supervise such department heads; 
(d)  To give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts or agreements; 
(e)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(f)  To recommend an annual budget to the Council and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the Council, and to keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(g)  To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and to attend Council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote; 
(h)  To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that are not imposed by this charter or ordinance upon some other official; 
(i)  To maintain a system of accounts of the city which shall conform to any uniform system required by law and by the Council and to generally accepted principles and procedure of governmental accounting. He shall make monthly financial statements to the Council; 
(j)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or as may be required of him by ordinance or by direction of the Council. 
Section 4.8. - Acting City Administrator. 
    The Council may appoint or designate an Acting City Administrator during the period of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of the City Administrator from the city. Such Acting Administrator shall, while he is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the City Administrator. 
Section 4.9. - Relationship of Council to Administrative Service. 
    Neither the Council nor any of its members or committees shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the City Administrator or in any way interfere with the City Administrator or other city officer to prevent them from exercising their judgment in the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service (except the Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and Attorney) solely through the City Administrator and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Administrator. 
Section 4.10. - Clerk: Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
(b)  He shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the city the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c)  He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the council. 
(d)  He shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this charter. 
(e)  He shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or by the Council. 
(g)  He shall at all times cooperate with the City Administrator and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Administrator so long as they are not inconsistent with duties of his office as provided herein. 
State Law reference- Oath of public officers, Mich. Const. 1963, art. XI, § 1; mandatory that Charter provide for keeping in the English language a written or printed journal of every session of the legislative body, MCL 117.3(m). 
Section 4.11. - Treasurer: Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the city, any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the city or held in trust by the city. 
(b)  He shall receive from other officers, employees and any other representative and/or agency of the city, as may be authorized by the City Council, all money belonging to and receivable by the city that may be collected by such officers, employees, representatives and/or agencies, including fines, license fees, permit fees, taxes, assessments, utility bills and other charges. 
(c)  He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the City Administrator. 
(d)  He shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district and city taxes as are conferred by law upon township treasurers in connection with state, county, township and school district taxes upon real and personal property. 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or by the Council. 
(f)  He shall at all times cooperate with the City Administrator and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Administrator so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as provided herein. 
(Adopted by electors 11-7-1989) 
Section 4.12. - Attorney: Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Council and shall be responsible solely to the Council. He shall advise any officer or department head of the city in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b)  He shall prosecute all ordinance violations and he shall conduct for the city such cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals as the Council may request. He shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(c)  He shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the Council and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d)  He shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the city. 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or by the Council. 
(f)  He shall at all times cooperate with the City Administrator and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Administrator so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as herein provided. 
(g)  Upon the recommendation of the Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein. 
Section 4.13. - Attorney: Compensation. 
    The compensation set by the Council for the Attorney shall be in contemplation of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation may be provided at the discretion of the Council for appeals to, or litigation commenced in, the Federal Courts, the Circuit Court or State Supreme Court; for work requiring extensive hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals; for legal work in connection with the issuance of bonds of the city; for condemnation proceedings or for other matters outside the scope of his normal duties. No such special compensation, nor any compensation to special legal counsel, shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement between the Council and the Attorney or special counsel made before the service for which such special compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Section 4.14. - City Assessor: Functions and Duties. 
    The City Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by statute. He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribe[d] by this charter, by ordinance and by statute. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this charter or by the Council or the City Administrator. 
Section 4.15. - Planning Commission. 
    The Council shall by ordinance maintain a city planning commission created in accordance with, and under the authority of, statute and having the powers and duties prescribed by statute and this charter. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 
Section 4.16. - Zoning. 
    The Council shall maintain a zoning ordinance in accordance with, and under the authority of statute, and having the powers and duties prescribed by statute and this charter and the Council shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq. 
Section 4.17. - Independent Boards. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for independent boards or commissions to administer the following activities of the city and no others: civil service or merit system, parks and recreation, public housing, hospitals and activities which by statute are required to be administered by a board or commission. 
Section 4.18. - Comptroller. 
    The City Council may appoint a City Comptroller who shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the Council and who shall be the General Finance Officer of the City. He shall be responsible to and work under the supervision of the City Administrator. His functions and duties shall be: 
(a)  To maintain a system of accounts of the City which shall conform to any uniform system required by law and by the Council and to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting; 
(b)  To examine and audit all accounts and claims against the City except claims for unliquidated damages. He shall not approve the issuance of, nor sign any draft, check or warrant until he has verified the correctness of the amount for which the same is issued; 
(c)  To prescribe a method of accounts and financial records for any office, department or court of the city maintaining independent accounts or financial records; 
(d)  To examine and audit all books of accounts or financial records kept by any office, department or court of the City, at the close of each fiscal year and at any other time at his own discretion; 
(e)  To present to the Council monthly financial reports showing in detail the financial condition and operations of the city; 
(f)  To at all time[s] cooperate with the City Administrator and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Administrator so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as herein provided. 
(Adopted by electors 11-4-1986) 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Section 5.1. - Eligibility for Office in City. 
    No person shall hold any elective office of the city unless immediately prior to the last day for filing petitions for such office he is a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    The Municipal Judge shall, in addition, have the qualifications for that office prescribed in Section 15.3. 
    No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive city office who is in default to the city or to any other governmental unit of the state. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be cured within thirty days after written notice thereof by the Council or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for such default. 
    Each candidate for elective office shall file with his petition his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this section. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his petition. 
    The Council shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members. 
    Each member of the city board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this charter shall have been a resident of this city or village for at least two years prior to the day of his appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    All administrative officers shall be United States citizens. If the city Administrator is not a resident of the city at the time of his appointment, he shall become a resident thereof within one year after his appointment and shall so remain throughout his tenure in office. 
    No elective city officer may be appointed to any city office other than the office of Mayor or be employed by the city during the term of office for which he was elected or for two (2) years thereafter, except that after the expiration of his term of office he may be appointed as a member of an independent Board or Commission or to fill a vacancy in the position of Councilman. 
(Adopted by electors 11-7-1989) 
Section 5.2. - Vacancies in Office; Removal from Office. 
    Any elective city office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon the occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If no person is elected to, or qualifies for, the office at the election at which such office is to be filled; 
(c)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; 
(d)  If the officer shall absent himself continuously from the city for more than thirty consecutive days in any one year without the permission of the Council; 
(e)  In the case of any members of the Council, if such officer shall miss four consecutive regular meetings of the Council, or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absences shall be excused by the Council and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council at the time of each absence; 
(f)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
    The office of any member of any board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this charter shall be declared vacant by the Council: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this Charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; 
(c)  If such officer shall miss four consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absences shall be excused by such board or commission and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of such board or commission at the time of each absence; 
(d)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
    Removals of officers by the Council shall be made for either of the following reasons: (1) for any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers by the Governor, (2) for misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter. Such removals by the Council shall be made only after hearing of which such officer has been given notice by the Clerk at least ten days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his last known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal is being considered, shall be required for any such removal. 
State Law reference- Removal of city officers, MCL 168.327. 
Section 5.3. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately. 
Section 5.4. - Filling Vacancies in Offices. 
(a)  Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. 
(b)  Vacancies in elective offices other than [the] Municipal Judge shall be filled by appointment by the Council, of a person possessing the qualifications for the office. Any person appointed to a vacancy in any such elective offices shall hold office until such vacancy is filled at the next regular city election. If four or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the positions of Mayor and Councilmembers, the Clerk shall within 10 days thereafter call a special election to be held within 60 days to fill such vacancies for the unexpired terms of the officers whose offices have become vacant. 
(c)  Vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge occurring more than sixty days before the regular city election to be held in years (1) other than in 1954, or (2) other than in any fourth year after 1954, shall be filled by appointment by the Council for a term expiring on the 31st of December following the next regular city election. At such election such vacancy shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term of office. 
    Vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge occurring sixty days or less before the regular city election in years (1) other than in 1953 or 1954, or (2) other than in any fourth year after 1953 or 1954, shall be filled by appointment by the Council for a term expiring on the Monday following the second succeeding regular city election. At such second succeeding regular city election such vacancy shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term of office. 
    Vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge occurring (1) in the period beginning on the sixtieth day before the regular city election in 1953 and ending on July 4, 1954, or (2) in the corresponding period beginning in any fourth year after 1953, shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term of office. 
(Adopted by electors 4-7-1952, 11-5-1996) 
Section 5.5. - Change In Term of Office or Compensation. 
    Except by procedures provided in this charter, the terms of office of the elective officers and members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers shall not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected except that an elective officer shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or employee after his service has been rendered. The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased from the time of his election until the end of the term of office for which he was elected, except by vote of a majority of the electors voting on the question. 
(Adopted by electors 11-5-1996) 
Section 5.6. - Oath of Office and Bond. 
    Every officer, elective or appointive, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed for public officers by the Constitution of the State and shall file the oath with the Clerk, together with any bond required by statute, this charter or by the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date he is notified in writing of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
State Law reference- Oath of public officers, Mich. Const. 1963, art. XI, § 1. 
Section 5.7. - Surety Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all officers of the city whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Council, shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the city an official bond, in such form and amount as the Council shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office, and will on demand deliver over to his successor in office, or other proper officer or an agent of the city, all books, papers, moneys, effects and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his office, which may be in his custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the Council shall prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that he will, on demand, pay over or account for to the city, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all moneys received by him as such officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, city employees and officers. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. All bonds of all officers or employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk shall be filed with the Treasurer. 
Section 5.8. - Delivery of Office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five days, and sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. 
    Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under statute. Any employee found guilty of violating this provision by a court of competent jurisdiction may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the court. 
Section 5.9. - Financial Interest Prohibited. 
(a)  Except as permitted by this section no contract or purchase involving an expenditure in excess of one hundred dollars shall be made by the city in which any elective or appointive officer, (except a member of a city board or commission created by or pursuant to this charter) or any member of his family has any financial interest, direct or indirect, other than the common public interest. A "contract" shall for the purposes of this section include any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the city for a valuable consideration to be paid by the city, or sold or transferred by the city, except the furnishing of personal services as an officer or employee of the city; and the term "member of his family" shall include only [a] spouse, child, grandchild, father, mother, sister, brother and the spouse of any of them. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of paragraph (a) of this section, an officer shall be deemed to have a financial interest in a contract if he or any member of his family is an employee, partner, officer, director or sales representative of the person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made or of a sales representative of such person, firm or corporation. Ownership, individually or in a fiduciary capacity, by an officer or member of his family of securities, or of any beneficial interest in securities, of any corporation with which a contract is made or which is a sales representative of any person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made, shall not be deemed to create a financial interest in such contract unless the aggregate amount of such securities, or interest in such securities, so owned by such officer and the members of his family, shall amount to ten per cent of any class of the securities of such corporation then outstanding. 
(c)  A contract in which an officer or member of his family has a financial interest may be made by the city if the members of the Council having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the best interests of the city will be served by the making of such contract and if either such contract is made after competitive prices are obtained or if the members of the Council having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the obtaining of competitive prices is not feasible in such particular case. Any Council member may evidence his participation in either determination required by this paragraph by vote at a Council meeting or by written instrument filed with the Clerk. 
(d)  Any officer who knowingly permits the city to enter into any contract in which he has a financial interest without disclosing such interest to the Council prior to the action of the Council in authorizing such contract, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. Except in the instances specified in paragraph (c) of this section, the unanimous determination (by vote or written instrument) of all members of the Council that in a particular case an officer or member of his family will not have a financial interest in any contract or purchase to be entered into by the city shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or misrepresentation. 
(e)  No officer shall stand as surety on any bond to the city or give any bail for any other person which may be required by the charter or any ordinance of the city. Any officer of the city who violates the provisions of this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
Section 5.10. - Compensation of Employees and Officers. 
(a)  The compensation of all employees and officers of the city whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Council. 
(b)  The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed by, or pursuant to, this charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. Such fees, commissions and compensation shall belong to the city and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the City Administrator. The provisions of paragraph (b) of this section shall not apply to fees, commissions or other compensation paid by the County of Wayne to any officer or employee serving as a city representative on the Board of Supervisors who is not a full time officer or employee of the city. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city. 
State Law reference- Salaries, MCL 117.5(d). 
Section 5.11. - Employee Welfare Benefits. 
    The Council shall have the power to finance and provide group life, health and accident, and hospitalization and surgical benefit insurance for the administrative officers and employees and retired employees of the City, and its departments and boards, and the dependents of such administrative officers and employees, by the adoption of any recognized standard plan of group life, health and accident or hospitalization and surgical benefit insurance. 
(Adopted by electors 4-6-1970) 
Section 5.12. - Anti-Nepotism. 
    The following relatives and their spouses (1) of any elective official or (2) of his spouse, or of the City Administrator or of his spouse are disqualified from holding any appointive office or any employment during the term for which said elective official was elected or during the tenure of office of the City Administrator, respectively: child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half brother and half sister. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the time of the election of said elective official or appointment of said City Administrator, respectively. 
Section 5.13. - Merit System; Civil Service. 
    The Council may provide for a merit or civil service system for city employees. 
CHAPTER 6. - THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Section 6.1. - Regular Meetings. 
    The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings each month. A regular meeting shall also be held on the Monday following each regular city election. 
Section 6.2. - Special Meetings. 
    Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, the City Administrator or any two members of the Council on at least twenty-four hours written notice to each member of the Council served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
Section 6.3. - Business of Special Meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at such special meeting if all the members present consent thereto and all the members absent file their written consent. 
Section 6.4. - Meetings to be Public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 6.5. - Quorum; Adjournment of Meeting. 
    A majority of the members of the Council in office shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Council, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later date, and in the absence of all members the Clerk may adjourn any meeting to a date not later than one week thence. 
Section 6.6. - Compulsory Attendance and Conduct at Meetings. 
    Any three or more members of the Council may by vote either request or compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at any meeting. Any member of the Council or other officer who when notified of such request for his attendance fails to attend such meeting for reasons other than confining illness or absence from the County of Wayne shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office unless excused by the Council. The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings and any Councilman or other officer who shall fail to conduct himself in an orderly manner at any meeting shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
    Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Section 6.7. - Rules and Organization of the Council. 
    The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting in the English language shall be kept by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting. 
(b)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(c)  No Councilman shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called unless excuse [excused] by unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(d)  In all roll call votes the names of the members of the Council shall be called in alphabetical order, and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call. 
(e)  Any standing committee of the Council shall be composed of at least three members. The Council shall not assign the administration of any department or agency of the city to any member or committee of the Council. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal, MCL 117.3(m). 
Section 6.8. - Providing for Public Health and Safety. 
    The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Council shall constitute the Board of Health of the city, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute. 
Section 6.9. - Investigations. 
    The Council or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council, for the purposes stated herein, may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this charter and such employee when found guilty of such violation by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the court. 
    It is provided further that, in case of failure on the part of any person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence as so ordered, the Council may invoke the aid of the Circuit Court of Wayne County in requiring obeyance of such summons or production of such books, papers and other evidence. The Circuit Court of Wayne County, in case of contumacy or refusal to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence, may issue an order requiring such person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence and to give evidence touching the matter in question, and any failure to obey such order of the Court may be punished by such Court as contempt thereof. 
CHAPTER 7. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to adopt ordinances relative to municipal concerns, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; Charter to provide for adopting, amending and repealing ordinances and publication thereof, MCL 117.3(k). 

Section 7.1. - Prior City Ordinances and Regulations. 
    All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Village or city which are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and effect as bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city until repealed or amended. If any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provides for the appointment of any officers or any members of any board or commission by the Village President, such officers or members of any board or commission shall, after the effective date of this Charter, be appointed by the Council. 
Section 7.2. - Ordinances and Resolutions. 
    All official action of the Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. Action by resolution, motion or order shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be so done by this charter, or by state or federal law or pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the Council, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title and by a serial number (or a code section number if a codification of city ordinances exists). 
    Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "The City of Grosse Pointe Woods ordains:" 
Section 7.3. - Enactment, Amendment, Repeal and Effective Date of Ordinances. 
    Subject to the exceptions which follow hereafter, (1) ordinances may be enacted, amended or repealed by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the Council, (2) no ordinance shall be enacted or amended or repealed by the Council until after publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment or repeal, or summary thereof, and (3) the effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein but the effective date shall not be earlier than ten days after the enactment nor before publication thereof. It is provided, however, that an ordinance which is declared therein to be an emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced or otherwise before publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment, or summary thereof, or may be given earlier effect than ten days after its enactment, or both, by the affirmative votes of not less than five members of the Council if six or seven members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted or by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the Council if four or five members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted. 
    In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than ten days after its enactment, the requirements for publication before such ordinance becomes operative may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in three public places in each voting precinct of the city; and the Clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of such publication by posting of the ordinance. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance with Section 7.4 but not as a requirement for the effectiveness thereof. 
    No ordinance granting any public utility franchise shall be enacted except in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.2. 
    No ordinance shall be revised or amended by reference to the title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised or amended shall be reenacted and published. However, an ordinance or section thereof may be repealed by reference to its title and ordinance or code number only. 
Section 7.4. - Publication and Recording of Ordinances. 
    Each ordinance enacted by the Council shall be published in either of the following manners, as the Council shall determine by proper action: 
(1)  By posting copies thereof in five conspicuous public places, in the City within 20 days after its adoption; or, 
(2)  By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least once within 20 days after its adoption. 
    All ordinances and amendments thereto shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon. The Clerk shall enter in such book after the publication of each ordinance, the date and method of publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
(Adopted by electors 2-16-1953) 
Editor's note- Notwithstanding the publication requirement in this section, a city may publish a summary instead. See MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 7.5. - Penalties for Violations of Ordinances. 
    The Council may provide in any ordinance for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any city ordinance shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for ninety days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
Editor's note- Notwithstanding the penalty limitation in this section, a city may increase the imprisonment to 93 days in certain circumstances. See MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 7.6. - Vacating of Public Places. 
    Council action to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part thereof, shall be by resolution. After the introduction of such resolution and before its final adoption, the Council shall appoint a time when it shall meet and hear objections thereto; and notice of the time, place and purpose of such meeting shall be published either separately or as part of any published proceedings of the Council. 
Section 7.7. - Requirement of Four Votes for Certain Actions. 
    Unless by the affirmative vote of four members of the Council, no office shall be created or abolished, no tax or assessment shall be imposed, no street, lane, alley or other public place shall be vacated or discontinued or abolished, no real estate or any interest therein shall be sold or disposed of, no action shall be taken to condemn private property for public use, no money shall be appropriated nor shall any vote of the Council be reconsidered or rescinded. 
Section 7.8. - Technical Codes Adopted by Reference. 
    Subject to the provisions of this section, the Council may adopt as a city ordinance or code, by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance, in whole or [in] part, provisions of (a) any Michigan statute or (b) any detailed technical regulations promulgated or enacted by (1) any state or federal agency, (2) by any municipality, or (3) by any organization or association which has developed a recognized standard code or set of such technical regulations. Such adopting ordinance shall clearly identify and state the purpose of the provisions or regulations so adopted. Where any ordinance or code, or amendment thereto, adopting provisions by reference is enacted, all requirements for its publication may be met, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, by (1) publishing the ordinance citing such provisions in the manner provided by this charter for the publication of other city ordinances and including as part of such publication a notice that printed copies of the provisions so cited are available for inspection by and distribution to the public at the office of the Clerk and (2) so making copies available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 7.9. - Severability of Ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
Section 7.10. - Compilation and Codification of Ordinances. 
    Immediately after the effective date of this charter, and at least once in every ten years thereafter, the Council shall direct the compilation or codification and printing in looseleaf or pamphlet form of all ordinances of the city then in force. Such compilation or codification shall be completed within one year thereafter. Any such codification may include provisions not previously contained in ordinances of the city. All requirements for publication of such compilation or codification, and of the ordinances contained therein, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, may be met by making copies thereof available for inspection by, and distribution to, the public at a reasonable charge and by publishing notice of the printing and availability thereof. 
    The copies of the ordinances and of any compilation, code or codes referred to in the charter may be certified by the Clerk and when so certified shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Section 7.11. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the Council may be had by petition, as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g). 
Section 7.12. - Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than ten per cent of the registered electors of the city, as of the date of filing the petition, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within twenty-one days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council. No such petition need be on one paper, but may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to contents. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance or code sections it proposes to have repealed. 
    Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 7.13. - Council Procedure on Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty days, unless otherwise provided by law, either. 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition; 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance referred to by a referendary petition; or 
(c)  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Section 7.14. - Submission of Initiatory and Referendary Ordinances to Electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election called for that specific purpose. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by the general laws of the State of Michigan. 
Section 7.15. - Ordinance Suspended; Miscellaneous Provisions on Initiatory and Referendary Ordinances. 
    The presentation to the Council by the Clerk of a valid and sufficient referendary petition, containing a number of signatures equal to twenty-five percent of the registered electors of the City shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory or referendary proceedings shall not be amended or repealed, nor shall an ordinance repealed by the electorate be reenacted, unless and until the electorate shall have approved any such action. Any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed by appropriate referendary or initiatory proceedings instituted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or upon submission to the electorate by the Council, upon its own motion. 
    If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
(Adopted by electors 4-5-1954) 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE-BUDGET, AUDIT, PURCHASING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; fiscal stabilization act, MCL 141.1001 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the city and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
Section 8.2. - Budget Procedures. 
    The City Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Council, on or before the first regular meeting in April of each year, a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, and shall include therein at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates with supporting explanations of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the city, including those for the Retirement System, and for the Court, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to March 1 and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to March 1, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)  Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
Section 8.3. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption, at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing, a summary of the proposed budget and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the City Administrator shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. 
State Law reference- Public hearing required prior to adoption of budget, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 32. 
Section 8.4. - Adoption of Budget. 
    Not before April fifteenth nor later than the third Monday in May in each year, the Council shall by resolution adopt a budget for the next fiscal year, shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year of the city and shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes subject to the limitations contained in Section 9.1. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h). 
Section 8.5. - Budget Control. 
    Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city without an appropriation thereof, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The Council by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one department, fund or agency to another. In the case of emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety, the Council may make additional appropriations to cover unanticipated expenditures required of the city because of such emergency. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the City Administrator shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
    The balance in any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund. 
Section 8.6. - Depository. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for city funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The Council shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12; deposits of public money, MCL 211.43b. 
Section 8.7. - Independent Audit; Annual Report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit may be made by Certified Public Accountants experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council. 
    The City Administrator shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city including a financial report. 
    Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Administrator within thirty days after the receipt of the audit. 
State Law reference- Annual accounting of public funds, Mich. Const. 1963, art. IX, § 21. 
Section 8.8. - Purchase and Sale of Property. 
    The City Administrator shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city personal property. Except when no advantage to the city would result, competitive prices shall be obtained for all purchases of personal property and public improvements contracts, and the purchase made or contract awarded according to procedure established by ordinance. All purchases and sales of personal property and all public improvement contracts shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. In such sales or purchase or contracts, in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),[:] 
(1)  the sale or purchase shall be approved by the Council, 
(2)  formal sealed bids shall be obtained unless the Council by formal unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting, based upon the written recommendation of the City Administrator, determines that no advantage to the city would result from competitive bidding, and 
(3)  the requirements of Section 13.6 shall be complied with. The Council may authorize the making of public improvements or the performance of any other city work by any city agency without competitive bidding. 
    The purchase and sale of all city property shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.9. 
    Detailed purchasing, sale and contract procedure shall be established by ordinance. 
    The purchase or sale of real property by the city shall be authorized by appropriate action of the Council, provided that the city may not sell any park, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, cemetery, or any part thereof, unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(Adopted by electors 11-7-1989) 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of city to levy taxes for public purposes, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; Charter to provide for taxation, MCL 117.3(g). 

Section 9.1. - Power to Tax; Tax Limit. 
    The city shall have the power to annually levy and collect taxes for municipal purposes, but may not levy excises. Exclusive of any levies authorized by statute to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations, the annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g). 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of Taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 9.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or permitted by statute. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
Section 9.4. - Tax Day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the first day of January, which shall be deemed the tax day. 
State Law reference- Designation of levy date, MCL 211.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 9.5. - Preparation of the Assessment Roll. 
    On or before the first Monday in March in each year the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city subject to taxation. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with statute and this charter. Values shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. The roll shall show separate figures for the value of the land and of the building improvements. On or before the first Monday in March the Assessor shall give by first class mail a notice of any increase in the assessed value of any property or of the addition of any property to the roll to the owner as shown by such assessment roll. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq. 
Section 9.6. - Board of Review. 
    Effective January 1, 1962, the Board of Review shall be composed of five (5) freeholders who are qualified and registered electors of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, who, during their term of office, shall not be city officers or employees or be nominees or candidates for any elective city office. The filing by a member of the Board of Review of his nomination petition for an elective city office or the filing of a consent thereto, or upon accepting appointment to an elective office, or upon becoming an employee of the city, the same shall constitute a resignation from the Board of Review. 
    The terms of office of the members of the Board of Review, effective January 1, 1962, shall be as follows: 
The incumbent member of the Board of Review, whose term expires in January, 1963, shall continue as a member of the Board of Review until January 1st, 1964. 
The incumbent member of the Board of Review, whose term expires in January, 1964, shall continue as a member of the Board of Review until January 1st, 1964. 
The three (3) vacancies on the Board of Review existing as of January 1st, 1962, shall be filled by appointment of members to said Board of Review with terms expiring as follows: 
One member whose term shall expire January 1st, 1963; 
One member whose term shall expire January 1st, 1964; 
One member whose term shall expire January 1st, 1965. 
    Appointments to the Board of Review to succeed the members thereof, upon the expiration of their respective terms as above provided, shall be made for terms of three (3) years. The Council shall make all appointments to the Board of Review and shall annually fix the compensation of the members of such Board. The Board of Review shall annually select from among its own members a Chairman for the ensuing year. The City Assessor shall act as the Clerk of the Board and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but he shall have no vote upon any action taken by the Board. A majority of the members of the Board of Review shall constitute a quorum. 
(Adopted by electors 9-12-1961) 
Editor's note- The composition of the board has been changed pursuant to MCL 211.28. See Code Of Ordinances § 2-316 et seq. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a); board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 
Section 9.7. - Meeting of Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its first session on the Tuesday following the second Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall remain in session for at least one day for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. In each case in which the assessed value of any property is increased or any property is added to the roll by the Board, or the Board has resolved to consider at its second session the increasing of an assessment or the adding of any property to the roll, the Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owners as shown by such roll by first class letter mailed not later than the day following the end of the first session of the Board. Such notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the second session of the Board. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its second session on the Tuesday following the fourth Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall continue in session until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard, but in no case for less than six hours. At the second session, the Board may not increase any assessment or add any property to the rolls, except in those cases in which the Board resolved at its first session to consider such increase or addition at its second session. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for meetings of the board of review, MCL 117.3(i); completion of review, MCL 211.30a. 
Section 9.8. - Notice of Meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be published by the Clerk at least ten days prior to each session of the Board. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 9.9. - Duties and Functions of Board of Review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are by the general tax laws conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and no change in the status of any property after said day shall be considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon, or additions or corrections to, the assessment roll. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all proceedings and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. 
Section 9.10. - Endorsement of Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the first Monday in April, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a. 
Section 9.11. - Clerk to Certify Tax Levy. 
    Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed or charged upon any property or against any person. 
Section 9.12. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll," and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 9.11, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged, assessed or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread the amounts of the general ad valorem city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by statute. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
State Law reference- Avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39. 
Section 9.13. - Tax Roll Certified for Collection. 
    After spreading the taxes the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant thereto directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect prior to March 1 of the following year from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. On June 15 the roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer for collection. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Section 9.14. - Tax Lien on Property. 
    On July first, the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens to the extent provided by statute and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid. 
Section 9.15. - Taxes Due; Notification Thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on the first day of July. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall publish, between June 15 and July 1, notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and the penalties and fees for late payment of same. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalty and fees provided in this chapter in case of non-payment or late payment of the same. 
Section 9.16. - Collection Fees. 
    All taxes paid on or before August 31 of each year shall be collected by the Treasurer without collection fee. On September 1 he shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a collection fee of four per cent and on October 1 and each month thereafter an additional 1/2 of 1 per cent per month on the amount of said taxes. Such collection fee shall belong to the City and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. It is provided, however, that if delivery of the tax roll to the Treasurer, as provided in Section 9.13, is delayed for any reason by more than thirty days after June fifteenth, the application of the collection fee provided herein shall be postponed thirty days for the first thirty days of such delay and shall be postponed an additional thirty days for each additional thirty days, or major fraction thereof of such delay. 
(Adopted by electors 11-7-1978) 
Section 9.17. - Failure or Refusal to Pay Tax. 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax assessed to him or them [it], the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue the person, firm or corporation to whom it is assessed in accordance with statute. 
State Law reference- Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47. 
Section 9.18. - Delinquent Tax Roll to County Treasurer. 
    All city taxes on real and personal property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the County Treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as provided by statute for returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional assessments, charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected in accordance with statute, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. If by change in statute or otherwise, the Treasurer of the County of Wayne is no longer charged with the collection of either delinquent real or delinquent personal property taxes, such delinquent taxes shall be collected in the manner then provided by statute for the collection of delinquent township, school and county taxes. 
State Law reference- Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq. 
Section 9.19. - State, County and School Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of statute relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For these purposes the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under statute. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i). 
CHAPTER 10. - BORROWING POWER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power to borrow money and contract debts, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; Charter may provide for borrowing, MCL 117.4a. 

Section 10.1. - Grant of Authority to Borrow. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of law and this charter, the Council may by ordinance or resolution authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the city and permitted by law and may authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include but not be limited to the following types: 
(a)  General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit and resources of the city for the payment of such obligations including bonds for the city's portion of public improvements; 
(b)  Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, but the proceeds of such notes may be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided by Section 8.5; 
(c)  In case of fire, flood or other calamity, emergency loans due in not more than five years for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property; 
(d)  Special assessment bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts alone or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the city; 
(e)  Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by this charter to acquire or operate; provided such bonds shall not impose any liability upon such city but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. Such bonds shall be authorized by a three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. A sinking fund shall be created in the event of the issuance of such bonds, by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage bonds at maturity; 
(f)  Bonds issued in an amount not to exceed two hundred and fifty thousand dollars and at a rate of interest not to exceed six per cent per annum to refund money advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions; 
(g)  Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the City; 
(h)  Revenue bonds as authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended, which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation of the city. 
State Law reference- City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1). 
Section 10.2. - Limits of Borrowing Powers. 
    The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded money borrowed under the following sections of this charter: 10.1(b) (tax anticipation notes), 10.1(d) (special assessment bonds even though they are also a general obligation of the city), 10.1(e) (mortgage bonds), 10.1(f) (bonds issued to refund moneys advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions), 10.1(h) (revenue bonds) and other bonds issued under the authority of statutes which provide that such bonds shall not be subject to the limitations on the amount of bonded indebtedness contained in city charters. The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
    The amount of emergency loans which the Council may make under the provisions of Section 10.1(c) of this charter may not exceed three-eighths of one per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city. 
    The total amount of such special assessment bonds issued under Section 10.1(d) which are a general obligation of the city shall at no time exceed five percent of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city, nor shall such bonds be issued in any calendar year in excess of one per cent of such assessed value unless authorized by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
State Law reference- Limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(1). 
Section 10.3. - Applicability of Other Statutory Restrictions. 
    The issuance of any bonds not otherwise requiring the approval of the electors shall be subject to applicable requirements of statute with reference to public notice in advance of the authorization of such issues, filing of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding of such referendum and other applicable procedural requirements. 
Section 10.4. - Preparation and Record of Bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office, except that whenever the proceeds of any bond issue or part thereof shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the Council may authorize the use of said funds for the retirement of bonds of such issue. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signature of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the City Administrator. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be canceled. 
Section 10.5. - Unissued Bonds. 
    No bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if any such bonds are not sold within three years after authorization by the electors, such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void and such bonds shall be canceled. 
Section 10.6. - Deferred Payment Contracts. 
    The Council may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. Each of such contracts shall not extend over a period greater than five years nor shall the principal amounts payable under all such general fund contracts exceed the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in any fiscal year of the city. 
    All such deferred payments shall be included in the general fund budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
(Adopted by electors 11-7-1989) 
CHAPTER 11. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Public improvement or public building, MCL 141.261 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Section 11.1. - General Power Relative to Special Assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to determine by resolution that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
State Law reference- Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5. 
Section 11.2. - Detailed Procedure to Be Fixed By Ordinance. 
    The Council shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in the rolls, collection of assessments and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method. 
    Such ordinance shall provide for the enforcement of the following restrictions: 
(1)  No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any special assessment district for the making of any public improvement shall be made until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(2)  No special assessment district or districts shall be created by the Council for any one public improvement which includes property having an area in excess of twenty-five per cent of the total area of the city. No public improvement project shall be divided geographically for the purpose of circumventing this provision. 
(3)  No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed until after a meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(4)  No public improvement to be financed in whole or [in] part by special assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll for such improvement. 
Section 11.3. - Special Assessment Powers. 
    The Council shall, in the exercise of its powers of special assessment, have power to provide for the following, but this list shall not be exclusive: 
(a)  For the construction of public parking facilities as a public improvement financed in whole or [in] part by the special assessment method. 
(b)  For installing a boulevard lighting system on any street as a public improvement to be financed in whole or [in] part by special assessment upon the lands abutting thereupon, provided that the property owners of a majority of a frontage on such street or part thereof to be so improved shall petition therefor. 
(c)  For the payment of special assessments in annual installments not to exceed fifteen in number, the first such installment to be due either upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or on the following July first and subsequent installments to be due on July first of succeeding years and to be placed upon the annual city tax roll, and for an interest charge only until the due date of each such deferred installment not to exceed six per cent per year, subject to the right of advance payment of any such installment with interest only to the date of payment. 
(d)  For making additional pro rata assessments when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incident thereto, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five per cent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
Section 11.4. - Disposition of Excessive Special Assessments. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five per cent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five per cent the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or [in] part by such special assessment. 
Section 11.5. - Correction of Invalid Special Assessments. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, and whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment refunds shall be made. 
    No judgment or decree nor any act of the Council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
Section 11.6. - Contested Assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment (1) unless within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (2) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty days after confirmation of the roll. 
State Law reference- Statement of right to file written appeal, MCL 211.746. 
Section 11.7. - Collection of Special Assessments. 
    Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll the special assessments shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and shall until paid be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessment and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for city taxes. Such assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll except as may be provided by the Council pursuant to Section 11.3(c). 
    Each special assessment, or the initial installment of such assessment when installment payments are provided for, shall be collected by the Treasurer without collection fee for a period ending on the last day of the second month following the due date of such assessment or instrument. On the first day of the third month following such due date the Treasurer shall add to any assessment or initial installment paid thereafter a collection fee of four per cent of the amount of the assessment. 
    All collection fees shall belong to the city and be collectible in the same manner as the collection fee on city taxes. 
    Special assessments, or installments thereof, which become due on July first of any year shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on such date, and if uncollected on the following first day of March, shall be returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.18. 
    Special assessments or initial installments which become due other than on July first shall, if unpaid for ninety days or more on May first of any year, be certified as delinquent to the Council by the Treasurer and the Council shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year together with accrued collection fees to July first of such year. The total amount of such assessment and fees shall thereafter be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July first of that year, shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as are city taxes due on that date and if uncollected on the following March first shall be returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.18. 
Section 11.8. - Special Assessment Accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be segregated in a special fund or account and may be used only to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto or to repay any money borrowed therefor. 
Section 11.9. - Assessments for Removal of Hazards, Etc. 
    The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any sidewalk or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance, to be made pursuant to Section 2.2(u) or Section 2.2(v) shall be made by resolution of the Council. Notice of the time at which the Council will act thereon shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed as shown by the current tax roll of the city. 
    For the purposes of collection of such assessment, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt due to the city upon adoption of such resolution, be payable and subject to the collection fees and shall become a lien, all as provided in Section 11.7. Every such assessment shall also be subject to Sections 11.4, 11.5 and 11.6. 
Section 11.10. - Failure to Receive Notice. 
    Failure of any owner to receive any notice required to be sent by this chapter shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
Editor's note- The failure to give notice does invalidate the assessment on the property lacking notice in some circumstances. See MCL 211.744. 
CHAPTER 12. - MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Restrictions on municipal utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, §§ 24, 25. 

Section 12.1. - General Powers Respecting Utilities. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend[,] repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the limitations set by law. 
Section 12.2. - Management of Municipally Owned Utilities. 
    All municipally owned utilities shall be administered as a regular department of the city government under the management and supervision of the City Administrator. 
Section 12.3. - Rates. 
    The Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with such public utility services as the city may provide. 
Section 12.4. - Utility Rates and Charges: Collection. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinance shall provide: 
(a)  That the city shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance; 
(b)  The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges; 
(c)  That suit may be instituted by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of such rates or charges. 
    With respect to the collection of rates charged for water the city shall have all the powers granted to cities by Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 123.161 et seq.), as amended. 
Section 12.5. - Disposal of Utility Plants and Property. 
    Unless approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment, privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned public utility. All contracts, negotiations, license, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of machinery or equipment of any city owned public utility which are worn out or useless or which have been, or could with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
Section 12.6. - Utility Accounts. 
    Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the city of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of the utility and the results of its operations, which report shall be available for inspection at the office of the City Administrator. 
CHAPTER 13. - FRANCHISES-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Section 13.1. - Franchises, Contracts and Leases Remain in Effect. 
    All franchises, contracts and leases to which the Village or city is a party when this charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Section 13.2. - Granting of Public Utility Franchise. 
    Public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
    No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Council, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Council unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
    A franchise ordinance which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and shall have so been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
State Law reference- Submittal to electors required if franchise irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 25; expense of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i); franchise limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 30. 
Section 13.3. - Conditions of Public Utility Franchise. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, non-use or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public; 
(f)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and public places and the space above and beneath them. 
Section 13.4. - Regulation of Rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Section 13.5. - Use of Public Places by Utilities. 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the city by the city and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Section 13.6. - Contracts. 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the City is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the statutes and of this Charter, except that purchases and sales may be made by the City Administrator subject to the provisions of Section 8.8. The City Council shall provide detailed procedures for the purchase and sale of property by ordinance, which ordinance may include provisions for legal review of such contracts and require that funds be available for such purchases. No contract shall be amended after same has been made except upon the authority of the Council. No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. No contract shall be made with any person, firm or corporation who is in default to the City. 
(Adopted by electors 11-6-1986) 
Section 13.7. - Leases. 
    No lease of public property to any person, firm or corporation which is not subject to revocation by the Council upon thirty days notice to the lessee shall be made or become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such lease shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Council, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the lessee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such lease. 
CHAPTER 14. - SUPERVISORS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter was repealed by Charter amendment. Adopted by electors 11-6-86. 

CHAPTER 15. - COURT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Retention of municipal courts in certain cities, MCL 600.9928. 

Section 15.1. - Establishment of Courts. 
    There is hereby established a Court in the city. The presiding officer of such Court shall be a justice of the peace elected in accordance with the provisions of this charter. This Court is created under the authority of Section 28 of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended. 
Section 15.2. - Title of Court. 
(a)  The Court shall be entitled "Municipal Court." 
(b)  The justice of the peace shall be entitled "Municipal Judge" and shall be so designated in nominating petitions, on election ballots and in all other election procedures. 
(c)  The Court shall be referred to in all process, pleadings and proceedings therein as the Municipal Court of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, and the justice of the peace thereof shall be referred to in such process, pleadings and proceedings as the Municipal Judge of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
Section 15.3. - Qualifications of Presiding Officer of Court. 
    The Municipal Judge of the Court shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 and shall be an attorney admitted to practice law in the Supreme Court of this State immediately preceding the date of his appointment or election. Neither he nor his business partners or employees shall have any part in any case before this Court. 
(Adopted by electors 11-5-1996) 
Section 15.4. - Compensation of Municipal Judge. 
    The Municipal Judge of the Court shall receive annual compensation of nine thousand dollars. 
    The salary for the office provided shall be in lieu of all fees, both in civil and criminal cases, to which the municipal judge might be entitled but for the provisions of this section, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies and for administering oaths in matters not connected with suits and proceedings in his court. 
(Adopted by electors 11-5-1996) 
Editor's note- The compensation of the municipal judge is now established by the local officers compensation commission under Code § 2-251 et seq. See also Code § 26-31. 
Section 15.5. - Bond. 
    The presiding officer of the Court shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond to the City of Grosse Pointe Woods and to the Treasurer of the County of Wayne, each in such sum as shall be set by ordinance or statute and which shall in no case be less than two thousand dollars each. Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.7. 
Section 15.6. - Jurisdiction of Court. 
(1)  General Jurisdiction. The Court shall have and exercise within the City of Grosse Pointe Woods and County of Wayne the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are or may be conferred upon or required of Judges in cities and townships by statute and shall be subject to such statutes with respect to such Judges except as otherwise provided in this charter. The Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other Judges in Wayne County as to all crimes, offenses and misdemeanors alleged to have been committed within Wayne County, whether within or without the city. 
(2)  Charter and Ordinance Cases. The Court shall have authority to hear, try and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by this charter and the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for the violation of such charter and ordinances as in the charter or ordinances prescribed and directed. 
(3)  Extended Jurisdiction. The Court shall also have jurisdiction to the amount of fifteen hundred dollars in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law. 
(4)  Additional Authority. The Court shall have additional jurisdiction, powers and duties as may now or hereafter be conferred upon such courts by statute. 
(Adopted by electors 11-5-1996) 
Section 15.7. - Fees and Costs. 
    The Council shall by ordinance establish and fix the fees and costs which may be taxed by the Court in all civil matters and in all cases for the violations of the charter or city ordinances and in such criminal cases which will not be inconsistent with the general laws of the state. Such ordinances shall be originally enacted within ninety days after the effective date of this charter. 
Section 15.8. - Disposition of Fees, Cost and Fines; Fees in State Criminal Cases. 
(a)  Civil Cases. All fees in civil cases shall be collected by the Court and turned over to the City Treasurer on or before the first day of the next month after collection or receipt thereof and shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(b)  State Criminal Cases. 
(1)  All fees and costs in state criminal cases shall be charged and presented to and audited by the Board of Supervisors of Wayne County, in the same manner and amounts as provided by law in the cases of justices of the peace in townships, and upon allowance by said Board, shall be paid monthly by said county to the City Treasurer for the use and benefit of the city and shall be credited to the general fund of the city. The expenses of prosecution before the Court for violations of criminal laws of the state and in punishing the offenders shall be paid by the County of Wayne. 
(2)  All fees, costs, penalties and forfeitures imposed by the Court in state criminal cases shall be paid over by the Court to the County Treasurer within thirty days after the receipt thereof. 
(c)  Charter and Ordinance Violations. All fines, costs, penalties, forfeitures and moneys collected or received by the Court on account of violations of any provisions of the charter or ordinances of the city shall be paid over by the Court to the City Treasurer on or before the first day of the next month after collection or receipt thereof and shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Failure to Comply. Failure of the presiding officer of the Court to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 15.9. - Place and Conduct of Court. 
    The Council shall furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for conducting Court. It may regulate the hours of Court and may make other necessary and proper rules and regulations for the conduct of the business of the Court which are not inconsistent with this charter or statute. 
    The presiding officer of the Court shall file with the Council promptly after the end of the fiscal year an annual report of the Court in such detail as the Council shall prescribe. 
Section 15.10. - Docket. 
    There shall be kept at the place of holding court a docket in the manner required by statute. Failure of the presiding officer of the court to make provision for the maintenance of such a docket shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 15.11. - Transfer of Cases. 
    In case of the absence, disability or disqualification of the presiding officer of the Court, any other justice of the peace or Municipal Judge in the County of Wayne shall be qualified to act in his place and for him in the performance of any of the duties imposed upon him by statute or this charter; and shall so act when called upon in the manner and under the conditions herein set forth. The Council shall by ordinance fix the compensation to be paid Justices or Judges for such services and the procedure to be followed in calling upon them so to act. Unless the Council shall so provide by ordinance, no such Justice or Judge shall so act or be entitled to compensation therefor. 
Section 15.12. - Court Clerk. 
    The Council may by ordinance provide for a court clerk and one or more deputy clerks to perform such duties as shall be therein prescribed. Such clerk and deputy clerks shall also, by virtue of their office, have the statutory powers to administer oaths to persons making affidavits for writs in civil causes and to issue all process and test the same in the name of the presiding officer of the Court and shall be required to collect all fees, costs, fines and other moneys paid into court and to keep a record book of the same and to pay over all such moneys to the authorities of the city or county or other persons entitled to the same as directed by this charter, the proper authorities or by law, and the Council shall cause such book to audited annually. 
Section 15.13. - Court Officers. 
    The City Administrator upon request of the presiding officer of the Court, may assign a police officer of the city to the Court who shall have all the duties and powers of court officers of the Circuit Courts of the state and shall serve in such capacity during the pleasure of the City Administrator. Such officer shall receive no compensation except such as he may be entitled to as a police officer. All fees and mileage allowances received by such officer in the performance of the duties imposed upon him shall be paid into the City Treasury in accordance with Section 5.10. 
Section 15.14. - Constables. 
    The City Administrator shall appoint one or more police officers of the city as Constables. Such Constables shall have like powers and authority in matters of civil and criminal nature, and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on Constables in townships. They shall have power also to serve all process issued for breaches of ordinances of the city. The bond of Constables shall be that required of Constables in townships and shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of Section 5.7. The Statutory fees received by such Constables shall be paid into the city treasury in accordance with Section 5.10. 
Editor's note- Constables were abolished pursuant to MCL 117.32. 
Section 15.15. - Violations Bureau. 
    The Council shall have power and authority to establish by ordinance a Violations Bureau within the Court for the handling of such violations of ordinances and regulations of the city, or parts thereof, as prescribed in the ordinance establishing such Bureau. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a charge of violating any of such ordinances may within the time specified in the notice of such charge answer at the Violations Bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a fine prescribed by ordinance which cannot be waived by the Bureau, and in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and the power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a Bureau shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in Court should such person so choose. 
CHAPTER 16. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter was repealed on March 31, 1987. 

CHAPTER 17. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 17.1. - City Liability. 
    The city shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person either to his person or property by reason of the negligence of the city [or] its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective condition of or obstruction in any public place unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk within sixty days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have occurred a notice in writing, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant and a statement that the person sustaining such damages intends to hold the city liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. 
    The city shall not be liable for any damages to person or property arising out of any such injury unless there shall have been first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the time, place, nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. No person shall bring any action against the city for any damages until such claim shall have been filed with the Clerk and until the Council shall have been given opportunity to act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to an action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city under the section that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
Editor's note- Liability for negligence of city in governmental functions is governed by MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Section 17.2. - No Estoppel. 
    No estoppel may be created against the city. 
Section 17.3. - Vested Rights Continued. 
    After the effective date of this charter, the city shall be vested with all the property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books and papers belonging to the Village. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the Village, existing at the time this charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change has been made. All debts and liabilities of the Village shall be the debts and liabilities of the city and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
Section 17.4. - Trusts. 
    All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy pres doctrine. The Council may in its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and for no other purposes except in cases where the cy pres doctrine shall apply. 
Section 17.5. - Vacancies in Appointive Boards and Commissions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, if a vacancy occurs in the membership of any appointive board or commission, the authority responsible for the appointment of the person whose position has become vacant shall fill such vacancy by appointment of a qualified person for the unexpired term of such person. 
Section 17.6. - Records to Be Public. 
    All records of the city shall be public, shall be kept in city offices except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safe keeping to be elsewhere and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Section 17.7. - Definition of Publication, Mailing of Notices. 
    The requirement contained in this charter for the publishing or publication of notices or ordinances shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character which newspaper shall have had a general circulation at regular intervals in the city or Village for at least two years immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or of his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
    In any case in which this charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Section 17.8. - Sundays and Holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this charter for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 17.9. - Chapter and Section Headings. 
    The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the charter. 
Section 17.10. - Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context: 
(1)  All words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(2)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(3)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
(4)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method. 
(5)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting. 
(6)  The word "Village" shall mean the municipal corporation of Grosse Pointe Woods as it existed prior to the effective date of this charter including the period from and after its incorporation as a city and until such effective date. 
(7)  The word "officer" shall include the Mayor and other members of the Council, the administrative officers, members of city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this charter, the Municipal Judge (justice of the peace) and a Court Clerk if one shall be appointed. 
(8)  The word "statute" shall denote the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the charter containing the word "statute" is to be applied. 
(9)  All references to specific Public Acts of the State of Michigan shall be to such acts as are in effect at the time the reference to such act is to be applied. 
(10)  The words "law" or "general laws of the state" shall denote the Constitution and the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the charter containing the words "law" or "general laws of the state" is to be applied, and applicable common law. 
(11)  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this charter. 
Section 17.11. - Penalties for Violations of Charter. 
    Any officer of the city found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the court. The punishment provided in this section shall be in addition to that of having the office declared vacant as provided in Section 5.2. 
Section 17.12. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 17.13. - Severability of Charter Provisions. 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable and to this end this charter is declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER 18. - SCHEDULE 

Section 18.1. - Election on Adoption of Charter. 
(1)  Date. This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods at a special election to be held on Monday, December 11, 1950. At the same special election the elective officers provided for in this charter shall also be elected as hereinafter provided. The charter shall be adopted if a majority of the ballots cast thereon are in favor of adoption. 
(2)  Form of Ballot. The form of the ballot for the submission of this charter shall be as follows: 
    Instructions: A cross (X) in the square before the word "Yes" is in favor of the proposed charter and a cross (X) in the square before the word "No" is against the proposed charter. 
    Shall the proposed charter for the City of Grosse Pointe Woods drafted by the Charter Commission elected on June 19, 1950, be adopted? 
Yes 
No 
(3)  Election Commission. The Charter Commission of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods shall be the Election Commission for this election. The Chairman of the Charter Commission shall be Chairman of the Election Commission, and the Village Clerk shall act as Secretary of the Commission and shall perform such duties in connection with the work of the Commission as are prescribed by the Commission and this charter. 
(4)  Inspectors of Election. The inspectors of election for this election shall be those persons designated by the Charter Commission in its meeting on October 30, 1950. 
(5)  Board of Canvassers. The board of canvassers for this election shall be the Village President, Village Clerk and Village Treasurer of Grosse Pointe Woods. The board shall meet in the municipal building of the Village and city at 8 P.M., Tuesday, December 12, 1950, to canvass the results of such election. 
(6)  Registration. The persons designated to act as inspectors of this election shall constitute a board of registration for the purpose of making the first registration of qualified voters in the city. Said board shall be authorized to procure the necessary books or files and forms to conduct such registration. The last day for registration shall be November 21, 1950, the twentieth day preceding the election. The board of registration shall on such last day for registration procure from the Village Clerk the records of the Clerk of the persons who are registered Village electors and shall incorporate such records with their records and shall cause all such persons to be registered as city electors in the same manner as though such persons had then and there applied for registration and all such persons shall be deemed to be registered as city electors. Subsequent to the election, the registration records shall be delivered to the Clerk. 
(7)  Notice of Registration. The Secretary of the Election Commission shall give notice for the board of registration of the days, hours and place that the registration will be conducted by publishing the same in the Grosse Pointe News and Grosse Pointe Review on November 9 and November 16, 1950, said first publication being not less than ten days prior to the last day for receiving registration. 
(8)  Notice of Election. The Secretary of the Election Commission shall cause to be published with the publication of this charter, and again in the Grosse Pointe News and the Grosse Pointe Review on November 30 and December 7, 1950, a notice of this election, the location of the polling places, that on the date fixed therefor the question of adopting such proposed charter will be voted on and that the elective officers provided for in the charter will be elected on the same date. He shall also post such notice in at least ten public places within the Village not less than ten days prior to such election. 
(9)  Procedure Governing Election. In all respects not otherwise provided for in [this] Chapter 18 of this charter, the election procedure shall be in accordance with the provisions of the other chapters of this charter. 
Section 18.2. - First Election of City Officers. 
(1)  Election. The first election of officers provided for in this charter shall be held on Monday, December 11, 1950, in conjunction with the election on the adoption of this charter. At this election the voters shall be entitled to vote for a Mayor, not more than six candidates for Council and not more than one candidate for the Municipal Judge (justice of the peace). 
(2)  Terms. The three candidates for Council who receive the three highest numbers of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on Wednesday, December 13, 1950, and ending on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1953. The three candidates for Council who receive the fourth, fifth and sixth highest numbers of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on Wednesday, December 13, 1950, and ending on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1952. The Municipal Judge (justice of the peace) who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on Wednesday, December 13, 1950, and ending on the fourth day of July, 1954. After this election the provisions contained in this charter relative to elections and terms of elective officers shall govern. 
(3)  Nomination. Candidates shall be nominated by petition in a manner identical to that provided for in Section[s] 3.9 to 3.12, inclusive, except that (1) petitions shall be filed with the Secretary of the Election Commission who shall perform all the duties in connection with such nomination petitions as are required by this charter of [sic] the Clerk, and (2) nomination petitions shall be filed at least fourteen and not more than twenty-one days prior to December 11, 1950. The Secretary of the Election Commission shall on November 16, 1950, make available a supply of official petition forms as required by Section 3.10. Notice of the days permitted for filing nomination petitions and the number of persons to be elected to each office shall be published by the Secretary of the Election Commission in the Grosse Pointe Review and the Grosse Pointe News on November 9, 16 and 23, 1950, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding. The names of those candidates who file valid and sufficient nomination petitions and have the qualifications required for their respective office shall be certified to the Election Commission to be placed on the ballot. 
(4)  Other Election Procedure. In all respects not otherwise provided for in this section the procedure for the election of officers shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.1. 
Section 18.3. - Effective Date of Charter. 
    For the purpose of initiating the procedure for the election on the adoption of this charter and for nominating and electing the first city officers, this charter shall take effect on November 16, 1950. For all other purposes this charter shall take effect on Wednesday, December 13, 1950, at 8[:00] P.M. Eastern Standard Time. At such time the officers first elected under this charter shall assemble in the municipal Council chambers. The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman of the Charter Commission. Each elective officer shall take and subscribe to his oath of office as administered by said Chairman, and shall thereupon be qualified for, and shall assume the duties of, his office. 
    At the time the elective officers of the city assume the duties of their respective offices, the Village Commission shall cease to be and the office of each and every member thereof shall terminate, and all other elective village offices shall thereupon cease to be and terminate. The control of such Village Commission and Village officers and of the officers of the Township of Grosse Pointe over that territory which was formerly the Village shall cease and be superseded by that of the Council and officers of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
Section 18.4. - Continuation of Appointed Officers and Employees. 
    After the effective date of this charter all appointive officers and all employees of the Village shall continue in that city office or employment which corresponds to the Village office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this charter; except that the terms of office of all members of the Village Board of Review shall terminate on December 13, 1950, and except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this charter provides be held at the will or pleasure of the appointing officer or body shall hold such position only at such will or pleasure regardless of the term for which originally appointed. 
Section 18.5. - First Board of Review. 
    Before February 1, 1951, the Council shall appoint a Board of Review of three freeholders who meet the qualifications for such office as provided in this charter and shall fix their compensation. One such member shall be designated to serve for a term expiring in January 1952, one for a term expiring in January, 1953, and one for a term expiring in January, 1954. Thereafter the provisions of Section 9.6 shall govern. 
Section 18.6. - Interim Financial Provisions. 
    The Council shall, at its first meeting on December 13, 1950, by resolution continue as city appropriations the unencumbered balances of the appropriations made by the previous Village Commission of Grosse Pointe Woods until March 31, 1951, and these appropriations shall then be deemed to be city appropriations and the fiscal year of the Village shall be completed by the city as though no governmental change had been made. At the close of business on March 31, 1951 the balances of all appropriations not then encumbered shall revert to the general fund of the city. 
    The period from April 1, 1951, to June 30, 1951, inclusive, shall constitute a special interim fiscal, budget and tax period to accomplish the transition from the previously existing fiscal year. A budget for such special fiscal period shall be prepared and adopted and administered in accordance with Sections 8.2 to 8.5 inclusive, except that the City Administrator shall submit the budget to the Council on or before March 1, 1951, and the budget shall be adopted not later than March 31, 1951. At the time of the adoption of the budget, the Council shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes for the three-month interim fiscal period and shall provide a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for such purposes. Such levy shall not exceed one-fourth of the annual limit of two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city. Such levy shall be spread on the tax roll which becomes due and payable on July 1, 1951 in addition to the regular taxes for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1951, and the amounts of taxes for these two levies may be combined for the purpose of convenience in spreading of the roll and preparation of the tax bills. Taxes for the interim period shall be collected in all respects as provided in this charter for the collection of city taxes. 
    There shall be an audit of this interim fiscal period in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.7. 
Section 18.7. - Township Assets and Liabilities. 
    As soon as practicable the Council shall take all necessary and proper action to obtain the division between the city and the Township of Grosse Pointe of the assets and liabilities of such township. 
Section 18.8. - Status of Schedule Chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the city under this charter and to accomplish the transition from Village to city government and it shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods held on the thirtieth day of October, 1950, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Burgess: 
    RESOLVED, that the Charter Commission of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed charter for the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, and the Secretary of this Commission is directed to transmit a copy of this charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with statute, and to cause this proposed charter to be published in the Grosse Pointe Review on November 16, 1950. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner Eyre and adopted by the following votes: 
    YEAS: Commissioners Beauchamp, Beever, Burgess, Diesing, Eyre, Harkness, Love, McKnight and Savage. 
    NO: None. 
    ABSENT: None. 
The Chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried unanimously and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the copy of the charter to be presented to the Governor by attesting their names thereto in the following manner: 
GEORGE A. BEAUCHAMP RUSSELL M. HARKNESS ALBERT BEEVER HAROLD O. LOVE GEORGE M. BURGESS WAID H. McKNIGHT ARNOLD L. DIESING HERBERT N. SAVAGE ALBERT L. EYRE  
    All of the Commissioners having attested as to said resolution and also having attested the copy to be signed by the Governor, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
STATE OF MICHIGAN, 
COUNTY OF WAYNE, ss. 
    Russell M. Harkness, Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, being duly sworn says that at an election duly called and held in the Village of Grosse Pointe Woods on the 19th day of June, 1950, the following named persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission to frame a revised charter for the city, namely: George A. Beauchamp, Albert Beever, George M. Burgess, Arnold L. Diesing, Albert L. Eyre, Russell M. Harkness, Harold O. Love, Waid H. McKnight and Herbert N. Savage, and that the annexed the foregoing [sic] charter was duly adopted by said Charter Commission by the foregoing resolution which is a true and correct copy thereof, and that the said Charter Commission directed that said charter be presented to the electors of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods in accordance with the requirements of this charter and the laws of the State of Michigan. Further deponent sayeth not. 
RUSSELL M. HARKNESS, 
Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
Dated: October 30, 1950. 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 30th day of October, 1950. 
LUCILLE BROWN, 
Notary Public, Wayne County, Michigan. My commission expires October 31, 1953. 
    I do hereby approve the above and foregoing charter of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
Approved G. MENNEN WILLIAMS, 
Governor of the State of Michigan. Dated: November 9, 1950 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
Date Section 
this Charter 12-11-1950 1.1-18.8  4- 7-1952 5.4  2-16-1953 7.4  4- 5-1954 7.15  4- 2-1956 3.5 4.2  9-12-1961 9.6  8- 7-1962 3.9  4- 6-1964 3.5  4- 6-1970 5.11 11- 7-1978 9.16 11- 4-1986 4.18 11- 6-1986 13.6 11- 7-1989 4.11 5.1 8.8 10.6  1- 5-1996 3.5 11- 5-1996 3.9 5.4 5.5 15.3 15.4 15.6  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Grosse Pointe Woods Code." 
(Code 1997, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  It is the legislative intent of the city council in adopting this Code that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. In the construction of this Code and any amendment to this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods adopted by the electorate on December 11, 1950, and effective on December 13, 1950 and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan. 
    Code. The term "this Code" or "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The term "computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code. When expressed in days, it shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded if the time period expires on a Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Council. The term "council" means the council of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
    County. The terms "the county" and "this county" mean the County of Wayne, State of Michigan. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations and to all neuter objects, as well as to males. Gender-neutral language which gives equal importance to males and females has been used in this Code. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things, as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" shall be construed to include the term "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases the term "sworn" shall be construed to include the term "affirmed." 
    Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan." Whenever by the provisions of this Code any officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read as the term "and," and the term "and" may be read as the term "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Person. The term "person" includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and all federal, state and local agencies of government, as well as natural persons, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
    Public Act. References to Public Acts of Michigan, whether by act number or by short title, are references to the acts as amended, revised or transferred. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, expressed or implied. 
    Shall, may. Whenever the term "shall" appears in this Code, it shall be considered mandatory and not discretionary, except as otherwise provided. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway, alley. The terms "street," "highway" and "alley" mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, or every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the traveling public. The term "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future, as well as the present and past. 
(b)  Any word or term not defined in this Code shall be considered to be defined in accordance with its common or standard definition. 
(Code 1997, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections or as any part of the sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No section of this Code shall be held invalid because of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 1997, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes in this Code are explanatory only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after certain sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in such section. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Prior offenses, rights, contracts not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1997, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    In case any provision of this Code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any ordinance or code of this city, the provisions which establish the higher standards for the protection of the public safety and general welfare shall prevail. 
(Code 1997, § 10-300; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the sections of this Code shall be made by amending such sections by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan (or Grosse Pointe Woods Code), is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan (or Grosse Pointe Woods Code), is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a section is to be repealed, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan (or Grosse Pointe Woods Code), is hereby amended by deleting a section, numbered _______." 
(Code 1997, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1997, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
    Should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent of the city council that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. This section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1997, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-11. - Service of notice. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which is performed by the city and may be assessed against the premises under this Code, shall be served by: 
(1)  Delivering the notice to the owner personally or leaving the notice at his residence, his office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  Mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to the owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action for which the notice is given. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by the officer to remove the notice. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation, or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Any provision of this Code that is made or declared to be a misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction is a violation of this Code. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or city ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasijudicial enforcement. 
(Code 1997, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(k), 117.4l. 
Sec. 1-13. - Aiding and abetting violations. 
    Whenever any act or omission to act is made a violation of this Code, or of any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, any person who causes, secures, aids or abets such violation may be prosecuted, and any conviction thereof shall be punished as if such person had directly committed such violation. 
(Code 1997, § 1-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code, when not inconsistent with this Code, shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Affecting the boundaries of the city; 
(2)  Vacating, abandoning or accepting any street, alley or easement; 
(3)  Relating to any specific local improvement; 
(4)  Authorizing, directing or ratifying any purchase or sale; 
(5)  Approving or accepting any subdivision or plat; 
(6)  Authorizing or directing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness; 
(7)  Authorizing or directing the making of any investment; 
(8)  Making or otherwise affecting any appropriations; 
(9)  Levying or otherwise affecting any taxes, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(10)  Relating to franchises; 
(11)  Pertaining to rezoning; 
(12)  Regulating or restricting traffic to parking on particular streets or in particular locations in the city; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city clerk. No offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code shall be affected. 
(Code 1997, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-15. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1997, § 1-14) 
State Law reference- Forgery of records and other instruments, MCL 750.249. 
Sec. 1-16. - Single lot assessment. 
    Whenever the city incurs any expense relating to a single lot or property, the city may assess the property for that expense. Any expense must be chargeable under the provisions of this Code, and not be an expense generally prorated among several lots or properties. A summary of the labor, material and service involved shall be reported to the treasurer, who shall immediately bill the owner. The council shall direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges reported to it together with a penalty of ten percent. The roll shall be filed with the clerk who shall advise the council of the filing, and the council shall set a date for the hearing of objections to the assessment roll. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The city clerk shall give notice in advance, by publication, of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the council to hear complaints and shall also give like notice to the owners of the property affected by first class mail at their address as shown on the current general assessment roll of the city, at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. Such special assessments and all interest and charges thereon shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assesses, of the same character and effect as a lien created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid. Interest shall be paid on such assessments, when delinquent, from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the council, and such assessments, with penalties and interest, shall be added by the treasurer to the next general city tax roll or general county and school tax roll, and shall thereafter be collected and returned in the same manner as general city taxes. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.431 et seq.; Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; conflicts of interests as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.; legal defense of public employees, MCL 691.1408; incompatible offices, MCL 15.181 et seq.; nondiscrimination in employment, MCL 37.2102. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-19-2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPUTY CLERK 

Sec. 2-40. - Office created. 
    The office of deputy city clerk is hereby created. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2-1; Code 1997, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-41. - Duties. 
    The deputy city clerk shall have full power and authority to act for and on behalf of the city clerk during the clerk's absence from the city, the clerk's incapacity to act and at such times as the clerk may direct in writing. The term "absence from the city" shall be deemed to mean any absence other than casual absence in the ordinary routine of business activities and living activities while the clerk is residing at his residence. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2-2; Code 1997, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-42. - Bond required. 
    The deputy city clerk shall qualify under such bond as the council may direct and shall be held accountable for the administration of such office to the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2-3; Code 1997, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-43. - Appointment. 
    The office of the deputy city clerk shall be filled by the city clerk with confirmation by the council. Such appointees shall perform all other services as may be required by the city clerk in addition to any of the services required under this division. Appointees shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2-4; Code 1997, § 2-49) 
Secs. 2-44-2-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPUTY TREASURER 

Sec. 2-75. - Office created. 
    The office of deputy city treasurer is hereby created. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3-1; Code 1997, § 2-66) 
Sec. 2-76. - Duties. 
    The deputy city treasurer shall have full power and authority to act for and on behalf of the city treasurer during the treasurer's absence from the city, the treasurer's incapacity to act and at such other times as the treasurer may direct in writing. The term "absence from the city" shall be deemed to mean any absence other than casual absence in the ordinary routine of business activities and living activities while the treasurer is residing at his residence. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3-2; Code 1997, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-77. - Bond required. 
    The deputy treasurer shall qualify under such bond as the council may direct and shall be held accountable for the administration of such office to the treasurer. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3-3; Code 1997, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-78. - Appointment. 
    The office of deputy treasurer shall be appointed by the city treasurer with confirmation by the council. Such appointee shall perform all other services as may be required by the city treasurer in addition to any of the services required by the city treasurer. Appointees shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the city treasurer. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3-4; Code 1997, § 2-69) 
Secs. 2-79-2-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEPUTY ASSESSOR 

Sec. 2-90. - Office created. 
    The office of deputy city assessor is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 822, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 2-91. - Duties. 
    The deputy city assessor shall have full power and authority to act for and on behalf of the assessor during the assessor's absence from the city, the assessor's incapacity to act and at such other times as the assessor may direct in writing. The term "absence from the city" shall be deemed to mean any absence other than casual absence in the ordinary routine of business activities and living activities while the assessor is residing at his or her residence. 
(Ord. No. 822, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 2-92. - Bond required. 
    The deputy city assessor shall qualify under such bond as the council may direct and shall be held accountable for the administration of such office to the assessor. 
(Ord. No. 822, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 2-93. - Appointment. 
    The office of deputy city assessor shall be appointed by the assessor with confirmation by the council. Such appointee shall perform all other services as may be required by the assessor in addition to any of the services required by the assessor. Appointees shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the assessor. 
(Ord. No. 822, 6-16-2008) 
Secs. 2-94-2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-100-2-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES 

Sec. 2-127. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a department of the city to be known as the department of public services, which shall be in the charge of a director of public services to be appointed and to hold office as provided in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 1-7-1) 
Sec. 2-128. - Organization. 
    The director of public services shall be appointed by the city administrator, receive compensation and carry out the director's responsibilities in the manner provided by the Charter. The director of public services shall recommend to the city administrator the employment of such employees as deemed necessary to efficiently carry out the responsibilities of the department of public services within the limits of the current budget, and shall further recommend to the city administrator the discharge of any of such employees without confirmation by the city council in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 1975, § 1-7-2) 
Sec. 2-129. - Jurisdiction and responsibilities. 
(a)  The department of public services shall have jurisdiction over and responsibility for, among other things, but not limited to, the following divisions: 
(1)  Public works division. The public works division of the department of public services shall be headed by the director of public services, or his designated representative, who shall be responsible for the following: 
a.  Construction, maintenance and repair of all present and future physical and tangible properties and assets of the city. 
b.  Water mains and water distribution system. 
c.  Stormwater structures and pumping stations. 
d.  Sanitary sewer system. 
e.  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, drains, buildings, parking meters, municipal parking lots. 
f.  Operation and maintenance of the refuse collection system. 
g.  Operation and maintenance of the rolling stock and mechanical equipment of the city. 
h.  Investigation of any alleged violation of local ordinances and the Code of the city pertaining to public works and any other applicable rules and regulations. 
i.  Control and regulation of the planting of trees, shrubs, flowers. 
j.  Planning, development, maintenance, management and operation of all playgrounds and public medians. 
k.  Maintenance schedules for all trees and lawn areas located on public land. 
l.  Coordinating reforestation and landscape projects. 
m.  Investigation of any alleged violation of local ordinances and the Code of the city pertaining to forestry and any other applicable rule and regulations. 
(2)  Community center division. The community center division shall be headed by the director of public services, or his designated representative, who shall be responsible for the following: 
a.  Providing cultural, educational, recreational and social activities for residents of the city. 
b.  All matters relating to the management, maintenance and operation of the community center. 
c.  Investigation of any alleged violation of local ordinances and the Code of the city pertaining to the community center and any other applicable rules and regulations. 
(3)  Parks and recreation division. The parks and recreation division shall be headed by the director of public services, or his designated representative, who shall be responsible for the following: 
a.  Recreational services for all recreation areas and facilities. 
b.  All matters relating to the management, maintenance and operation of the municipal parks. 
c.  Investigation of any alleged violation of local ordinances and the Code of the city pertaining to parks and recreation and any other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  The city administrator may be the director of public services. 
(c)  The director of public services may appoint and designate a person to be known as the assistant director of public services, who shall perform such duties as shall be delegated to him by the director of public services. 
(d)  The director of public services shall plan, schedule, correlated and supervise all departmental activities and the use of personnel and equipment in connection with the various functions described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  The director of public services shall keep such records, documents, files and materials and shall prepare such reports as requested by the city administrator. 
(f)  The director of public services may encumber funds and authorize services, labor and materials according to established procedures. The director shall make all purchases through the city purchasing agent as required and shall not obligate the city except through established procedures. 
(g)  The director of public services shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city administrator or by provisions of this Code. 
(h)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this division, the jurisdiction and responsibilities set forth in this section shall be subject to and shall be controlled by the provisions of the city Charter. 
(Code 1975, § 1-7-3) 
Sec. 2-130. - Additional rules and regulations. 
    The director of public services is hereby given permission to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary, expedient and advisable for the carrying out of the terms and provisions of this division or for the proper operating and maintaining of the department of public services. 
(Code 1975, § 1-7-4) 
Secs. 2-131-2-158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION DIVISION 

Sec. 2-159. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation division, which shall be in the charge of the director of public services, or his designated representative, to be appointed by the city administrator and to hold office as provided in section 2-128. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5-1) 
Sec. 2-160. - Organization. 
    The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall recommend to the city administrator the employment of such employees as such director deems necessary to efficiently carry out the responsibilities of the parks and recreation division within the limits of the current budget, and shall further recommend to the city administrator the discharge of any such employees without confirmation by the council in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5-2) 
Sec. 2-161. - Jurisdiction and responsibilities. 
(a)  The parks and recreation division shall have jurisdiction over and responsibility for, among other things, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Preparation and supervision of all recreational programs and activities within the city and its parks. 
(2)  All rolling stock and mechanical equipment, recreational supplies and equipment purchased or acquired for the parks and recreation division. 
(3)  Arranging for and coordinating, through the department of public services, the necessary care and maintenance of all parks and playgrounds, including all facilities and buildings used by or under the control and jurisdiction of the parks and recreation division. 
(b)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, may designate one of the parks and recreation employees as supervisor of parks and recreation, who shall perform all duties and services as required of a department head and such other duties as may be delegated to such supervisor by the director of public services. 
(c)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall plan, schedule, correlate and supervise all recreational activities which are a part of the city's recreational program. 
(d)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall arrange and coordinate with other city departments to have recreation areas, fields, parks and playgrounds, including board of education facilities, maintained and repaired by the department of public services, other than where such maintenance and repair is provided by the board of education. 
(e)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall keep such records, documents, files and materials and shall prepare such reports as are requested by the city administrator. 
(f)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, may encumber funds and authorize services, labor and materials according to established procedures. The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall make all purchases through the purchasing agent as required and shall not obligate the city except through established procedures. 
(g)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city administrator or by this Code. 
(h)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the jurisdiction and responsibilities set forth in this section shall be subject to and shall be controlled by the provisions of section 4.5 of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5-3) 
Sec. 2-162. - Additional regulations. 
    The director of public services, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary, expedient and advisable for the carrying out of the terms and provisions of this division, or for the proper operating and maintaining of the parks and recreation division. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5-4) 
Secs. 2-163-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION 

Sec. 2-176. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a public works division which shall be in the charge of the director of public services, or his designated representative, to be appointed and to hold office as provided in section 2-128 et seq. 
Sec. 2-177. - Organization. 
    The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall recommend to the city administrator the employment of such employees as such director deems necessary to efficiently carry out the responsibilities of the public works division within the limits of the current budget and shall further recommend to the city administrator the discharge of any such employees without conformation by the council in accordance with the Charter. 
Sec. 2-178. - Jurisdiction and responsibilities. 
(a)  The public works division shall have jurisdiction over and responsibility for, among other things, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Construction, maintenance and repair of all present and future physical and tangible properties and assets of the city; water mains and water distribution system; stormwater structures and pumping stations; sanitary sewer system; streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, drains, buildings, parking meters, municipal parking lots. 
(2)  All rolling stock and mechanical equipment, recreational supplies and equipment purchased or acquired for the public works division. 
(3)  Arranging for, and coordinating, through the department of public services, the necessary care and maintenance of all facilities and buildings used by or under the control and jurisdiction of the public works division. 
(4)  Operation and maintenance of the refuse collection system. 
(b)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, may designate one of the public works division employees as supervisor of the public works division, who shall perform all duties and services of a department head and such other duties as may be delegated to such supervisor by the director of public services. 
(c)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall keep such records, documents, files and materials and shall prepare such reports as are requested by the city administrator. 
(d)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, may encumber funds and authorize services, labor and materials according to established procedures. The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall make all purchases through the purchasing agent as required and shall not obligate the city except through established procedures. 
(e)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city administrator or by this Code. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the jurisdiction and responsibilities set forth in this section shall be subject to and shall be controlled by the provisions of section 4.5 of the Charter of the city. 
Sec. 2-179. - Additional regulations. 
    The director of public services, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules and regulations, subject to council approval, as may be necessary, expedient and advisable for the carrying out of the terms and provisions of this division, or for the proper operating and maintaining of the public works division. 
Secs. 2-180-2-192. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMUNITY CENTER DIVISION 

Sec. 2-193. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a community center division which shall be in the charge of the director of public services, or his designated representative, to be appointed and to hold office as provided in section 2-128 et seq. 
Sec. 2-194. - Organization. 
    The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall recommend to the city administrator the employment of such employees as such director deems necessary to efficiently carry out the responsibilities of the community center division within the limits of the current budget and shall further recommend to the city administrator the discharge of any such employees without confirmation by the council in accordance with the Charter. 
Sec. 2-195. - Jurisdiction and responsibilities. 
(a)  The community center division shall have jurisdiction over and responsibility for, among other things, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All rolling stock and mechanical equipment, recreational supplies and equipment purchased or acquired for the community center division. 
(2)  Arranging for, and coordinating, through the department of public services, the necessary care and maintenance of all facilities and buildings used by or under the control and jurisdiction of the community center division. 
(b)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, may designate one of the community center employees as supervisor of community center, who shall perform all duties and services of a department head and such other duties as may be delegated to such supervisor by the director of public services. 
(c)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall plan, schedule, correlate and supervise all cultural, educational, recreational and social activities for residents of the city which are a part of the community center programs. 
(d)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall keep such records, documents, files and materials and shall prepare such reports as are requested by the city administrator. 
(e)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, may encumber funds and authorize services, labor and materials according to established procedures. The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall make all purchases through the purchasing agent as required and shall not obligate the city except through established procedures. 
(f)  The director of public services, or his designated representative, shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city administrator or by this Code. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the jurisdiction and responsibilities set forth in this section shall be subject to and shall be controlled by the provisions of section 4.5 of the Charter of the city. 
Sec. 2-196. - Additional regulations. 
    The director of public services, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary, expedient and advisable for the carrying out of the terms and provisions of this division, or for the proper operating and maintaining of the community center division. 
Secs. 2-197-2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 2-216. - Authority and duties generally. 
    The department of public safety shall be charged with the performance of those duties which: 
(1)  Enforce city codes and ordinances, state statutes and federal laws; 
(2)  Preserve order; 
(3)  Protect life, persons and property against fire; 
(4)  Perform building safety inspections; 
(5)  Provide other public services of an emergency nature; and 
(6)  Perform all other duties as may be assigned by the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10-1; Code 1997, § 2-421) 
Sec. 2-217. - Director of public safety-Appointment; removal. 
(a)  The director of public safety shall head the department of public safety. The director shall be appointed by the city administrator for a term of indefinite duration. 
(b)  The director of public safety may be removed from office by the city administrator at any time that the director's conduct of the activities and operations of the department becomes unsatisfactory. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10-2; Code 1997, § 2-422) 
Sec. 2-218. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The director of public safety shall be responsible to the city administrator for the proper administration of the activities and operations of the department of public safety pursuant to statutes of the state and ordinances and codes of the city, with powers and duties as follows: 
(1)  To supervise and direct the activities of the members of the department of public safety. 
(2)  To recommend that the city administrator appoint new members to the department of public safety whenever the director deems such action necessary or desirable for the good of the department. 
(3)  To demote, suspend or remove any member of the department subject to the provisions of any labor contract last in effect whenever the director deems such action necessary or desirable for the good of the department. 
(4)  To analyze and present problems pertaining to the department which require policy decisions to the city administrator, and keep the city administrator advised concerning developments pertaining to department administration, business and affairs, and to make recommendations for improving the quality and efficiency of the services performed by the department. 
(5)  To prepare annually and submit to the city administrator a recommended financial budget of anticipated expenditures of the department for the ensuing fiscal year and to supervise the expenditures of money and the administration of such budget as adopted. 
(6)  To formulate and promulgate such general rules and regulations for the conduct of the department as the director deems necessary. 
(7)  To supervise and control all mobile and other equipment of the department and be responsible for its proper maintenance. 
(8)  To maintain or cause to be maintained complete and detailed records of all public safety activities in which the department engages. 
(9)  To perform such other duties as may from time to time be delegated to the director by the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10-3; Code 1997, § 2-423) 
Sec. 2-219. - Acting director of public safety. 
    In the event of the absence or incapacity of the director of public safety, the director's powers and duties shall be assumed by the individual specified as acting director, who shall be appointed by the director and approved by the city administrator. If no specific individual is designated, the senior ranking public safety officer shall assume the powers and duties of the position of director. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10-4; Code 1997, § 2-424) 
Sec. 2-220. - Public safety officers-Performance of police and fire duties. 
    Public safety officers shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by the director of public safety. There shall be no distinction between police duties and fire duties, these duties being combined and made a part of the duties of public safety officers. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10-5; Code 1997, § 2-425) 
Sec. 2-221. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The director of public safety and all public safety officers shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subjected to the liabilities conferred and imposed by laws upon police officers and firefighters. The director of public safety and all public safety officers shall have full power and authority; and it shall be the duty of each such individual to: 
(1)  Familiarize himself with state statutes, federal laws and the codes and ordinances of the city and attend to the enforcement of such statutes, laws, codes and ordinances by all lawful means. 
(2)  Prevent crimes and violations of state, federal and city laws and ordinances and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the city and its inhabitants. 
(3)  Engage in fire prevention, the fighting and extinguishing of fires and the preparation and submission of all reports relative thereto. 
(4)  Perform other administrative or emergency duties as directed by the city administrator, the director of public safety or their duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10-6; Code 1997, § 2-426) 
Sec. 2-222. - Definitions; law enforcement authority. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Law enforcement officer means any legally appointed police officer or public safety officer of the cities of Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms, Grosse Pointe Park, Grosse Pointe Woods, Harper Woods and the Village of Grosse Pointe Shores, Wayne County, Michigan. 
    Police mutual aid agreement means that agreement entered into between the cities of Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms, Grosse Pointe Park, Grosse Pointe Woods, Harper Woods and the Village of Grosse Pointe Shores, Wayne County, Michigan, which agreement shall be the current existing agreement between such communities which pertains to law enforcement mutual assistance. 
(b)  Authority. Any law enforcement officer, when acting in any of the communities that are signatories of the police mutual aid agreement by direction of their superiors and in accordance with the plans and procedures of the police operational planning board established under the provisions of the police mutual aid agreement, shall have the same law enforcement authority when acting in such communities as the law enforcement officers of the community in which they are operating. 
(Code 1975, §§ 1-11-1, 1-11-2; Code 1997, §§ 2-427, 2-428) 
State Law reference- Mutual police assistance agreements, MCL 123.811 et seq. 
Secs. 2-223-2-252. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-253-2-283. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-284. - Name; establishment; effective date. 
    The city employees' retirement system, called "the retirement system," is hereby established for the purpose of providing retirement allowances for the officers and employees of the city and under certain conditions for their dependents, under the provisions of this division. The effective date of the retirement system is April 1, 1949. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-1; Code 1997, § 2-116) 
Sec. 2-285. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member and credited to such member's individual account in the annuity savings fund, together with regular interest thereon. 
    Annuity means a monthly amount, payable throughout the future life of a person, derived from the accumulated contributions of a member. 
    Annuity reserve means the present value of all payments to be made on the account of any annuity. The annuity reserve shall be computed upon the basis of such mortality table and regular interest as the board of trustees shall from time to time adopt. 
    Beneficiary means any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of or who is designated to receive, a pension, retirement allowance or other benefit payable by the retirement system. 
    Board means the board of trustees of the retirement system, as provided in this division. 
    Compensation means a member's annual gross salary or earnings paid by the city for personal services rendered by the member to the city, and shall include annual longevity pay, holiday pay, overtime pay and cost-of-living pay, but it shall not include any payments for accumulated sick leave or vacation leave after July 1, 1985. 
    Covered member means any member who is covered under the federal social security old-age and survivors and disability insurance program on account of the member's city employment. 
    Credited service means the total service standing to a member's credit in his service account. 
    Final average compensation means the monthly average of the compensation paid to a member during the period of the four highest years of such member's credited service. If the member has less than four years of credited service, such member's final average compensation shall be the monthly average of the compensation paid to such member for such member's total months of credited service. 
    General member means any member except a police officer and/or firefighter member. 
    Member means any person who is included in the membership of the retirement system. 
    Noncovered member means any member who is not covered under the federal social security old-age and survivors and disability insurance program on account of such member's city employment. 
    Pension means a monthly amount, payable throughout the future life of a person or for a temporary period, as provided in this division, derived from money provided by the city. 
    Pension reserve means the present value of all payments to be made on account of any pension. The pension reserve shall be computed upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience and regular interest as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
    Police officer and/or firefighter member means any officer or employee in the department of public safety of the city holding the rank of patrol officer and/or firefighter, including probationary patrol officer and/or firefighter or higher rank. The term shall not include: 
(1)  Any civilian employee in the department of public safety; 
(2)  Any person who is temporarily employed as a police officer or firefighter for an emergency; or 
(3)  Any person who is privately employed as a police officer or firefighter. 
    Regular interest means such rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded annually, as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
    Retirant means any member who retires with a pension or retirement allowance payable by the retirement system. 
    Retirement means a member's withdrawal from the employ of the city with a pension or retirement allowance payable by the retirement system. 
    Retirement allowance means the sum of the annuity and pension payable to a retirant or beneficiary. 
    Service means personal service rendered to the city by an officer or employee of the city. 
    Workers' compensation period means the period a member or retirant is in receipt of workers' compensation on account of disability arising out of and in the course of the member's or retirant's city employment. If the member or retirant is paid a single sum in lieu of his future workers' compensation, the "workers' compensation period" shall be the period, if any, that the member or retirant was in receipt of weekly workers' compensation plus the period arrived at by dividing the single sum paid the member or retirant by his weekly workers' compensation award. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-2; Code 1997, § 2-117) 
Sec. 2-286. - Board of trustees-Authority; composition. 
(a)  A board of trustees shall have the authority and responsibility to administer, manage and operate the retirement system, and to construe and carry into effect the provisions of this division. The board shall consist of five trustees as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, to serve by virtue of the position. 
(2)  A member of the council to be selected by the council, to serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(3)  A citizen, who is an elector and taxpayer of the city and who is not a member, retirant or beneficiary of the retirement system, to be appointed by the mayor by and with the consent of the council. 
(4)  A police officer and/or firefighter member to be elected by the police officer and/or firefighter members. 
(5)  A general member to be elected by the general members. 
(b)  The elections of the trustees provided in subsections (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section shall be held under such rules and regulations as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-3; Code 1997, § 2-118) 
Sec. 2-287. - Same-Terms of office. 
    The regular term for the office of trustee provided for in section 2-286(a)(3)-(5) shall be for three years, one such term to expire each year. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-4; Code 1997, § 2-119) 
Sec. 2-288. - Same-Oath of office. 
    Each trustee shall take an oath of office before the city clerk for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-5; Code 1997, § 2-120) 
Sec. 2-289. - Same-Vacancies. 
    If a trustee, as provided in section 2-286(a)(1), (2), (4) or (5), shall cease to be employed by the city, or if a trustee provided in section 2-286(a)(2), (3), (4) or (5) shall fail to attend scheduled meetings of the board for three consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the remaining trustees attending the meeting, the trustee shall be considered to have resigned from the board, and the board shall by resolution declare the office of trustee vacated as of the date of adoption of such resolution. Any vacancy occurring in the office of trustee shall be filled within 60 days following the date of the vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term, in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-6; Code 1997, § 2-121) 
Sec. 2-290. - Same-Meetings; quorum; rules. 
    The board of trustees shall hold meetings regularly, at least quarterly, and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings of the board shall be public. Three trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each question before the board and at least three concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-7; Code 1997, § 2-122) 
Sec. 2-291. - Same-Officers. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall elect from its own number a chairman and a chairman pro-tem. 
(b)  The council shall designate an officer of the city to serve as secretary of the board and an officer to serve as the administrator of the retirement system. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall be treasurer of the retirement system and shall be the custodian of its cash and investments. 
(d)  The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board. 
(e)  The board shall appoint an actuary who shall be the technical advisor to the board and who shall perform such other duties as are required under this division. 
(f)  The board shall appoint as medical director a physician who is not a member of the retirement system. The medical director shall: 
(1)  Hold office at the pleasure of the board; 
(2)  Arrange for and pass upon all medical examinations required under this division; 
(3)  Investigate all essential statements and certificates of a medical nature furnished by or on behalf of a member or retirant in connection with a claim for benefits under this division; and 
(4)  Report, in writing to the board, the conclusions on medical matters referred to the medical director by the board. 
(g)  The board may employ such professional and other services as are required for the proper operation of the retirement system. The compensation for the actuary, medical director and for other services shall be determined by the council upon recommendation of the board. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-8; Code 1997, § 2-123) 
Sec. 2-292. - Records; annual report. 
    The administrator of the retirement system shall keep, or shall cause to be kept, such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the retirement system. The board of trustees shall annually render a report to the council showing the fiscal transactions of the retirement system for the preceding fiscal year and the last balance sheet showing the financial condition of the retirement system by means of an actuarial valuation of its assets and liabilities. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-9; Code 1997, § 2-124) 
Sec. 2-293. - Adoption of experience tables; regular interest. 
    The board of trustees shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other tables of experience and a rate of regular interest as are necessary in the operation of the retirement system on an actuarial basis. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-10; Code 1997, § 2-125) 
Sec. 2-294. - Membership. 
(a)  The membership of the retirement system shall include all officers and employees of the city and all persons who become officers or employees of the city, except as provided in subsection (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  The membership of the retirement system shall not include: 
(1)  Any person whose services are compensated on a contractual or fee basis; 
(2)  Any person who is employed by the city in a temporary or seasonal capacity or in a position normally requiring less than 1,350 hours of work per annum; 
(3)  The medical director and the actuary; or 
(4)  Any elective or appointive officer of the city unless such officer is employed by the city in a full-time position. After July 1, 2016, appointed officials and department directors may irrevocably elect to opt out of membership in the retirement system. The election must be made in writing, approved by the city council, and filed with the retirement system and the finance department. Such employees electing to opt out of the retirement systems will not eligible to re- enroll at a future date. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this division and subject to applicable Internal Revenue Code Regulations, in the event a retirant of the retirement systems is re-employed by the city, payment of the retirant's pension shall continue during the period of re-employment. During the period of re-employment by the city, the retirant shall not again become a member of the retirement system. 
(d)  In any case of doubt as to the membership status of any officer or employee in the retirement system, the board shall decide the question. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-11; Code 1997, § 2-126; Ord. No. 838, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 868, 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 872, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 2-295. - Termination of membership. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, should any member have separated or become separated from the employ of the city for any reason except such member's retirement or death, the member shall thereupon cease to be a member of the retirement system; and such member's credited service at that time shall be forfeited. Should the person be reemployed by the city, he shall again become a member. If the member's reemployment occurs within five years from and after the date he last left the city employment, the credited service last forfeited by the member shall be restored to his credit, provided the member returns to the annuity savings fund the amount, if any, he withdrew therefrom, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. Upon such member's retirement or death, he shall thereupon cease to be a member. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-12; Code 1997, § 2-127) 
Sec. 2-296. - Service credit. 
    The board of trustees shall determine by appropriate rules and regulations the amount of service to be credited any member; but in no case shall less than ten days of service rendered by a member in any calendar month be credited to the member as a month of service, nor shall more than one year of service be credited any member for all service rendered by the member in any calendar year. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-13; Code 1997, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-297. - Military service credit. 
    A person who while employed by the city entered any armed service of the United States, or a member who entered or enters any armed service of the United States, and who has been or shall be on active duty during time of war or period of compulsory military service, shall have such armed service, not to exceed five years, credited to such him as city service; provided that such person is reemployed by the city within one year from and after termination of such armed service actually required of such person, and that such person returns to the annuity savings fund the amount, if any, that he might have withdrawn therefrom at the time he entered or while in such armed service, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited as a member, the board shall have final power to determine the period. During the period of armed service, and until the person's return to city employment, the person's contributions to the annuity savings funds shall be suspended and the balance therein shall be accumulated at regular interest. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-14; Code 1997, § 2-129) 
Sec. 2-298. - Member's service accounts. 
    The board of trustees shall credit each member's service account with the number of years and months of service rendered by such member before and after April 1, 1949, to which the member is entitled. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-15; Code 1997, § 2-130) 
Sec. 2-299. - Voluntary retirement. 
(a)  Any member who either: 
(1)  Has ten or more years of credited service and has attained or attains age 60 years; 
(2)  Has 20 or more years of credited service and has attained or attains age 55 years; or 
(3)  Has 25 or more years of credited service and attains age 50 years, may retire upon his written application filed with the board setting forth at what time, not less than 30 days or more than 90 days subsequent to the execution of filing thereof, he desires to be retired. 
(b)  Upon his retirement, a covered member shall receive a retirement allowance provided in section 2-300 and a noncovered member shall receive a retirement allowance provided in section 2-301. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-16; Code 1997, § 2-131; Ord. No. 740, § 1, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 799, 10-18-2004) 
Sec. 2-300. - Normal retirement. 
(a)  Any police officer and/or firefighter member who has attained 60 years of age before December 1, 1993, shall be separated from city employment the first day of the calendar month following the month in which he attains 60 years of age, subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any police officer and/or firefighter member who has attained 60 years of age may continue in city employment, provided that his continuance in city employment is requested by his department head and approved by the member in writing. On and after January 1, 1994, a police officer and/or firefighter member may continue employment indefinitely if physically qualified. 
(c)  If, at the time of the member's separation from city employment as provided in this section, a member has ten or more years of credited service, such member shall be retired and shall receive a retirement allowance as provided in section 2-301 if such member is a covered member, or as provided in section 2-302 if the member is a noncovered member. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-17; Code 1997, § 2-132) 
Sec. 2-301. - Retirement allowance-Covered member. 
(a)  Upon retirement, as provided in this division, a covered member shall receive a straight life retirement allowance consisting of the benefits provided in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, and such member shall have the right to elect to receive his retirement allowance under an option provided in section 2-304 in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance. The following benefits are available to covered members: 
(1)  Any annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of such member's accumulated contributions standing to such member's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of the member's retirement; and 
(2)  A pension which, when added to the member's annuity, shall provide a retirement allowance equal to two percent of the member's final average compensation multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of such member's credited service, not to exceed 25 years, plus one percent of the member's final average compensation multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of the member's credited service which is in excess of 25 years. For a TPOAM covered member hired after March 30, 2011, the pension multiplier shall be 1.75 percent of final average compensation. If a member, retirant or beneficiary is granted workers' compensation paid for by the city, then during such member's workers' compensation period, the member's pension shall not exceed the difference between the member's final average compensation and the member's weekly workers' compensation allowance converted to a monthly amount. 
(b)  If a retirant dies before he has received in straight life retirement allowance payments an aggregate amount equal to his accumulated contributions standing to the retirant's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of his retirement, the difference between the retirant's accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of straight life retirement allowance payments received by the retirant shall be paid from the retirement reserve fund to the person the retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there is no such person surviving the retirant, the difference, if any, shall be paid to the retirant's legal representative. No benefits shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a retirant if the retirant elected option II or III provided in subsection 2-304(a) as long as pension benefits are being paid. 
(c)  According to the rules and regulations, as the board of trustees may from time to time adopt, any covered member who retires prior to his attainment of age 65 years may elect to have his straight life retirement allowance actuarially equated to provide an increased retirement allowance payable to him until his attainment of age 65 years and a reduced retirement allowance payable thereafter. The member's increased retirement allowance payable to such member's attainment of age 65 years shall approximate the sum of such member's reduced retirement allowance to be payable after such member's attainment of age 65 years and the member's estimated Social Security primary insurance amount. This subsection shall not apply to a retirement allowance payable under option II or III provided in subsection 2-304(a). 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-18; Code 1997, § 2-133; Ord. No. 855, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-302. - Same-Noncovered member. 
(a)  Upon retirement, as provided in this division, a noncovered member shall receive a straight life retirement allowance consisting of the benefits provided in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, and such member shall have the right to elect to receive such member's retirement allowance under an option provided in subsection 2-304(a) in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance. The following benefits are available to noncovered members: 
(1)  An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the member's accumulated contributions standing to such member's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of such member's retirement; and 
(2)  A pension which when added to the member's annuity, shall provide a retirement allowance equal to 2.5 percent of a command member's final average compensation, and 2.125 percent of an AEMT and clerk/dispatch member's final average compensation, and 2.5 percent for a noncovered PSO member's final average compensation if hired prior to July 1, 2011 and 2.0 percent for a noncovered PSO member hired after July 1, 2011, multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of such member's credited service, up to a maximum of 75 percent of the members final average compensation. If a member, retirant or beneficiary is granted workers' compensation paid for by the city, then during such member's workers' compensation period, the member's pension shall not exceed the difference between the member's final average compensation and the member's weekly workers' compensation allowance converted to a monthly amount. 
(b)  If a retirant dies before he has received in straight life retirement allowance payments an aggregate amount equal to the accumulated contributions standing to the retirant's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of his retirement, the difference between the retirant's accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of straight life retirement allowance payments received by the retirant shall be paid from the retirement reserve fund to such person as the retirant shall have mentioned by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there is no such person surviving the retirant, the difference, if any, shall be paid to the retirant's legal representative. No benefits shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a retirant if the retirant elected option II or III provided in subsection 2-304(a) as long as pension benefits are being paid. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-19; Code 1997, § 2-134; Ord. No. 855, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-303. - Deferred retirement. 
    Should any member who has ten or more years of credited service leave the employ of the city, for any reason, except the member's retirement or death, before the member has satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement provided in section 2-299, and does not withdraw his accumulated contributions from the annuity savings fund, the member shall be entitled to a retirement allowance provided in section 2-301 if the member is a covered member, or as provided in section 2-302 if the member is a noncovered member, as the applicable section was in force at the time the member left the city employment. The member's retirement allowance shall begin the first day of the calendar month next following the month in which the member's application for such benefit is filed with the board on or after the member's attainment of age 60 years. During the period of the member's absence from city employment, the member's accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the annuity savings fund shall be accumulated at regular interest. Unless otherwise provided in this division, the member shall not receive service credit for the period of his absence from city employment. 
(Ord. No. 669, § 1, 2-28-1994; Code 1997, § 2-135) 
Sec. 2-304. - Retirement allowance options. 
(a)  Prior to the effective date of a member's retirement, but not thereafter, a member may elect to receive his retirement allowance as a straight life retirement allowance payable throughout the member's life, or the member may elect to receive the actuarial equivalent of his straight life retirement allowance in a reduced retirement allowance payable throughout the member's life, and nominate a beneficiary, in accordance with the provisions of option I, II and III, set forth below, subject to subsection (b) of this section. Provided, however, that for any member retiring on or after November 4, 1986, having attained the age of 60 years and also having accumulated 30 years of credited service, the value of any reduced optional annuity shall be the actuarial equivalent of the annuity otherwise payable to the member based upon the member being 60 years of age and his beneficiary's age at the time the member was 60 years of age, notwithstanding the member's or beneficiary's actual age at the time of retirement. 
(1)  Option I. Cash refund annuity. If a retirant who elected option I dies before he has received in payment of the annuity portions of his reduced retirement allowance an aggregate amount equal to his accumulated contributions standing to the retirant's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of his retirement, the difference between the retirant's accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of annuity payments received by such retirant shall be paid to such person or persons as he shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there is no such designated person surviving such retirant, the difference, if any, shall be paid to the retirant's legal representative; 
(2)  Option II. Joint and survivor retirement allowance. Upon the death of a retirant who elected option II, such retirant's reduced retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person having an insurable interest in such retirant's life, as the retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior to the effective date of his retirement; or 
(3)  Option III. Modified joint and survivor retirement allowance. Upon the death of a retirant who elected option III, one-half of the retirant's reduced retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person having an insurable interest in the retirant's life, as the retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior to the effective date of retirement. 
(b)  If any benefits become payable under section 2-310 on account of the death of a retirant, no retirement allowance shall be paid to such retirant's designated beneficiary under option II or III, and if such retirant's death occurs before the retirant has received in retirement allowance payments an aggregate amount equal to his accumulated contributions standing to such retirant's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of retirement, the difference between the retirant's accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of retirement allowance payments received by the retirant shall be paid to the retirant's beneficiary, if living; otherwise to the retirant's legal representative. 
(c)  A member who has attained the voluntary retirement age while in city employment and who has elected to retire in accordance with section 2-299 may elect to be paid the annuity portion of such member's retirement allowance in an actuarially equivalent single payment and, thereafter, be paid only the pension portion of the retirement allowance as determined without regard to the single payment. The accumulated contributions of the member in the annuity savings fund shall be reduced by the amount of such single payment. If a member elects to receive a reduced retirement allowance provided for in this subsection, the member may also elect to have such member's retirement allowance further reduced by electing one of the optional forms of payment provided for in subsection (a) of this section. Provided, however, that the rate of interest for the purpose of computing the actuarial equivalent of refunded contributions at retirement be the rate of regular interest as adopted by the board of trustees for the purpose of the regular annual actuarial valuation; and provided further that if the employer's annual contribution required to finance this annuity withdrawal benefit exceeds one percent of payroll, the rate of interest used to compute the actuarial equivalent of refunded contributions will be adjusted for future retirements. 
(d)  If a member elects option II or option III and the member's beneficiary predeceases the member, the retirement allowance shall be increased to the amount of unreduced straight life retirement allowance. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-21; Code 1997, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-305. - Nonduty death. 
(a)  Any member who continues in the employ of the city after the date such member either acquires 15 years of credited service or attains age 55 years and has ten or more years of credited service may, by written declaration duly executed and filed with the board, elect option II provided in section 2-304(a)(2) and nominate a beneficiary whom the board finds to be dependent upon such member for at least 50 percent of the member's financial support. Prior to the effective date of such member's retirement, the member may revoke his election of option II and nomination of a beneficiary and may, prior to the effective date of such member's retirement, again elect option II and nominate a beneficiary as provided in this subsection. Upon the death of a member who has an option II election in force, the member's beneficiary, if living, shall immediately receive a retirement allowance computed in the same manner in all respects as if such member had retired the day preceding the date of such member's death, notwithstanding that the member might not have satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement provided in section 2-299; provided that the computation of the retirement allowance of section 2-301(b) shall not be applied if the deceased member was a covered member. If a member has an option II election in force at the time of his retirement, the member's election of option II and nomination of a beneficiary shall thereafter continue in force, unless prior to the effective date of the member's retirement the member elects to receive his retirement allowance as a straight life retirement allowance or according to another option provided in section 2-304(a). No benefits shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a member if any benefits are paid under section 2-310 on account of the member's death. 
(b)  Any member who continues in the employ of the city after the date he either acquires 15 years of credited service, or attains age 55 years and has ten or more years of credited service, and in either case does not have an option II election in force as provided in subsection (a) of this section, and dies while in city employment and leaves a widow, or in the case of a female member, leaves a widower whom the board finds to be totally and permanently disabled and to have been dependent upon such female member for at least 50 percent of his financial support, such widow or widower shall immediately receive a retirement allowance computed in the same manner in all respects as if such member had: 
(1)  Retired the day preceding the date of such member's death, notwithstanding that the member might not have satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement provided in section 2-299; 
(2)  Elected option II provided in section 2-304(a)(2); and 
(3)  Nominated such member's widow or widower as beneficiary; provided that in computing such retirement allowance, section 2-301(b) shall not be applied if the deceased member was a covered member. No benefits shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a member if any benefits are paid under section 2-310 on account of such member's death. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-22; Code 1997, § 2-137) 
Sec. 2-306. - Disability retirement. 
    Upon the application of a member or a member's department, a member who is in the employ of the city, has ten or more years of accumulated and/or credited service, and has become totally and permanently incapacitated for duty in the employ of the city by reason of a personal injury or disease, may be retired by the board; provided that after a medical examination of the member made by or under the direction of the medical director, the medical director certifies to the board that the member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for duty in the employ of the city, that the member's incapacity will probably be permanent and that the member should be retired; provided further that the report of the medical director is concurred by the board. Upon the member's retirement, the member shall be paid a disability retirement allowance as provided in section 2-308. This section shall be subject to section 2-307. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-23; Code 1997, § 2-138) 
Sec. 2-307. - Duty disability. 
(a)  The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section are applicable to a member who satisfies the provisions of section 2-306 and whom the board finds: 
(1)  To be totally and permanently incapacitated for duty in the employ of the city as the natural and proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of the member's actual performance of duty in the employ of the city; and 
(2)  Who is granted workers' compensation on account of the member's total and permanent incapacity. 
(b)  A member who satisfies the conditions provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be granted service credit for the period between the effective date of duty-disability retirement and the earlier of the date the member would attain age 55 years or the date the member would have satisfied the rule of 80 retirement condition had the member continued in city employment. 
(c)  The service requirement of at least ten years of credited service contained in section 2-305 shall be waived in the case of a member who satisfies the conditions provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-24; Code 1997, § 2-139) 
Sec. 2-308. - Disability retirement allowance. 
    Upon a member's retirement on account of disability, as provided in section 2-305, the member shall be paid a disability retirement allowance equal to the member's final average compensation multiplied by the sum of two percent for each year and fraction of a year of such member's credited service to a maximum of 25 years, and one percent for each year and fraction of a year of such member's credited service in excess of 25 years, if any. This section shall be subject to sections 2-306 and 2-308. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-25; Code 1997, § 2-140) 
Sec. 2-309. - Offsets. 
    Any benefits which are paid or payable under the provisions of any workers' compensation law shall be offset against and payable in lieu of the portion of any retirement allowance provided by retirement system funds. The portion of the member's retirement allowance provided by his accumulated contributions is exempt from this offset. Workers' compensation benefits shall include redemptions and settlements in lieu of periodic benefits, but shall not include payments for medical expenses, nor any expenditures by workers' compensation providers for rehabilitation and/or retraining expenses. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-26; Code 1997, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-310. - Duty death benefits. 
    If a member dies as a result of a personal injury or disease arising solely and exclusively out of and in the course of the member's employment with the city, or if a disability retirant who was granted workers' compensation paid for by the city dies within five years from and after the date of such retirant's disability retirement as the result of the same injury or disease for which he was retired, and in either case such death, injury or disease resulting in death be found by the board to have been the natural and proximate result of the member's actual performance of duty in the employ of the city, the applicable benefits provided in subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall be paid, subject to the condition that workers' compensation paid for by the city is granted the beneficiary on account of the death of such member or retirant. 
(1)  In the case of the death of a member, the accumulated contributions standing to such member's credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of the member's death shall be paid in accordance with section 2-313(b). 
(2)  A pension equal to the weekly workers' compensation, converted to a monthly basis, granted such member's widow shall be paid her, if she has not remarried. Her pension shall begin upon termination of her workers' compensation period and shall continue until her remarriage or death; shall not exceed 33 1/3 percent of the final average compensation of the deceased member or retirant; and shall be subject to subsection (5) of this section. 
(3)  The member or retirant's unmarried children under 18 years of age shall receive a pension equal to the weekly workers' compensation, converted to a monthly basis, granted each child. Such child's pension shall begin upon termination of the workers' compensation period and shall continue until the child's adoption, marriage, attainment of age 18 years or death, whichever occurs first; shall not exceed 25 percent of the final average compensation of the deceased member or retirant; and shall be subject to subsection (5) of this section. 
(4)  The deceased member or retirant's parents shall each receive a pension equal to the weekly workers' compensation, converted to a monthly basis. The parent's pension shall begin upon termination of the workers' compensation period and shall continue until such parent's remarriage or death; the pension shall not exceed 16 2/3 percent of the final average compensation of the deceased member or retirant, and shall be subject to subsection (5) of this section. 
(5)  As used in this section, the term "widow" means the person to whom the member or retirant was married at the time the member's or retirant's employment with the city last terminated, and it shall include a widower whom the board finds to be totally and permanently disabled and to have been dependent upon the member or retirant for at least 50 percent of such widower's financial support. In no case shall the total of the pensions payable under subsections (2)-(4) of this section on account of the death of a member or retirant exceed the member's or retirant's final average compensation. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-27; Code 1997, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-311. - Reimbursement provision. 
    If a person is entitled to a pension payable by the retirement system as the result of an accident or injury caused by the act of a third party, the city shall be reimbursed from the proceeds of any recovery of damages for injuries so sustained. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-28; Code 1997, § 2-143) 
Sec. 2-312. - Reexamination of disability retirants. 
(a)  At least once each year during the first five years following the retirement of a member with a disability retirement allowance, and at least once in each three-year period thereafter, the board may require any disability retirant who has not attained age 55 years to undergo a medical examination to be made by or under the direction of the medical director. Should any disability retirant refuse to submit to medical examination in any such period, the board may suspend payment of the retirant's disability retirement allowance until such retirant's withdrawal of such refusal. If such refusal continues for one year, all of such retirant's rights in and to the pension portion of such retirant's disability retirement allowance may be revoked by the board. If, upon such medical examination of the retirant, the medical director reports to the board that the retirant is physically able and capable of resuming employment with the city, the retirant shall be returned to the employ of the city and such retirant's disability retirement allowance shall terminate. In returning the retirant to the employ of the city, as provided in this subsection, reasonable latitude shall be allowed the city in placing the member in a position commensurate to the member's type of work and rate of compensation at the time of such member's retirement. 
(b)  A disability retirant who has been or shall be returned to the employ of the city, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall again become a member of the retirement system. The member's credited service standing to his credit at the time of such member's retirement shall be restored to full force and effect. The member shall be given service credit for the period such member was receiving a disability retirement allowance, as provided in this division, if within such period such member was in receipt of workers' compensation paid for by the city; otherwise, the member shall not be given service credit for such period. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-29; Code 1997, § 2-144) 
Sec. 2-313. - Refund of accumulated contributions. 
(a)  Should a member leave the employ of the city before the member has satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement as provided in section 2-299, for any reason except the member's retirement or death, such member shall be paid such member's accumulated contributions standing to the member's credit in the annuity savings fund as the member shall demand in writing on a form furnished by the board. 
(b)  Upon the death of a member, if no pension becomes payable by the retirement system, except as provided in section 2-310, the member's accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the annuity savings fund at the time of such member's death shall be paid to such person as such member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there is no such designated person surviving such member, the member's accumulated contributions shall be paid to the member's legal representative. 
(c)  Payments of refunds of accumulated contributions, as provided in this section, may be made in a single sum or in installments in accordance with such rules and regulations which from time to time shall be adopted by the board. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-30; Code 1997, § 2-145) 
Sec. 2-314. - Annuity savings fund. 
(a)  The annuity savings fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions deducted from the compensations of members to provide their annuities, and from which shall be made refunds and transfers of accumulated contributions as provided in this division. 
(b)  A covered member's contributions to the retirement system shall be five percent of the compensations paid to such member by the city. A noncovered member's contribution to the retirement system shall be six percent of the compensations paid to such member by the city. 
(c)  The officer responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the applicable contribution provided in this section to be deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, so long as the member continues as a member of the retirement system. The member's contributions provided in this section shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member shall be thereby changed. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for in this section and payment of the member's compensation less such deduction shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services rendered by such member during the period covered by payment, except as to benefits provided by this division. The officer responsible for making up the payroll shall certify to the city treasurer the amount of contributions to be deducted from the compensation of each member for each and every payroll. Each of such amounts shall be deducted by the city treasurer and when deducted shall be paid to the retirement system and shall be credited to such member's individual account in the annuity savings fund. 
(d)  In addition to the contributions deducted from the compensation of a member as provided in this section, a member shall deposit in the annuity savings fund, by a single contribution or by an increased rate of contribution as approved by the board, the amount, if any, such member withdrew therefrom, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In no case shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior to the date such member withdrew such member's accumulated contributions until such member repays to the annuity savings fund all amounts due such fund by such member. 
(e)  Upon retirement of a member, the member's accumulated contributions shall be transferred from the annuity savings fund to the retirement reserve fund. At the expiration of a period of three years from the date an employee ceases to be a member, any balance outstanding to the member's credit in the annuity savings fund, unclaimed by the member or his legal representative, shall be transferred to the pension reserve fund; provided that no pension becomes or will become payable by the retirement system on account of membership. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-31; Code 1997, § 2-146; Ord. No. 855, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-315. - Retirement reserve fund. 
    The retirement reserve fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund from which shall be paid all annuities and pensions payable as provided in this division. Should a disability retirant return to the employ of the city, such retirant's annuity reserve at that time shall be transferred from the retirement reserve fund to the annuity savings fund and shall be credited to such retirant's individual account therein; and the retirant's pension reserve at that time shall be transferred from the retirement reserve fund to the pension reserve fund. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-32; Code 1997, § 2-147) 
Sec. 2-316. - Pension reserve fund. 
    The pension reserve fund is hereby created. The pension reserve fund shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated reserves for the payment of all pensions payable as provided in this division. Upon the basis of such mortality and other experience tables, and regular interest, as the board shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall annually compute the annuity and pension reserves for retirement allowances being paid retirants and beneficiaries, and covering service rendered and to be rendered by members. The pension reserves shall be financed by annual appropriations, to be made by the council, determined according to subsections (1)-(3) of this section. 
(1)  The appropriations for members' current service shall be a percentage of their annual compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the city during their future service will be sufficient to provide the reserves, at the time of their retirements, for the portions of the pensions to be paid them based upon their future service. 
(2)  The appropriations for members' accrued service shall be a percentage of their annual compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be determined by the council, will amortize at regular interest the unfunded pension reserves for the accrued service portions of the pensions to be paid them. 
(3)  The appropriations for retirement allowances being paid retirants and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the annual compensations of members which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be determined by the council, will amortize at regular interest the unfunded annuity and pension reserves, if any, for retirement allowances being paid retirants and beneficiaries. 
(4)  Upon the retirement of a member, or at the time a pension becomes payable on such member's account, the pension reserve for such pension shall be transferred from the pension reserve fund to the retirement reserve fund. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-33; Code 1997, § 2-148) 
Sec. 2-317. - Administrative expenses. 
    Administrative expenses of the retirement system shall be paid from investment income of the retirement system, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-34; Code 1997, § 2-149) 
Sec. 2-318. - Investment of funds. 
(a)  The board shall be the trustees of the funds of the retirement system and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such funds in accordance with MCL 38.1132 et seq. The board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer and dispose of any securities and investments in which any of the funds of the retirement system have been invested, as well as the proceeds of such investments and any moneys belonging to the retirement system. 
(b)  There shall be kept on deposit available cash not exceeding five percent of the total assets of the retirement system. All assets of the retirement system shall be held for the sole purpose of meeting disbursements for pensions, annuities and other payments authorized in this division and shall be used for no other purpose. The description of the various funds of the retirement system shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the retirement system and not to the actual segregation of moneys in the various funds of the retirement system. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-35; Code 1997, § 2-150) 
Sec. 2-319. - Allowance of regular interest. 
    At the end of each fiscal year, the board shall allow regular interest on the mean balance in the retirement reserve fund, and on the balance standing to each member's credit in the annuity savings fund at the beginning of such fiscal year. Interest so allowed and credited shall be payable from the investment income of the retirement system. Any additional amounts required to credit regular interest, as provided herein, shall be charged to the pension reserve fund; and any investment earnings in excess of such requirements shall be credited to the pension reserve fund. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-36; Code 1997, § 2-151) 
Sec. 2-320. - Method of making payments. 
    All payments from moneys of the retirement system shall be made according to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances governing the disbursement of moneys from the city's general fund. No payment shall be made from the moneys of the retirement system unless such payment has been authorized by a specific or continuing resolution adopted by the board. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-37; Code 1997, § 2-152) 
Sec. 2-321. - Assignments prohibited. 
    The right of a person to an annuity, a pension, a retirement allowance, to the return of accumulated contributions, the annuity, the pension, or the retirement allowance itself, any optional benefit, any other right accrued or accruing to any member, retirant, or beneficiary under the provisions of this division, and any moneys belonging to the retirement system, shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law, or any other process of law whatsoever, and shall be unassignable except as it is specifically provided in this division. If a member is covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by the city, and should the member be permitted to, and elect to, continue such coverage as a retirant, the member may authorize the board to have deducted from such member's retirement allowance the payments required of the member to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan. The city shall have the right to set off for any claim arising from embezzlement by or fraud of a member retirant or beneficiary. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-38; Code 1997, § 2-153) 
Sec. 2-322. - Errors. 
    Should any change or error in the records result in any person receiving from the retirement system more or less than such person would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the board shall correct such error and, as far as practicable, shall adjust the payment in such manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such person was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-39; Code 1997, § 2-154) 
Sec. 2-323. - Retirement allowance. 
    The amount of each retirement allowance having an effective date on or after December 31, 1973, shall be redetermined each January 1, beginning January 1, 1975, or the January 1 which is at least 12 full months following the effective date of the retirement allowance, whichever is the last to occur, and such redetermined amount shall be the basis of payments for an ensuing year. Subject to the maximum stated in the next sentence, such redetermined amount shall be equal to the amount of retirement allowance otherwise payable multiplied by the following fraction: The numerator shall be the average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12 calendar months ending with the month of November immediately preceding the January 1 of redetermination, but in no event less than the denominator; and the denominator shall be the average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12 calendar months ending with the month of November in either calendar year 1973, or the calendar year in which the retirement allowance becomes effective, whichever is the last date to occur. In no event shall such redetermined amount be less than the amount of retirement allowance otherwise payable, nor more than the amount of retirement allowance otherwise payable increased by 2.5 percent for each complete year in the period between January 1, 1974, or the effective date of the retirement allowance, if more recent, and the January 1 of redetermination. As used in this section, the term "amount of retirement allowance otherwise payable" means the amount of retirement allowance which would be payable without regard to the provisions of this section. As used in the section, the term "Consumer Price Index" means the Consumer Price Index for urban wage earners and clerical workers, as determined by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and in effect December 31, 1973, and as it may from time to time be amended. Should the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics adopt a new base or modify the method of computation of the Consumer Price Index in any way so as to render it unsuitable in the opinion of the board of trustees, the board shall make appropriate adjustments. If the Consumer Price Index is no longer published, the board of trustees shall choose another index which it deems appropriate for the purposes of this section. In the case of a retirement allowance payable to a person upon the death of a retirement member, the effective date of the retirement allowance shall be the effective date of the deceased retired member's retirement allowance. 
(Code 1975, § 1-21-41; Code 1997, § 2-156) 
Sec. 2-324. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 852, adopted Jan. 28, 2013, repealed § 2-324, entitled "Retirees and spouse hospitalization insurance, optical insurance and dental insurance", which derived from: Code 1975, § 1-21-42; and Code 1997, § 2-157. 
Sec. 2-325. - Service beyond normal retirement age. 
    Those employees and appointed officials holding the offices of city administrator, city comptroller, city clerk, director of public services and director of public safety as of the effective date of the amendment from which this division is derived, may elect to remain actively employed by the city beyond their normal retirement age. Should they so elect to serve beyond the age when they first become eligible for a service related retirement benefit, they shall receive additional retirement benefits upon retirement as follows: 
One and one-half percent of the employees' final year of compensation times the number of years worked past normal retirement age to a maximum of 15 percent of the employees annual salary or the sum of $10,000.00, whichever is the lesser amount. The amount of this compensation shall be indexed to the rate of inflation as provided in section 2-323. Any amount being paid by reason of service beyond normal retirement age shall be reduced by 50 percent upon the death of the retiree and the reduced benefit shall continue to be paid to the beneficiary of the deceased retiree until the death of the beneficiary. 
(Code 1997, § 2-158; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Sec. 2-325A. - Internal Revenue Code qualifications. 
(a)  The retirement system is intended and has been administered to be a qualified pension plan under § 401 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended ("IRC" or "Code"), or successor provisions of law, including the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA '86); the Technical and Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1988 (TAMRA); the Unemployment Compensation Amendments of 1992 (UCA); the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA); the Uniformed Service Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA); the Uruguay Round Agreements Act of 1994 (GATT); the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996 (SBJPA '96); the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (TRA '97); the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (RRA '98); the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000 (CRA); the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA); the Job Creation and Workers Assistance Act of 2002 (JCWAA); the Pension Fund Equity Act of 2004 (PFEA); the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PPA); the Heroes Earnings Assistance and Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART). The retirement system is a governmental plan under IRC § 414(d) and is administered for the exclusive benefit of the plan's participants and their beneficiaries. The retirement system trust is an exempt organization under IRC § 501. The retirement system shall operate and be administered so as to fulfill the purpose of maintaining a tax-qualified retirement system. 
(b)  Limitations on benefits and contributions. The amount of annual benefits and contributions credited a member in any given year shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Defined benefit plans. The maximum permissible annual pension benefit with respect to any member shall be in accordance with IRC § 415(b) which provides that such annual pension benefit shall not exceed $90,000.00, as adjusted for inflation, pursuant to IRC § 415(b) (the "dollar limit"). 
a.  Special dollar limitations. If the benefit is payable prior to age 62, the dollar limitation shall be reduced to the actuarial equivalent of a benefit commencing at age 62. In the case of any full-time public safety employee, who is a qualified participant as defined in IRC § 415(b)(2)(G), there is no reduction in the dollar limitation. If the benefit is not payable until after age 65, the dollar limitation shall be increased to the actuarial equivalent of a benefit commencing at age 65. 
b.  In the case of an employee who has less than ten years of participation in the plan, the dollar limitation shall be reduced one-tenth for each year of participation in accordance with IRC § 415(b)(5). 
(2)  Excess benefit payment. The retirement system shall not pay any benefit that would exceed the benefit limitations for governmental plans as set forth in IRC § 415 and regulations, as amended. 
(3)  Compensation. As defined by IRC § 415(c)(3)(D) and Treas. Reg. § 1.415-2(d)(2)(i), compensation means amounts actually paid to the employee during the limitation year, including: wages, salary, professional fees, percentage of profits, commissions, tips and bonuses paid or made available to the member during the limitation year for personal services actually rendered in the course of employment, any elective deferral, and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the employer at the election of the employee and which is not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of IRC §§ 125, 132(f) or 457. 
(c)  Distributions. 
(1)  Distributions from the retirement system shall comply with the requirements of IRC § 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. A member's interest in the trust must begin to be distributed by the member's required beginning date, being the later of: (i) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year that the employee attains the age of 701/2; or (ii) April 1 of the calendar year the member retires. With respect to distributions under the retirement system made for calendar years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, the retirement system will apply the minimum distribution requirements of IRC § 401(a)(9) in accordance with the regulations under IRC § 401(a)(9) that were proposed in January 2001, notwithstanding any provision in the retirement ordinance to the contrary. This amendment shall continue in effect until the end of the last calendar year beginning before the effective date of final regulations under IRC § 401(a)(9) or such other date as may be specified in guidance published by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(2)  In the case of a distribution in the form of a joint and survivor annuity, if the survivor beneficiary is not the member's spouse, the method of payment selected must assure that the periodic annuity payable to the survivor annuitant must not at any time on or after the member's required beginning date, as defined above and in applicable Treasury Regulations, exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment payable to the member using the table prescribed in the applicable provisions of Treasury Regulation § 1.401(a)(9)-6. 
(3)  Effective on September 8, 2009, the U.S. Department of Treasury issued final regulations under Code § 401(a)(9) to permit a governmental plan to comply with the required minimum distribution rules of Code § 401(a)(9) by using a reasonable and good faith interpretation of the statute. The retirement system shall be administered accordingly. 
(d)  Eligible rollover distributions. 
(1)  This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distribute may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board of trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distribute as a direct rollover. The following definitions shall apply with regard to this section: 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distribute, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distribute or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distribute and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more, and any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under § 401(a)(9) of the IRC. For purposes of the direct rollover provision, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in IRC §§ 408(a) or (b), or to a qualified plan described in §§ 401(a) or 403(b) of the IRC, that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan. An "eligible retirement plan" means as follows: (1) an individual retirement account described in IRC § 408(a); (2) an individual retirement annuity described in IRC § 408(b); (3) an annuity plan described in IRC § 403(a); (4) effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in IRC § 403(b); (5) effective January 1, 2002, an eligible plan under IRC § 457 which is maintained by a state or political subdivision of a state or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this retirement system; (6) a qualified trust described in IRC § 401(a), that accepts eligible rollover distributions; or (7) effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA, subject to the requirements of IRC § 408A(c)(3). 
c.  Distributee. A "distributee" includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse or former spouse who is an alternate payee under a domestic relations order is a distributee with regard to the interest of the surviving spouse. Effective July 1, 2010, the non-spouse beneficiary of a member or former member also may be a distributee with regard to the interest of the non-spouse beneficiary that is directly transferred to an individual retirement account described in IRC § 408(a) or an individual retirement annuity described in IRC § 408(b). 
d.  Direct rollover. A "direct rollover" is a payment by the retirement system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(2)  Acceptance of rollover distributions. The retirement system will accept an eligible rollover distribution for the purchase of credited service, and for the repayment of previously withdrawn accumulated contributions. Upon receipt of sufficient documentation that the plan from which a distribution is to occur is qualified in accordance with applicable code provisions, the retirement system will accept a rollover distribution from the following: 
a.  An individual retirement account or annuity described in Code §§ 408(a) or 408(b) that is eligible to be rolled over and would otherwise be includible in gross income; 
b.  A qualified plan described in Code §§ 401(a) or 403(a), including after-tax employee contributions; 
c.  An annuity contract described in Code § 403(b), excluding after-tax employee contributions; and 
d.  An eligible plan under Code § 457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The retirement system shall provide a separate accounting for any after-tax contributions received, and earnings thereon. 
(e)  Maximum annual earnings. 
(1)  In addition to other applicable limitations which may be set forth in the plan and notwithstanding any other contrary provision of the plan, compensation taken into account under the plan shall not exceed $200,000.00, adjusted for changes in the cost of living as provided in IRC § 415(d), for the purpose of calculating a plan participant's accrued benefit for any plan year commencing after December 31, 1988. 
(2)  For plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1989 and before July 1, 1996, the annual compensation of each participant taken into account for determining all benefits provided under the plan for any determination period shall not include any amounts in excess of the annual compensation limit (originally $200,000.00) provided for in IRC § 401(a)(17) prior to the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 and adjusted for inflation in the manner provided by IRC § 401(a)(17). For plan years beginning on or after July 1, 1996, the annual compensation of each employee taken into account shall not exceed the annual compensation limit provided for in IRC § 401(a)(17), as amended by OBRA '93. This limit may be adjusted as required by federal law for qualified government plans and shall be further adjusted for inflation in the manner provided by IRC § 401(a)(17). Annual compensation means compensation during the plan year or such other consecutive 12-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the plan. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. 
(f)  Actuarial assumptions. Actuarial equivalence will be determined on the basis of the interest rate and mortality tables adopted by the board of trustees. Actuarial assumptions that will be used to determine the amount or level of any optional benefit forms will be the actuarial equivalent of the normal retirement benefit. Optional benefits provided under the plan shall be actuarially adjusted in relation to the straight life annuity in accordance with IRC § 415(b)(2), as amended, which is incorporated by reference. For purposes of determining the IRC § 415 limitations for benefits paid in a form to which § 417(e)(3) applies, the interest rate assumption will not be less that the greater of: (i) 5.5 percent; (ii) the rate that provides a benefit of not more than 105 percent of the benefit that would be provided if the applicable interest rate (as defined in § 417(e)(3)) were the interest rate assumption; or (iii) the rate specified in the plan for determining actuarial equivalence for the particular form of retirement benefit. The actuarial early retirement reduction and reduction of the dollar limit if the employee has less than ten years of participation under IRC § 415 do not apply to income received as a pension or annuity as a result of an employee's personal injury, sickness or death and shall be administered in accordance with IRC § 415(b)(2), as amended. 
(g)  Forfeitures. Upon a member's termination date, the value of any forfeitable accrued benefit shall be forfeited by the member as of the termination date. The value of such forfeitures shall be used to reduce the employer's future contributions under the plan in accordance with IRC § 401(a)(8). No forfeitures under the plan shall be applied to increase the benefits that any member or beneficiary would otherwise receive at any time prior to the time when the plan may be terminated. If a member whose employment has terminated does not retain a vested benefit under the plan, he/she shall no longer be a member or retain or earn credited service under the plan unless and until he/she again becomes an employee. 
(h)  Military service. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with IRC § 414(u) and related Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  In the case of a death occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a member dies while performing qualified military service (as defined in Code § 414(u)), the survivors of the member are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) provided under the plan as if the member had resumed and then terminated employment on account of a non-duty related death. For these purposes, the member shall be entitled to service credit under the plan for the period of qualifying military service. 
(i)  Forfeitability of accrued benefits. An employee's right to his/her normal retirement benefit is nonforfeitable on the attainment of his/her normal retirement age as defined in IRC § 411(a)(8) and in accordance with Rev. Rul. 66-11 and IRC § 411(e)(2). The accrued financial benefits of each member and/or beneficiary of the retirement system shall be a contractual obligation thereof, and shall not be diminished or impaired as protected by Article IX, Section 24 of the State of Michigan Constitution. In the event of termination or partial termination of the plan, a member's interest is nonforfeitable to the extent funded in conformity with applicable sections of the Code and Treasury Regulations. 
(j)  Prohibition against reversion. The retirement system and trust have been created for the exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries set forth herein. The funds thereof have been established for the benefit of the members and for the operation of the retirement system. No part of the principle and income of any of the funds of the system and trust shall revert to or be returned to the city prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities hereunder to all members, beneficiaries and anyone claiming by or through them. 
(k)  Vesting. A member shall be vested in his/her accrued benefit in accordance with IRC § 411(e) as in effect in 1974. 
(l)  Actuarial reports. Annually, or more frequently, the board of trustees shall obtain actuarial computations from an enrolled actuary as to the contributions necessary to fund the benefits provided by the plan on a reasonable basis in accordance with any applicable regulations, and such actuary shall certify such amounts to the employer. Contributions accumulated under the plan, along with the earnings thereon, will be distributed in accordance with the terms of the plan. 
(m)  Assignment of benefits. None of the benefits, payments, proceeds, claims, or rights of any participant or their beneficiary hereunder shall be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law, or other process of law, nor shall any participant or beneficiary have any right to transfer, assign, encumber, or otherwise alienate, any of the benefits or proceeds which the participant may expect to receive, contingently or otherwise under the plan, except as provided under a domestic relations order and in accordance with Public Act 100 of 2002, as amended, being MCL § 38.1681 et seq., and Public Act 350 of 1994, as amended, being MCL § 38.2701 et seq. 
(n)  Plan year. The plan year shall be the 12 consecutive month period commencing on July 1 and each anniversary thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 853, 1-28-2013) 
DIVISION 3. - RETIREE HEALTH CARE BENEFITS PLAN AND TRUST 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-326. - Purpose and short title. 
(a)  This retiree health care plan (the "plan") and the retiree health care trust (the "trust") are created, under the authority of the Public Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999 (MCL 38.1211 et seq.). The trust shall constitute a governmental trust pursuant to Section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The trust is established to allow the City of Grosse Pointe Woods (the "city") to fund required retiree health care benefits as provided by the plan, an essential governmental function. The plan is created for the exclusive purpose of providing, through a group health and insurance benefits plan, health care, optical and life insurance benefits or such other benefits approved by the city commission or the applicable collective bargaining agreements for the welfare of certain retirees of the city who are eligible to receive a retirement benefit from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System and the eligible spouses and eligible dependents of such retirees. 
(b)  This plan may be known and cited as the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Retiree Health Care Benefits Plan and Trust ("plan"). 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-327. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this plan and trust, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Base plan means the benefits in effect at the time of the employee's retirement for the applicable collective bargaining unit, as provided by the policy or the comprehensive program in place at the time of retirement (exclusive of HMO, PPO and other alternative plans) or by any such higher benefit, offered by the city, at the discretion of the city. Pursuant to the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, upon the retiree or spouse's attainment of Medicare eligibility, the base plan shall be a secondary, complimentary plan to Medicare which shall be the primary plan. 
(2)  City means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
(3)  Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Reference to any section or subsection of the code includes reference to any comparable or succeeding provision of any legislation which amends or replaces such section or subsection and any regulations thereto. 
(4)  Collective bargaining agreement(s) means any written agreement, supplemental agreement, memorandum of understanding, final arbitrator's decision, judicial decision or decision of any public board or agency, by and between applicable collective bargaining associations and the city, and any amendments, continuations, or renewals, which require the city or any other entity to make payments into group health insurance programs for employees of the city. 
(5)  Collective bargaining associations means those associations which have negotiated to participate in this plan. 
(6)  Contributions means the payment to be made to the trust by the city under the terms of the plan and trust or payment to be made to the trust by employees pursuant to the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement or city personnel policy for the purpose of providing group health insurance for retirees and beneficiaries covered by the plan. 
(7)  Dependent generally means a participant's or retiree's unmarried child until the end of the year in which he or she reaches age 18 and a participant's or retiree's unmarried child who is totally and permanently disabled by either a physical or mental condition prior to age 18. (The base plan definition of dependent above applies unless the participant or retiree selects an alternate insurance policy offered by the city, in which case the definition is controlled by the insurance policy covering the participant or retiree, which may or may not vary from the definition listed above.) 
(8)  Effective date means April 18, 2011. 
(9)  Employee means a person employed by the city on a full-time basis who meets one of the following requirements: 
a.  A non-union person employed by the city; or 
b.  A person employed by the city who is a member of a collective bargaining association which has negotiated to participate in this plan. 
Part-time employees, retired employees, and persons employed on a retainer or fee basis are not to be considered employees for purposes of this plan. 
(10)  Employer means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, Michigan. 
(11)  Family continuation dependent shall be defined in the participant's or retiree's applicable insurance policy offered by the city. 
(12)  Health care benefits means group health care benefits as currently provided and any other future health care related benefits as may be determined to be part of the plan pursuant to city decisions and collective bargaining agreements. 
(13)  Insurance agreement means the health insurance plan(s) and any amendment(s) thereto, including any substitute insurance agreement with a commercial insurance carrier, health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization, or any other qualified entity currently existing or created for the purpose of providing benefits under the plan. The term "insurance agreement" shall include the plural where applicable. 
(14)  Insurance carrier means a commercial health insurance carrier, health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization or other qualified entity designated by the city to provide benefits under the plan. 
(15)  Investment fiduciary means the board of trustees of the retiree health care benefits plan and trust. 
(16)  Major life event changes means birth of a child, legal adoption, legal separation, divorce, legal guardianship, death, or marriage of a dependent child. 
(17)  Participant means an employee who is either: (a) a member of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System and whose participation has not terminated under other applicable provisions of the plan; or (b) an employee granted health coverage under a separation agreement, settlement or court order. No person shall be considered a participant of the plan who is compensated for services to the city on a fee or independent contractual basis. In all cases of doubt, the board of trustees shall decide who is a participant within the meaning of the provisions of this plan and trust provided such decision is consistent with any established city policy. 
(18)  Plan means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Retiree Health Care Benefits Plan and Trust as described in this document and any subsequent amendments, and any insurance agreement(s), collective bargaining agreements, personnel policies, or other applicable insurance policy documents incorporated by reference into the plan. A description of the health benefits provided to retirees, spouses and dependents under this plan is maintained by the plan administrator. 
(19)  Plan administrator means the person, persons, firm, corporation or insurance company or companies, appointed by the board of trustees to administer the plan. The plan administrator shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the plan and shall carry out the directives of the board of trustees. 
(20)  Plan year means the period commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 of each year. 
(21)  Qualified beneficiary means any person satisfying the benefit eligibility requirements of the plan and shall be in accordance with the resolutions and decisions of the trustees. 
(22)  Retiree means an individual who meets the following requirements or who satisfies the requirements of a collective bargaining agreement, personnel policy or personal services contract: 
a.  For members of benefit group police officers bargaining unit: An individual receiving a retirement benefit allowance from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System. 
b.  For members of benefit group command officers bargaining unit: An individual receiving a retirement benefit allowance from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System. 
c.  For members of benefit group fire, EMT, dispatch bargaining unit: An individual receiving a retirement benefit allowance from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System. 
d.  For members of benefit group DPW and clerical workers bargaining unit: An individual receiving a retirement benefit allowance from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System. 
e.  For members of benefit group non-union employees: An individual receiving a retirement benefit allowance from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System. 
(23)  Retirement plan means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System. 
(24)  Spouse means a participant's or retiree's spouse by legal marriage who is the participant's spouse on the date the participant retires from employment with the city. 
(25)  Trust means the declaration of trust of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Retiree Health Care Benefits Plan as provided for in this plan. 
(26)  Trustee(s) or board means the board of trustees of the trust or a member of the board of trustees of the trust as provided for in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-328. - Interpretation and law; construction. 
(a)  The plan and trust are established in accordance with the Public Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999 (MCL 38.1211 et seq.), and shall be administered consistent with applicable federal and Michigan law. The plan is intended to qualify as an accident and health plan and a group health plan under applicable provisions of the code, (sections 105, 106, and 162), the regulations promulgated under each, and applicable federal and Michigan law. 
(b)  The trust shall constitute a governmental trust pursuant to section 115 of the code, as amended and shall be construed, enforced and administered and the validity thereof determined in accordance with the code and the laws of the State of Michigan. If any provision of the trust is held to violate the code or to be illegal or invalid for any other reason, that provision shall be deemed to be null and void, but the invalidation of that provision shall not otherwise affect the plan or trust. 
(c)  Neither the establishment of the plan and trust, nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or account, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as giving to any person covered under the plan, or any other person, any legal or equitable right against the city, its elected or appointed officials or employees, the trustees or any individual trustee, except as may otherwise be provided in this plan and trust. 
(d)  Neither the city, nor the trustees shall be responsible for the validity of any insurance agreement issued in connection with the plan or for the failure on the part of the insurer to make payments provided by such insurance agreement, or for the action of any person which may delay payment or render an insurance agreement wholly or partially void. 
(e)  The headings and subheadings in this plan and trust are inserted for convenience of reference only and are not to be considered in the construction of any provision of the plan and trust. 
(f)  Words herein in the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine gender where appropriate, and words used herein in the singular or plural shall be construed as being in the plural or singular where appropriate. 
(g)  In resolving any conflict among provisions of this plan and trust or any uncertainty as to the meaning or intention of any provision of this plan and trust, the interpretation that causes both the trust to be exempt from tax and the plan and trust to comply with all applicable requirements of the code shall prevail over any different interpretation. 
(h)  This plan and trust shall be binding upon all participants and qualified beneficiaries under the plan, or their applicable heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-329. - Collective bargaining agreements, policies, notice, reporting and amendments. 
(a)  The benefit provisions of this plan are subject to relevant provisions of applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city and the various collective bargaining associations of the city. The provisions of a collective bargaining agreement relative to retiree health care benefits are controlling in the event of a conflict between the terms of the collective bargaining agreement and the plan. 
Nothing contained in this plan shall be deemed to modify or limit in any way the rights that the parties to a collective bargaining agreement may have, any supplements or memoranda thereto, or any arbitrator's award to enforce the terms of the plan, inclusive of the collection of any amounts due to the plan and the right of the parties to sue for same. 
(b)  Personnel policies. The benefit provisions of this plan are subject to relevant provisions of any personnel policies that the city may have for non-union employees or personal service contracts between the city and an individual employee. The provisions of any personnel policies for non-union employees or personal service contracts relative to retiree health care benefits are controlling in the event of a conflict between the terms of the personnel policies or applicable personal service contract and the plan. 
(c)  Notice. Notice given to all interested parties shall, unless otherwise specified in this plan, be sufficient if in writing and delivered or sent by prepaid first class mail. Except as otherwise noted, the distribution or delivery of any statements or documents required under the plan and trust shall be sufficient if delivered in person or prepaid first class mail. 
(d)  Reporting and disclosure. The board and the plan trustees, or their respective designees, shall complete and provide to participants, retirees, spouses and/or dependents and to the appropriate government agencies any reports as may be required by the code, applicable federal, state or local law. 
(e)  Amendments. The provisions of the plan and trust may be amended at anytime by the city council in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Subdivision II. - Health Care Benefit Plan 

Sec. 2-330. - Health care plan and benefit groups. 
(a)  Retiree health care benefits shall be provided through policies issued by a duly licensed commercial insurance company, through a fund of self-insurance, or through any other lawful means of providing group health insurance in accordance with city decisions and in accordance with any and all collective bargaining agreements between the city and applicable collective bargaining associations and personnel policies or personal services contracts for any non-union employees who are eligible to participate in accordance with the plan. Dental insurance shall be available only to those eligible retirees and spouses who have purchased a rider for such coverage. 
(1)  The city intends the benefits to be provided by the establishment and maintenance of a plan in conformance with all applicable federal statutes and regulations, state and local law. The plan is intended to qualify as an accident and health plan and a group health plan under applicable provisions of the code, (sections 105, 106, and 162), the regulations promulgated under each, and applicable federal and Michigan law. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to enter into insurance agreements, and to modify, alter or amend such agreements from time to time, with commercial insurance carriers, health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organizations or any other qualified entity currently existing or created for the purpose of providing benefits under the plan. 
(b)  Benefit groups/composition. The following benefit groups are designated for the purpose of determining benefit eligibility conditions, benefit amounts, including co-pay amounts, and member contribution rates: 
(1)  Benefit group police officers bargaining unit: All employees of the city who are members of the police officers bargaining unit in the Police Officers Association of Michigan (POAM). 
(2)  Benefit group command officers bargaining unit: All employees of the city who are members of the command officers association in the Police Officers Labor Council (POLC). 
(3)  Benefit group fire/EMT/dispatch bargaining unit: All employees of the city who are members of the fire/EMT/dispatch bargaining unit in the Police Officers Labor Council (POLC). 
(4)  Benefit group DPW and clerical workers bargaining unit: All employees of the city who are members of the department of public works and clerical workers bargaining unit in the Technical, Professional and Office Workers Association of Michigan (TPOAM). 
(5)  Benefit group non-union employees: All employees of the city who are not a part of a collective bargaining unit as described above who are eligible for benefits under this plan. 
In case of doubt, the board of trustees shall determine the benefit group that applies to a particular member. 
(c)  Benefit eligibility conditions shall be those applicable to the member(s benefit group at the time of that member's termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-331. - Eligibility. 
    In order to be eligible for post-retirement health care benefits during any plan year, an individual must: 
(1)  Be a retiree of the city that had been a participant of this plan; and: 
a.  Had been an employee on the date preceding the effective date of the retiree(s retirement and commencement of benefits from the city; or 
b.  Met the requirements of the member's benefit group as described in subsection 2-327(22). 
(2)  Be a retiree, who was a participant of the plan, receiving duty or nonduty disability benefits from the retirement plan; or 
(3)  Be a retiree who was in receipt of benefits as of the effective date of this plan; or 
(4)  Be a spouse of an individual who meets the eligibility requirements in subsections (1), (2), or (3) above. 
The cost of spousal coverage shall be in accordance with section 2-335, unless otherwise provided by an applicable collective bargaining agreement or decision of the city; or 
(5)  Be a dependent of an individual who meets the eligibility requirements in subsections (1), (2), or (3) above. 
The cost of dependent coverage shall be in accordance with section 2-335, unless otherwise provided by an applicable collective bargaining agreement or decision of the city; or 
(6)  Be a family continuation dependent of an individual who meets the eligibility requirements in subsections (1), (2), or (3) above. 
The cost of family continuation dependent coverage shall be in accordance with section 2-335, unless otherwise provided by an applicable collective bargaining agreement or decision of the city; or 
(7)  Be an individual granted health coverage under a settlement agreement between the city and the individual; or 
(8)  Be an individual granted health coverage under a court order entered pursuant to applicable law, provided that: 
a.  The individual produces satisfactory documentation at the time of application for benefits and satisfies plan eligibility requirements; and 
b.  The city reserves the right to challenge the validity of the court order and, if such a challenge proves successful, the cost of any benefits provided be reimbursable to the trust. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-332. - Commencement of benefit. 
    Subject to all applicable provisions of the plan and/or insurance agreement, a participant shall commence eligibility for benefits from the plan on the first day he or she satisfies the eligibility requirements of section 2-331, provided the participant has enrolled for coverage on such date. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-333. - Enrollment. 
(a)  The city shall give each participant timely written notice of his or her eligibility and his or her right to enroll for coverage under the plan. A participant or retiree may enroll for coverage on a form or forms provided by and filed with the city. In connection with his or her enrollment for coverage, the participant or retiree shall furnish all pertinent information requested by the city, plan administrator and the insurance carrier. The plan administrator or the insurance carrier may rely upon all such forms and information furnished. The participant, retiree, spouse, and eligible dependent may be held responsible for costs for the false or incorrect information reported. 
(b)  The retiree shall enroll for coverage at the time of retirement or within the time periods as specified by the provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreement or policy. 
(c)  Spouse and dependents shall be eligible for coverage as provided in the plan or insurance agreement and in section 2-331 above. Spouse and dependents shall be enrolled for coverage under the plan by the participant or retiree at the time the participant or retiree enrolls for coverage under the plan or as provided for in subsection (d), below. 
(d)  Participants or retirees must report major life event changes to the city within 30 days of the event in order to change persons covered by their benefit plans (health insurance). Major life event changes may impact eligibility for benefits. If failure to report the event within 30 days results in additional benefit costs by the plan and trust due to nontermination of benefits, the participant or retiree may be held responsible for such costs. 
(e)  In the event a participant, retiree, spouse or eligible dependent elects not to receive benefits as provided in the plan, such individual may enroll for coverage at any time due to a major life event change provided they satisfy the eligibility requirements for coverage as provided in the plan pursuant to provisions of any applicable collective bargaining agreement or personnel policy. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-334. - Suspension of benefits, termination of benefits, COBRA coverage. 
(a)  Suspension. Except as provided in subections (b) and (c) of this section, participation in the plan shall be suspended in accordance with the plan and insurance agreement or applicable collective bargaining agreement in the event of: 
(1)  Nonpayment of any required participant or retiree contributions. 
(2)  A retiree, spouse, or dependent fails or refuses to give notice of other health care coverage, the plan administrator shall suspend entitlement to benefits under this plan until and unless the individual reimburses the trust for any and all excess costs incurred. 
(b)  Termination. Except as provided in subsection (a) above, participation in the plan shall terminate in accordance with the plan, insurance agreement, or applicable collective bargaining agreement, on the earliest of: 
(1)  Termination of the plan; 
(2)  Nonpayment of any required participant or retiree contributions; 
(3)  Death of the individual receiving benefits under the plan; 
(4)  A participant's or retiree's election in writing to cease coverage under the plan; 
(5)  In the case of a spouse or dependent, the date the spouse or dependent ceases to be a spouse or dependent as defined in this plan; or 
(6)  In the case of a retiree, if that individual had a contractual agreement with the city to provide health benefits at retirement which did not include benefits for a surviving spouse or surviving dependents, upon the death of the retiree. 
(c)  COBRA continuation coverage. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-333, continuing coverage shall be provided under the plan to eligible participants, retirees, their spouses and dependents in accordance with Internal Revenue Code provisions (currently Section 4980B, and Title XXII of the Public Health Services Act ("COBRA continuation coverage"), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-335. - Health care benefits, general provisions and costs. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Beginning on the effective date, the city shall provide health care benefits to each eligible retiree and, if elected, to his or her eligible spouse and, eligible dependents, unless modified by an applicable collective bargaining agreement or decision of the city. The benefits provided under the plan are those set forth in the plan, insurance agreement(s), collective bargaining agreements, personnel policies, personal services contracts and decisions of the board of trustees. The insurance agreement(s), collective bargaining agreements, personnel policies, and personal services contracts are incorporated herein by reference. A complete description of benefits provided under the plan and the insurance agreement(s), inclusive of those set forth in the collective bargaining agreements, personnel policies, and personal services contracts, shall be maintained by the city or the plan administrator. 
(2)  In accordance with the plan and insurance agreement with the insurance carrier, retirees and their spouses and dependents will be entitled to the benefits in effect at the time of such retiree's retirement from employment with the city ("base plan"). The city, at its discretion, may offer retirees a different benefit. All retirees, spouses, and dependents in receipt of health care benefits at the time of enactment of this plan and trust shall continue to be eligible for benefits and shall continue to receive those benefits until the benefits are altered or terminated pursuant to the health care provisions in effect at the time of the retiree's retirement. 
(b)  Costs. Collective bargaining agreements, personnel policies, or personal services contracts may modify this section. In the event of a conflict between this section and a collective bargaining agreement, personnel policy or a personal services contract, the collective bargaining agreement, personnel policy or personal services contract will control. 
(1)  For members of benefit group police officers bargaining unit: Upon retirement, the applicable portion of the cost for the applicable medical, optical and dental coverage for the retiree, spouse, and eligible dependents as delineated in the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be paid by the plan and trust. 
(2)  For members of benefit group command officers bargaining unit: Upon retirement, the applicable portion of the cost for the applicable medical, optical and dental coverage for the retiree, spouse, and eligible dependents as delineated in the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be paid by the plan and trust. 
(3)  For members of benefit group fire/EMT/dispatch bargaining unit: Upon retirement, the applicable portion of the cost for the applicable medical, optical and dental coverage for the retiree, spouse, and eligible dependents as delineated in the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be paid by the plan and trust. 
(4)  For members of benefit group DPW and clerical workers bargaining unit: Upon retirement, the applicable portion of the cost for the applicable medical, optical and dental coverage for the retiree, spouse, and eligible dependents as delineated in the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be paid by the plan and trust. 
(5)  For members of benefit group non-union employees: Upon retirement, the applicable portion of the cost for the applicable medical, optical and dental coverage for the retiree, spouse, and eligible dependents as delineated in the applicable personnel policy shall be paid by the plan and trust. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-336. - Alternative policies or programs, duplicate coverage. 
(a)  Alternative policies. The city, in its discretion, may offer alternative policies or benefit structures to participants, retirees, spouses and dependents in addition to the base plan. In the event that the city chooses to offer alternative policies or benefit structures, participants or retirees and their spouses and dependents may transfer from one policy or benefit structure to another policy or benefit structure during open enrollment periods. However, any additional cost above the base plan shall be borne by the participant or retiree or the participant's or retiree's spouse or dependents. 
(b)  Duplicate coverage. In the event that there are two or more participants or retirees who: (1) are each independently eligible for health care benefits from the city or the plan; (2) are each also eligible for health care benefits from the city or the plan as a spouse or dependent of a participant or a retiree; and (3) wish to receive coverage under this plan, said parties shall each receive individual coverage as a retiree. If said retirees also have eligible dependents, then both retirees and all eligible dependents shall be eligible to participate in only one policy or program so that one party participates in the one policy or program as the principal insured and the other party(ies) participates in the same policy or program as a spouse or dependent of the participant or retiree. The dependent shall suffer no detriment as a result of the disallowance of duplicate coverage. 
    If the cost to provide separate, individual coverage for two parties who are eligible to receive coverage as both a retiree and as a spouse or dependent exceeds the cost to cover both parties under one policy or program so that only one party participates as the principal insured and the other party participates as a dependent or spouse, duplicate coverage may not be provided. The city may, in its sole discretion, require that said parties shall be eligible to participate in only one policy or program so that one party participates in the one policy or program as the principal insured and the other party(ies) participates in the same policy or program as a spouse or dependent of the participant or retiree. The dependent shall suffer no detriment as a result of the disallowance of duplicate coverage. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-337. - Medicare eligibility, coordination of benefits. 
(a)  Medicare eligibility. Upon attaining the age of Medicare eligibility, pursuant to the terms of the applicable collective bargaining agreements and personnel policies, those eligible retirees and spouses shall enroll in both Medicare A and B, and are obligated to pay for Medicare parts A and B. Once a retiree is in receipt of Medicare A and B coverage, this plan will provide medical coverage on a substantially equivalent basis as that coverage provided prior to Medicare eligibility, which shall supplement coverage from Medicare. The retiree may be required to enroll in any other federal government Medicare program. 
(b)  Coordination of benefits. The city intends that the plan shall provide each retiree with payment for health care expenses incurred by the retiree and, if eligible, his or her spouse and his or her dependents, as provided in the plan and insurance agreement. The city does not intend that payment under this plan shall exceed the amount of the expenses incurred. For this reason, the plan coordinates benefits with other insurance policies according to industry standards and applicable laws. 
(1)  Reimbursement. If an expense is paid under the plan by the plan administrator on behalf of a retiree, his or her spouse or dependents, and such expense subsequently is paid from any other source, in whole or in part, the retiree, his or her spouse or dependents, shall remit to the plan an amount equal to the duplicated benefits. In addition, the plan administrator may reimburse any other plan, person or entity that has paid an expense on behalf of a retiree, his or her spouse or dependents which expense was payable under this plan. In such event, the plan, plan administrator, and the insurance carrier shall be relieved of all further responsibility with respect to that expense. 
(2)  Subrogation. In the event any payment is made by the trust under the plan, the plan and the trust shall be subrogated and shall succeed to the rights of any retiree, his or her spouse and dependents against any other plan, person or entity for recovery of health care expenses for which such other plan, person or entity legally is liable. All amounts so recovered, by settlement, judgment or otherwise, shall be paid to the trust. Retirees, their spouses and dependents shall furnish such information, execute and deliver such assignments, documents or other instruments, and take whatever steps are necessary to secure the rights of the plan. Retirees, their spouses and dependents shall take no action to prejudice the rights and interests of the plan hereunder. 
(3)  Effect of exclusions. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to create any independent right to payment of any benefit under this plan. Any exclusion or limitation contained in the plan or insurance agreement shall supersede any provision of this section regarding coordination of benefits. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-338. - Plan administration. 
(a)  City duties. The city shall be responsible for complying with the code's reporting and disclosure requirements and for the purpose of fulfilling such other plan administrative functions as are not specifically assigned to the plan administrator or insurance carrier. The city may employ a plan administrator or insurance carrier who will be responsible for the interpretation, administration and the payment of health care claims under the plan. 
(b)  The city also shall be responsible for the performance of its duties as employer and plan sponsor under applicable code sections. The city may delegate all or any part of its plan administration responsibilities. Any such delegation shall be done in writing. 
(c)  The city may employ one or more persons to render advice with regard to any responsibility such fiduciary has under the plan. Any fiduciary, agent, representative or other person performing services to or for the plan shall be entitled to reasonable compensation for services rendered, unless such person is employed by the city and already receives full pay from the city, and to reimbursement for expenses properly and actually incurred. 
(d)  The city shall furnish the plan administrator or insurance carrier, while this plan is in effect, any information as may be required, at intervals and in the form prescribed by the plan administrator or insurance carrier, for the enrollment of retirees, spouses and/or dependents for coverage under the plan and for the processing of terminations or other changes in coverage of retirees, spouses and dependents and also shall furnish to the plan administrator or insurance carrier such other information required for the administration of the plan. 
(e)  Insurance carrier duties. Each insurance carrier shall have the responsibility for interpreting and administering its respective insurance agreement and for processing and paying benefit claims thereunder, and shall provide the city with such information as the city may deem necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by law. The insurance carrier also shall provide a description of the benefits provided under its respective insurance agreement to the retirees, spouses and dependents, or to the city for distribution to retirees, spouses and dependents. 
(f)  Plan administrator duties. The plan administrator as set forth in subsection 2-327(19), shall have the responsibility for interpreting and administering the plan and for processing and paying benefit claims thereunder, and shall provide the trustees with such information necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by applicable laws or regulations governing the trust. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-339. - Health care benefits, claims procedures. 
    A claim for benefits under the plan must be submitted in writing to the plan administrator or insurance carrier in accordance with procedures established by the plan administrator or the plan or insurance carrier as communicated in writing to retirees, spouses and dependents. The plan administrator or insurance carrier shall provide written notice within 30 days to any participant or qualified beneficiary whose claims for benefits under this plan have been denied, setting forth the specific reasons for such denial, written in a manner calculated to be understood by the party. The plan administrator or respective insurance carrier has responsibility for the resolution of disputes involving payment of benefits under the portion of the plan assigned to the plan administrator or insurance agreement with the insurance carrier. The plan administrator or insurance carrier shall afford a reasonable opportunity to any participant or qualified beneficiary whose claim for benefits has been denied for a full and fair review of the decision denying the claim. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Subdivision III. - Declaration of Trust 

Sec. 2-340. - Irrevocable trust, established. 
(a)  The trust, established in accordance with the Public Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999, as amended (MCL 38.1211 et seq.), shall be an irrevocable trust administered consistent with applicable federal and Michigan law, and shall constitute a governmental trust under section 115 of the code, as amended, Revenue Rulings 77-261 and 90-74, and other relevant guidance. The trust is intended to fund the city's accident and health plan, which is a group health plan established under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, the regulations promulgated under each, and applicable federal and Michigan law. The trust shall conform to all applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code, the applicable collective bargaining agreements, the statement of purpose in this trust, and all statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, arbitrators' awards and judicial decisions interpreting the foregoing provisions. 
(b)  The trust shall consist of city contributions, any contributions which may be paid by employees, retirees and other qualified beneficiaries due pursuant to the provisions of an applicable collective bargaining agreement or city personnel policy, all investments made or held under trust, and all income therefrom, both received and accrued, and any other property, which may be received or held by reason of this trust. Any funds paid by retirees and other qualified beneficiaries as a result of premium sharing required pursuant to an applicable collective bargaining agreement or city policy, shall be paid directly to the city and/or the applicable insurance carrier and shall not be paid into the trust. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-341. - Use of trust assets, funding. 
(a)  No part of the net earnings of the trust may inure to the benefit of any participant, retiree or other beneficiary other than by benefit payments or for services provided to the trustees in their administration of the trust. The trust assets shall not be used for or diverted to purposes other than to provide the benefits contemplated under the plan for the exclusive benefit of retirees and their eligible spouses and eligible dependents, except any administrative expenses for which the trust is liable. A portion of net earnings may be used for payment for reasonable and necessary professional services, costs and expenses related to assisting the trustees in the operation of the trust. 
(b)  All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures and any and all monies, securities and properties of any kind at any time received or held by the trustees hereunder, shall become part of the trust when received, and shall be held for the use and purposes hereof. 
(c)  For the purpose of creating and maintaining a fund for the payment of health care benefits payable as provided in this plan, the city will pay to the trust an amount consistent with the actuarial valuations and calculations made by the actuary for the trust to result in a pre-funded plan. The city reserves the right to fund these health care benefits on a "pay-as-you-go" basis and the right to provide such lesser amount as the city determines. Such contributions shall also be made in accordance with any regulations of the board of trustees as are not inconsistent with the authority stated in this plan and any collective bargaining agreements between the collective bargaining associations and the city regarding this plan. 
(d)  Commencing at such date as shall be determined by city council, all active, non-union participants shall contribute a percentage of their applicable wages to the trust. The percentage shall be set by resolution of the city council, or an applicable personnel policy, and may be amended by resolution of the city council, or an applicable personnel policy. The participants will pay such contributions, to the extent allowable under applicable law, to the trust on a post-tax basis. 
(e)  Participants who are members of a collective bargaining association shall make contributions to the trust in such amounts as required pursuant to the provisions of their applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(f)  The officer or officers responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the contributions provided for in this subsection to be deducted from the compensation of each participant on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, so long as he or she is a participant of the plan. The participant's contributions provided for in this subsection shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any participant is thereby changed, each participant shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for in this subsection. When deducted, the contribution shall be paid to the trust and shall be credited to the participant's individual account from whose compensation such deduction was made. 
(g)  Participants who cease employment prior to satisfying the eligibility requirements for the receipt of health care benefits payable as provided in this plan, or who are otherwise ineligible for receipt of the health care benefits payable as provided in this plan, shall receive a refund of his or her participant contributions standing to his or her credit in the trust upon his or her demand in writing on forms furnished by the board. No interest shall be credited or paid on participant contributions. 
(h)  Qualified beneficiaries shall contribute those amounts required for additional coverage as required by an applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or city personnel policy, and otherwise as determined by the trustees. 
(i)  Subject to the tax provisions of applicable ordinances, resolutions and state law, the trustees may, to the extent matters are not set forth in the trust, in their discretion decide the manner and means of payments, the procedures to be followed in making the payments, and the forms required to accompany the payments to the trust. Upon determination by the trustees of these matters, the trustees shall provide written notice to the city and will provide for payments by the city to be made pursuant to the rules and regulations of the trust. 
(j)  Time is of the essence in making and processing all payments to the trust. The parties recognize that the regular and timely payments of contributions are essential to the operation of the trust and the providing of benefits under various insurance programs. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-342. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall consist of five trustees which shall be the same elected and appointed individuals that serve on the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System Board of Trustees, as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, by virtue of his/her position. 
(2)  A member of the city council as selected by the council, and serving at the pleasure of the council. 
(3)  A citizen, who is an elector and taxpayer of the city and who is not a member, retiree or beneficiary of the retirement system, appointed by the mayor with the consent of council. 
(4)  A public safety member elected by the public safety members. 
(5)  A general member elected by the general members. 
(b)  The general administration, management and responsibility for the proper operation of the trust and for making effective and construing the provisions of the trust shall be vested in the board of trustees established by this section, consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. A trustee or other fiduciary under the trust shall discharge his or her duties with respect to the trust solely in the interest of the participants and qualified beneficiaries for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and qualified beneficiaries and paying reasonable expenses of administering the trust. A trustee shall discharge his or her duties with the care, skill and caution under the circumstances then prevailing which a prudent person, acting in a like capacity and familiar with those matters, would use in the conduct of an activity of like character and purpose. 
(c)  The election of the trustees as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be held under such rules and regulations, as the board of trustees shall adopt. 
(d)  Terms of office. The regular terms of office of the trustees shall be as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, for the duration of his/her position as mayor of the city. 
(2)  The member of city council, for the duration of his/her position, or if earlier, until such time as city council selects another member of city council. 
(3)  The citizen trustee shall have a three-year term of office. 
(4)  The public safety trustee shall have a three-year term of office. 
(5)  The general member trustee shall have a three-year term of office. 
The term of the trustees shall be identical to and coincide respectively with the term each trustee serves as a member of City of Grosse Pointe Woods Employees Retirement System Board of Trustees. Upon expiration of his or her term, each trustee shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed. 
(e)  Each trustee shall serve until the expiration of his or her term of office or until his or her death, incapacity, resignation or removal. 
(f)  In the event an employee member trustee leaves the employ of the city, he or she shall be considered to have resigned from the board. The board shall, by resolution, declare his/her office of trustee vacated as of the date of such resolution. Any vacancy occurring in the office of trustee shall be filled within 60 days following the date of the vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term, in the same manner in which the office was previously filled. 
(g)  If a trustee as provided in subsections (a)(2)-(a)(5) of this section, shall fail to attend schedule meetings of the board for three consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the remaining trustees attending such meeting, the trustee shall be considered to have resigned from the board, and the board shall, by resolution, declare the office of the trustee vacated as of the date of adoption of such resolution. Any vacancy occurring in the office of trustee shall be filled within 60 days following the date of the vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term, in the same manner in which the office was previously filled. 
(h)  A vacancy or vacancies in the office of the trustees shall not impair the powers of the remaining trustees to administer the affairs of the trust, provided there are sufficient trustees to constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-343. - Officers and administration. 
(a)  At its first meeting in the calendar year, the trustees shall elect a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary. The chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary shall serve a term of one year or until a new chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary are elected. 
(b)  Consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations, the trustees shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations for the day-to-day management of the trust, the investment of monies held by the trust, to determine all questions regarding the interpretation of the trust, and such other trust related subjects as shall be deemed necessary and proper by the trustees. If any rule or regulation of the trust or part thereof, is found to be in conflict with any law, statute, judicial decision, arbitration decision or any other competent body or tribunal, such rule or regulation or part thereof, shall be deemed voided and, all other rules and regulations of the trust shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  Whenever the signature of a trustee is required on any document, signature of the chairperson or the vice chairperson, only as authorized by the board of trustees, shall be required. 
(d)  In the event of any suit brought against the trustees arising out of the acts within the scope and powers and duties of the trustees, or in the event of any lawsuit brought by the trustees as authorized by the plan and trust, the cost of defense or prosecution of such lawsuit shall be charged to the trust, and shall be paid directly from the trust, provided such costs are not incurred by reason of bad faith, gross negligence, or breach of a fiduciary obligation to the trust or to the beneficiaries thereof. 
(e)  The board of trustees may employ such other clerical staff or administrative staff to perform whatever administrative activities are required in the proper performance of the trust. In addition thereto, the trustees may, if they desire, utilize other staff to perform such clerical and administrative duties as they may, in their sole discretion, determine is reasonably and prudently necessary to carry out the trust's activities and purposes. Under no circumstances shall said staff have control or authority with respect to the management of the trust or its assets. The said staff shall not be clothed with any type of authority or power which will constitute the staff as a fiduciary. Said staff will not have the power or authority to act as an investment counselor or manager and will not be authorized to furnish investment advice. 
(f)  The board of trustees may utilize city staff for such functions as personnel administration, accounting, banking and purchasing and will comply with all established city control procedures and policies related to these services. The board will annually reimburse the city for actual costs of these services as determined by a method jointly agreed upon by the board of trustees and the city. 
(g)  Employees of the city, upon the request of the board of trustees, may also be assigned to the trust for the proper operation of the trust. Said employees shall be subject to the supervision of the board of trustees. The board of trustees shall have the authority to establish job descriptions and promulgate rules and regulations appropriate for the trust in addition to those adopted by the city. The board will annually reimburse the city for the actual costs of these employees as determined by a method jointly agreed upon by the board and the city. 
(h)  The board of trustees may employ an investment manager(s) to manage the assets of the trust. Such investment manager(s) must be registered under the Investment Advisor's Act of 1940, as amended, (15 USCS 80b-1) and must meet any applicable state and federal requirements to act as an investment manager. The trustees may, if they deem proper in their discretion, or if the circumstances require it, appoint such investment manager, managers, banks or insurance companies as fiduciaries and enter into an agreement with such institutions, naming it a fiduciary and conveying to such fiduciary all or a portion of the assets of the trust, so that said fiduciary may handle, manage and hold those assets conveyed to it. All assets conveyed to said fiduciary shall be subject to the provision of the agreement or agreements between the trustees and the fiduciary. 
(i)  The board of trustees may employ legal counsel with whom they may seek advice, consult, require attendance at meetings, and to otherwise represent the trustees in matters relating to the trust. The city attorney shall also be legal advisor to the board of trustees. 
(j)  The board of trustees may authorize the purchase of insurance for the trust and for the trustees to cover liability or losses occurring for any reason, including but not limited to, an act or omission (errors or omissions) of a fiduciary, including the trustees; provided however, that such insurance policy permits recourse by the insured against the fiduciary, including the trustee or trustees involved, in case of breach of fiduciary obligation by the fiduciary. 
(k)  The board of trustees shall appoint an actuary who shall advise the trustees on the actuarial operation of the plan and trust. The trustees shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other tables of experience and a rate or rates of regular interest as are necessary in the operation of the trust on an actuarial basis. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-344. - Board meetings, compensation. 
(a)  Meetings. The trustees shall meet at least once quarterly. The trustees shall determine the time for the regular meetings of the trustees and the place or places where such meetings shall be held. The plan administrator or his or her designee shall be responsible for giving notice of the time and place of such meetings to the other trustees. 
(1)  Notice and conduct of all meetings of the trustees, both regular and special, shall be given in accordance with applicable law including the Michigan Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
(2)  The board of trustees shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Three trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board of trustees. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each question before the board of trustees and at least three concurring votes. 
(b)  Compensation. All trustees shall serve without compensation as members of the board of trustees, except that employee trustees shall suffer no loss in compensation on account of their services as trustees. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-345. - Trustees; powers and responsibilities. 
    The trustees shall hold all the powers that are necessary to carry out the purposes of the trust and are generally available to trustees under the laws of the State of Michigan, except as limited by the trust and by federal law and regulations. It is intended that the plan and trust shall be tax exempt and shall qualify under the Internal Revenue Code and any amendments of the code applicable to plans of this type. The trustees shall have the continuing duty to propose, to the city, amendments to this plan to the extent it becomes necessary to qualify said plan under the Internal Revenue Code and to continue the tax exempt status of the trust. The trustees shall take no action, nor make any determination inconsistent with any qualification or ruling of the Internal Revenue Service, an arbitrator or the courts with respect to the trust. In the case of amendments to the Internal Revenue Code or changes of regulations by the Internal Revenue Service or the labor department, the trustees are empowered to take all necessary action(s) authorized by the plan and trust, federal and state law and regulations, to continue the qualification of the trust as a qualified trust. In carrying out the purposes of the trust, the trustees shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The trustees shall, in order to effectuate the purposes of the trust, be bound by the terms of the plan and any applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city and the collective bargaining associations, or applicable personnel policies. 
(2)  Consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations, the trustees shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations for the day-to-day management of the trust, the investment of monies held by the trust, to determine all questions regarding the interpretation of the trust, and such other trust related subjects as shall be deemed necessary and proper by the trustees. If any rule or regulation of the trust or part thereof, is found to be in conflict with any law, statute, judicial decision, arbitration decision or any other competent body or tribunal, such rule or regulation or part thereof shall be deemed void and all other rules and regulations of the trust shall remain in effect. 
(3)  Whenever the signature of a trustee is required on any document, signature of the chairman or the plan administrator, only as authorized by the board of trustees, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-346. - Investment of trust assets. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the board shall have complete control of the management and administration of the trust and shall have all powers necessary or convenient to enable it to exercise such control. 
(1)  The trustees shall be authorized, pursuant to the Public Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999, as amended, (MCL 38.1211 et seq.) to invest the assets of the trust in accordance with the provisions of the Public Employee Retirement System Investment Act, Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended (MCL 38.1132 et seq.). 
(2)  The board shall invest and reinvest the principal and income of the trust, without distinction between principal and income, in its sole discretion. The board in its sole discretion may keep such portion of the trust in cash or cash balances as the board may from time to time deem to be in the best interests of the trust. 
(3)  To the extent permitted by law, the board may commingle the investment of the trust with other funds that it administers. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-347. - Board liabilities. 
    The board's responsibilities and liabilities shall be subject to the following limitations and other limitations as set forth in the trust: 
(1)  The board shall have no duties other than those expressly set forth in this trust and those imposed on the board by applicable laws. 
(2)  The board shall be responsible only for money and property actually received by the board, and then to the extent described in this trust. 
(3)  The board shall not be responsible for the correctness of any determination of payments or disbursements from the trust. 
(4)  The board shall have no liability for the acts or omissions of any predecessor or successor in office. 
(5)  The board shall have no liability for the acts or omissions of any: 
a.  Investment manager or managers; 
b.  Insurance company; 
c.  Investment fund; or 
d.  Contractor. 
(6)  In the event of any suit brought against the trustees arising out of the acts within the scope and powers and duties of the trustees, or in the event of any lawsuit brought by the trustees, the cost of defense or prosecution of such lawsuit shall be charged to the trust, and shall be paid directly from the trust, provided such costs are not incurred by reason of bad faith, gross negligence, or breach of a fiduciary obligation to the trust or to the beneficiaries thereof. 
(7)  The board may authorize the purchase of insurance for the trust and for the trustees to cover liability or losses occurring for any reason, including, but not limited to, an act or omission (errors or omissions) of a fiduciary, including the trustees; provided however, that such insurance policy permits recourse by the insured against the fiduciary, including the trustee or trustees involved, in case of breach of fiduciary obligation by the fiduciary. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-348. - Trust liabilities. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for payment to the trust of any amount. Neither the city, nor any participant or qualified beneficiary or trustee shall be liable for any debts, liabilities or obligations of the trust except as provided for in this chapter. Neither the city nor any participant or qualified beneficiary shall have any right to the return of any money properly paid into the trust, except as otherwise specifically provided in this plan and trust, or to money improperly paid which has already been invested or distributed. Any contribution improperly paid into the trust by the city or on behalf of a participant or qualified beneficiary shall be returned by the trustees upon the request of the city, the participant or the qualified beneficiary or upon discovery by the trustees that such monies have been improperly paid into the trust, unless those monies have already been invested or distributed. 
(b)  Neither the city, nor the board or its trustees shall be responsible for the validity of any insurance agreement issued in connection with the trust or for the failure on the part of the insurer to make payments provided by such insurance agreement, or for the action of any person which may delay payment or render an insurance agreement null and void or unenforceable in whole or in part. Notwithstanding the establishment of the trust or anything contained in this agreement, the trustees shall not be empowered to interpret the rights and obligation of the city or any collective bargaining agreements. 
(c)  No part of the trust or any benefits payable by the trustees shall be subject to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge or encumbrance charge by any person. No participant or qualified beneficiary shall be entitled to receive any part of the contributions made by the city or payments required to be made by the trust, in lieu of such benefits provided under the plan as determined by the trustees in accordance with the trust. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-349. - Reports. 
(a)  The trustees, or their respective designees, shall establish a uniform system for the timely transmission of required reports and contributions. 
(b)  The trustees, in accordance with the requirements of law, may direct an impartial firm of independent certified public accountants to act as agent of the trustees to examine the payroll records and reports as may be necessary to determine the monies due on behalf of a participant or qualified beneficiary covered by this trust and to make a written report to the trustees. 
(c)  The trustees shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, proper books of accounts and records of and for the administration of the trust, including the minutes of all meetings, make them available for inspection during reasonable business hours by the city, or any participant or qualified beneficiary covered by the plan and trust. 
(d)  The financial records of the trust shall be subject to the annual audit of the city. The trustees shall fully comply with all applicable statutory and municipal budgetary and accounting procedures and provide access to or documentation of all assets and liabilities of the trust and a resume of the operations of the trust for the preceding year together with such other data as may be required by law or as part of the city's annual financial report. 
(e)  The records of the trust shall be maintained to protect the confidentiality of participants and qualified beneficiaries. The following shall be excluded from the above-reporting requirements, except with the written authorization of the individual concerned: 
(1)  An individual's statement of previous service and other information that must or may be kept confidential under Michigan or federal law; 
(2)  The amount of a benefit paid from the trust for an individual's medical expenses; 
(3)  The individual's personal history record, which means information maintained by the plan administrator on an individual who is a participant or qualified beneficiary, that includes the address, telephone number, Social Security Number, record of contributions, correspondence with the plan administrator, or other information the plan administrator determines to be confidential. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, all medical reports and recommendations required by the plan are privileged, except that copies of such medical reports or recommendations shall be made available to the personal physician, attorney, or authorized agent of the individual concerned upon written release from the individual or the individual's agent, or when necessary for the proper administration of the plan, to the physician or medical personnel assigned by the plan administrator. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-350. - Termination of the trust. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations of this plan and trust, the parties hereby contemplate that new employment benefit decisions may be made by the city and new collective bargaining agreements may be entered into which continue or modify the provisions of the trust. The trust shall continue during such period of time as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of any plan or collective bargaining agreement requiring payment to the trust and the fact that such collective bargaining agreements or employment benefit decisions are not extended, shall not by itself terminate the trust, which shall continue for a period of time sufficient to wind up the affairs of the trust. 
(b)  Provided there are no longer any retirees or qualified beneficiaries eligible for benefits from the trust, the trust may be terminated at any time by the trustees, so long as the termination is not inconsistent with any then existing city decisions. It shall not be necessary for the city to execute such an agreement for the trust to terminate. 
(c)  If the trust shall terminate, the trustees shall notify any insurance carrier or carriers then providing insurance to retirees and qualified beneficiaries in the trust as soon as administratively feasible. 
(d)  In the event of the termination of the trust, the remaining funds available after providing for all the outstanding obligations, shall be used in a manner as will, in the opinion of the trustees, best effectuate the purposes of the trust, including, but not limited to the purchase of insurance benefits. 
(Ord. No. 840, 7-11-2011) 
Secs. 2-351-2-353. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-354-2-379. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-380. - Created; composition; terms of office. 
    There is hereby created a community tree commission consisting of 11 persons who shall be appointed by the mayor and whose terms shall be for a period of three years. 
(Code 1975, § 2-15-1; Code 1997, § 2-201; Ord. No. 701, § 1, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 2-381. - Duties. 
    The members of the community tree commission shall elect a chair of the commission who shall serve in such capacity during such person's term of appointment. The commission shall meet on dates to be determined by the chair. The commission shall formulate and develop recommendations to assist the city in its efforts to maintain and further develop an active community forestry program. The commission shall keep minutes of its meetings and forward a copy of such minutes to the city council once per month, or more often as necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 2-15-2; Code 1997, § 2-202) 
Secs. 2-382-2-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 

Sec. 2-406. - Created. 
    A local officers compensation commission is hereby created, which commission shall determine the salaries of each local elected official. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-1; Code 1997, § 2-251) 
Sec. 2-407. - Appointment of members. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall consist of five members who shall be registered electors of the city, appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the city council elected and serving in such capacity. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-2; Code 1997, § 2-252) 
Sec. 2-408. - Terms of office. 
    The term of office of each commissioner of the local officers compensation commission shall be five years, excepting those members first appointed, of whom one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. The terms of office shall expire on September 30 of the year of appointment, and members, other than those first appointed, shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. The first members of the commission shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-3; Code 1997, § 2-253) 
Sec. 2-409. - Certain persons disqualified from membership. 
    A member or employee or a member of the immediate family of a member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of government, including the city government, shall not be a member of the local officers compensation commission. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-4; Code 1997, § 2-254) 
Sec. 2-410. - Duties. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salary of each local elected official. The determination of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk and shall become effective 30 days following the date of such filing unless the city council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds vote of the members elected to and serving on the council, shall reject such salary determination of the commission. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-5; Code 1997, § 2-255) 
Sec. 2-411. - Meetings and procedural rules. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in each odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days after its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall not take action or make a determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. As used in this section, the term "session day" means a calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-6; Code 1997, § 2-256) 
Sec. 2-412. - Compliance with Open Meetings Act. 
    The business which the local officers compensation commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of the meetings of the commission shall be given in the manner required by Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-7; Code 1997, § 2-257) 
Sec. 2-413. - Compliance with Freedom of Information Act. 
    A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the local officers compensation commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 422 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1975, § 1-18-8; Code 1997, § 2-258) 
Secs. 2-414-2-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

Sec. 2-440. - Created. 
    A city planning commission is hereby created. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-1; Code 1997, § 2-281; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
Sec. 2-441. - Appointment, term, removal of members. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of nine members who shall represent, insofar as it is possible, different professions or occupations, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by the city council. 
(b)  All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation and shall hold no other municipal office. 
(c)  The term of each member of the planning commission shall be three years, except that three members of the first planning commission to be so appointed shall serve for a term of one year, three members for a term of two years, and three members for a term of three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed and have qualified. 
(d)  The council may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this subsection constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-2; Code 1997, § 2-282; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33. 
Sec. 2-442. - Chair; meetings; rules; records; quorum. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its own chair from the members of the commission and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine or as required by state law. The term of the chair shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at the municipal building. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be open to public examination. 
(c)  A majority of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-3; Code 1997, § 2-283; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.34. 
Sec. 2-443. - Employees; contracts for special services; expenditures. 
(a)  The planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be under the direction of the planning commission. The planning commission may also contract with planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(b)  The expenditures of the planning commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work. No expenditure of any kind shall be made without an appropriation therefor having been first made by the council. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-4; Code 1997, § 2-284; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.35. 
Sec. 2-444. - Master planning. 
(a)  The planning commission shall make and approve a master plan for the physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. The planning commission may meet with other governmental planning commissions to deliberate. 
(b)  A master plan shall comply with subsections (c) or (d) of this section if the process of adopting the plan began under state law before the effective date of the 2001 amendatory act that added this subsection, or if the plan is a revised plan and the process of revision began under state law before the effective date of the 2001 amendatory act that added this subsection. Otherwise, a master plan shall comply with subsection (d) of this section and state law as amended. If a plan is amended, but not revised, before one year after the effective date of the 2001 amendatory act that added this subsection, the amendment shall comply with relevant provisions of subsections (c) or (d) of this section. Otherwise, the amendment shall comply with relevant provisions of subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the development of the territory, including, but not limited to all of the following: 
(1)  The general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, floodplains, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces. 
(2)  The general location of public buildings and other public property. 
(3)  The general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes. 
(4)  The removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals described in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(3) of this section. 
(5)  The general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units. 
(6)  The general character, extent and layout of the replanning and redevelopment of blighted areas. 
(7)  A zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(d)  The master plan shall address land use and infrastructure issues and may project 20 years or more into the future. The plan shall include maps, plats, charts, and descriptive, explanatory and other related matter and shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the physical development of the municipality. The plan shall also include those of the following subjects which reasonably can be considered as pertinent to the future development of the municipality: 
(1)  A land use plan and program, in part consisting of a classification and allocation of land for agriculture, residences, commerce, industry, recreation, ways and grounds, public buildings, schools, soil conservation, forests, woodlots, open space, wildlife refuges and other uses and purposes. 
(2)  The general location, character and extent of streets, railroads, airports, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, bridges, waterways and waterfront developments; flood prevention works, drainage, sanitary sewers and water supply systems, works for preventing pollution, and works for maintaining water levels; and public utilities and structures. 
(3)  Recommendations as to the general character, extent and layout for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of blighted areas; and the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment or changes or use or extension of ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, utilities or other facilities. 
(4)  A zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises, and an explanation of how the land use categories on the future land use map relate to the districts on the zoning map. 
(5)  Recommendations for implementing any of its proposals. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-5; Code 1997, § 2-285; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.36. 
Sec. 2-445. - Plans, general purpose. 
    The plans referred to in this division shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs, which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements, including the architectural, structural and aesthetic appearance of business structures and public buildings. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-6; Code 1997, § 2-286; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.37. 
Sec. 2-446. - Surveys for basis, purposes. 
    In the preparation of any plans, as described in this division, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to their relation to the neighboring territory. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-7; Code 1997, § 2-287; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.37. 
Sec. 2-447. - Adoption of plan; notice requirements; submission of information electronically. 
(a)  A master plan shall be adopted under the procedures set forth in this section and sections 2-448 and 2-449. 
(b)  Before preparing a plan, the planning commission shall mail by first class mail a notice, explaining that the planning commission intends to prepare a plan and requesting the recipient's cooperation and comment, to all of the following: 
(1)  The planning commission, or if there is no planning commission, the legislative body, of each township, city or village located within or contiguous to the city. 
(2)  The regional planning commission for the region in which the city is located, if there is no county planning commission. If there is a county planning commission, the city planning commission may consult with the regional planning commission but is not required to do so. 
(3)  The county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners. 
(4)  Each public utility company and railroad company owning or operating a public utility or railroad within the city, and any government entity, that registers its name and mailing address for this purpose with the planning commission. 
(c)  The notice to an entity under subsection (b) may request permission for the city to submit electronically any information required to be submitted to that entity under sections 2-448 or 2-449. If the entity to which the notice is sent grants this permission, information submitted to or by that entity under sections 2-448 or 2-449 may be submitted electronically in accordance with state law. Otherwise, such information shall be submitted in writing by first class mail or personal delivery. 
(Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.37a. 
Sec. 2-448. - Submission of proposed plan to city council; approval; notice to certain entities; review and comment; advisory statements. 
(a)  A master plan may be adopted as a whole or by successive parts corresponding with major geographical areas of the city or with functional subject matter areas of the plan. 
(b)  After preparing a proposed plan, the planning commission shall submit the proposed plan to the city council for review and comment. The process of adopting a plan shall not proceed further unless the city council approves the distribution of the proposed plan. 
(c)  If the city council approves the distribution of the proposed plan, it shall notify the secretary of the planning commission and the secretary shall submit a copy of the proposed plan, for review and comment, to all of the following: 
(1)  The planning commission, or if there is no planning commission, the legislative body, of each city, village or township located within or contiguous to the city. 
(2)  The regional planning commission, if any, for the region in which the city is located, if there is no county planning commission. If there is a county planning commission, the secretary of the planning commission may submit a copy of the proposed plan to the regional planning commission but is not required to do so. 
(3)  The county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners. The secretary of the planning commission shall concurrently submit to the county planning commission or, if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, a statement, signed by the secretary, that the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section have been met. The statement shall include the name and address of each planning commission or legislative body to which a copy of the proposed plan was submitted under subsections (a) or (b) of this section and the date of submittal. 
(4)  Each public utility company and railroad company owning or operating a public utility or railroad within the city, and any government entity, that registers its name and address for this purpose with the secretary of the planning commission. An entity that, pursuant to this subsection, receives a copy of a proposed plan, or of a plan as provided in subsection 2-449(e), shall reimburse the city for any copying and postage costs thereby incurred by the city. 
(d)  An entity described in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2) or (c)(4) of this section may submit comments on the proposed plan to the planning commission within 63 days after the proposed plan was submitted to that entity under subsection (c) of this section. A planning commission or legislative body described in subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section shall concurrently submit a copy of the comments to the county planning commission, or if there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners. 
(e)  If a county board of commissioners or county planning commission submits comments, the comments shall include, but need not be limited to both of the following, as applicable: 
(1)  A statement whether the county planning commission or county board of commissioners, after considering any comments received under subsection (d) of this section, considers the proposed plan to be inconsistent with the plan of any city, village, township or region described in subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section. 
(2)  If the county has a county plan, a statement whether the county planning commission considers the proposed plan to be inconsistent with the county plan. 
(3)  The statements provided for in subsections (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section are advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.37b. 
Sec. 2-449. - Public hearing; notice; resolution; submission of plan to city council; rejection or approval; final adoption. 
(a)  Before approving a proposed master plan, the planning commission shall hold not less than one public hearing on the proposed plan. The hearing shall be held after the expiration of the deadline for comment under subsection 2-448(e). The planning commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and in the official gazette, if any, of the municipality. The planning commission shall also submit notice to each entity described in subsection 2-447(b). 
(b)  The approval of the plan shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds of the members of the planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter and signed by the chairperson or the secretary of the planning commission. Following approval of the proposed plan by the planning commission, the secretary of the planning commission shall submit a copy of the proposed plan to the city council. 
(c)  Approval of the plan by the planning commission under subsection (b) of this section is the final step for adoption of the plan, unless the city council, by resolution, has asserted the right to approve or reject the plan. In that case, after approval of the plan by the planning commission, the city council shall approve or reject the plan. 
(d)  If the city council rejects the proposed plan, the city council shall submit to the planning commission a statement of its objections. The planning commission shall consider the city council's objections and revise the proposed plan so as to address those objections. The procedures provided in subsections (a)-(c) of this section and this subsection shall be repeated until a proposed plan is approved by the city council. 
(e)  Upon final adoption of the plan, copies of the adopted plan shall be submitted in the same manner as provided for submitting copies of the proposed plan under subsection 2-448(c). 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-8; Code 1997, § 2-288; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.38. 
Sec. 2-450. - Plan amendment or adoption of new plan. 
(a)  An extension, addition, revision or other amendment to a municipal plan shall be adopted under the same procedure as a plan or a successive part of a plan under sections 2-447, 2-448 and 2-449. However, for an amendment other than a revision of the plan, the following applies: 
The 63-day period otherwise provided for in subsection 2-448(d) shall be 42 days. 
(b)  At least every five years after adoption of the plan, the planning commission shall review the plan and determine whether to commence the procedure to amend the plan or adopt a new plan. 
(Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.38a. 
Sec. 2-451. - Plans for future; capital improvement; council approval. 
(a)  Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the city or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park, playground, public way, ground, open space or public building or other structure shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission with reasons provided. In case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to the council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership; provided, however, that if the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility be one, the authorization or financing of which does not, under the law or Charter provisions governing same, fall within the province of the council, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by such board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the planning commission to act within 35 days from and after the date of official submission of the master plan to the planning commission shall be deemed approval. 
(b)  For the purpose of furthering the desirable future developments of the city under the master plan, the mayor in conjunction with the city administrator, shall prepare and adopt a capital improvements program annually. A copy of the program will be submitted to the planning commission for review and comment, prior to final approval of the city council in accordance with MCL 125.3865, as amended. 
(c)  "Capital improvements" shall be defined as construction of a new street, square, park, playground, public way, ground, open space, public building, or other new structure, and shall not include maintenance, repair, renovations, or changes to existing improvements, including, but not limited to, maintenance, repair, renovations or changes to existing infrastructure, sidewalks, sewers, waterlines, roadways and similar improvements. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-9; Code 1997, § 2-289; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.39. 
Sec. 2-452. - Rescinding of action by council. 
    Whenever the council shall have ordered the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the council shall have ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the planning commission for a report and until after a public hearing shall have been held. The city council shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-10; Code 1997, § 2-290; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.40. 
Sec. 2-453. - Cooperation from public officials; right of entry. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan and, to that end, may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(b)  Members of the planning commission, when duly authorized by the planning commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes, or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the planning commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. 
(c)  The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. 
(d)  The planning commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. 
(e)  All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
(f)  The planning commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning or carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-11; Code 1997, § 2-291; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.41. 
Sec. 2-454. - Succession to zoning commission. 
    The planning commission shall have all powers granted by law to the zoning commission of the city and, from and after the creation of the planning commission, all powers and records of the zoning commission shall be transferred to the planning commission; provided, however, that if the existing zoning commission shall be nearing the completion of its zoning plan, the council may, by resolution, postpone such transfer of the zoning commission's powers until the completion of such zoning plan. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-12; Code 1997, § 2-292; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.42. 
Sec. 2-455. - Subdivision approval. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted that sort of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision jurisdiction or part thereof, and shall have filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds in which such territory or part is located, then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by such planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chair or secretary of the planning commission. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-13; Code 1997, § 2-293; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.43. 
Sec. 2-456. - Regulations governing subdivision of land. 
(a)  Before exercising the powers referred to in section 2-455, the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. Such regulations may include provision as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the planning commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation, but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. 
(b)  In lieu of the completion of improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the subdivision plat, the city council may accept bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the city council. The city is hereby granted the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
(c)  All regulations regarding the subdivision of land as provided in this section shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption a public hearing shall be held thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-14; Code 1997, § 2-294; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.44. 
Sec. 2-457. - Plat approval. 
(a)  The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within 60 days after the submission thereof; otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. 
(b)  The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. 
(c)  Any plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to such address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names and addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the municipality or county. 
(d)  Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the master municipal plan and a part thereof. 
(e)  Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. 
(f)  The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the council amendments of the zoning code (chapter 50) or map or additions thereto, to conform to the planning commission's recommendations for the zoning regulation of the territory comprised within an approved subdivision. 
(g)  The planning commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements, or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning code of the city. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as part of the zoning provisions or map of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-15; Code 1997, § 2-295; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.45. 
Sec. 2-458. - Interpretations of city zoning law. 
    All matters affecting modifications of the city zoning laws shall first be submitted to the planning commission for investigation and recommendation, and the planning commission shall make such investigation and submit its recommendations in writing within 28 days from the date of reference, and the zoning board of appeals shall take no action within such period, awaiting the recommendations of the planning commission. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4-16; Code 1997, § 2-296; Ord. No. 825, 2-2-2009) 
Secs. 2-459-2-484. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF REVIEW[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 

Sec. 2-485. - Appointment of members; quorum; meetings. 
    The city council may appoint three, six or nine electors of the city who shall constitute a board of review for the city. If six or nine members are appointed as provided in this section, the membership of the board of review shall be divided into board of review committees consisting of three members each for the purpose of hearing and deciding issues concerning the assessments of property. Two of the three members of a board of review committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business of the committee. All meetings of the members of the board of review and committees shall be held during the same hours of the same day and at the same location. 
(Code 1975, § 1-24-1; Code 1997, § 2-316) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section to supersede Charter provisions, MCL 211.28. 
Sec. 2-486. - Terms of office; compensation of members; oath of office. 
    The city council shall appoint or reappoint, as the case may be, members to the board of review for terms of office not to exceed two years, and shall annually fix the compensation of the members of such board. Terms of office shall end at 12:00 noon on January 1 of each odd-numbered year. Each member of the board of review shall qualify by taking the constitutional oath of office within ten days after appointment. 
(Code 1975, § 1-24-2; Code 1997, § 2-317) 
Sec. 2-487. - Waiver of additional tax collection fee. 
    If the city council shall direct the city treasurer or deputy city treasurer to add an additional collection fee equal to three percent of any real property taxes paid after February 14 in any year, as authorized by Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), such three percent collection fee shall be waived for a senior citizen, paraplegic, quadraplegic, eligible serviceperson, eligible veteran, eligible widow, totally and permanently disabled, or blind, as those persons are defined in chapter 9 of Public Act No. 281 of 1967 (MCL 206.501 et seq.), who presents a copy of the form filed for that credit to the local treasurer, and who has not received the credit before February 15. 
(Code 1975, § 1-17-1; Code 1997, § 2-318) 
State Law reference- Authority for this waiver, MCL 211.44. 
Sec. 2-488. - Claim for fee waiver required. 
    In order to be eligible for the waiver of the three percent additional collection fee authorized in section 2-487, the person so desiring such waiver shall file a claim for such on or before February 14 each year, as provided in state statutes, with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1975, § 1-17-2; Code 1997, § 2-319) 
Secs. 2-489-2-493. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-494. - Created; members; terms of office. 
    A historical commission is hereby created. The commission shall consist of 11 members, each appointed by the mayor for three year staggered terms. 
Sec. 2-495. - Meetings and procedural rules. 
    The members of the commission shall elect a chair who shall serve in such capacity during that person's term of appointment. The commission shall meet on dates to be determined by the bylaws or at the request of the council. The commission shall adopt bylaws, including a summary of its duties, subject to council approval, and shall from time to time submit minutes of its meetings to the council for approval. 
Secs. 2-496-2-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-501. - Created; members; terms of office. 
    A beautification commission is hereby created. The commission shall consist of 15 members, each appointed by the mayor for three-year staggered terms. 
Sec. 2-502. - Meetings and procedural rules. 
    The members of the commission shall elect a chair who shall serve in such capacity during that person's term of appointment. The commission shall meet on dates to be determined by the bylaws or at the request of the council. The commission shall adopt bylaws, including a summary of its duties, subject to council approval, and shall from time to time submit minutes of its meetings to the council for approval. 
Secs. 2-503-2-507. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SENIOR CITIZEN COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-508. - Created; members; terms of office. 
    A senior citizen commission is hereby created. The commission shall consist of 11 members, each appointed by the mayor, nine general community representatives serving for three-year staggered terms, and two senior and community interest group representatives serving one-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 834, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 2-509. - Meetings and procedural rules. 
    The members of the commission shall elect a chair who shall serve in such capacity during that person's term of appointment. The commission shall meet on dates to be determined by the bylaws or at the request of the council. The commission shall adopt bylaws, including a summary of its duties, subject to council approval, and shall from time to time submit minutes of its meetings to the council for approval. 
Secs. 2-510-2-514. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-515. - Boundaries; voting places. 
    The following shall constitute the election precincts in the city: 
(1)  Election precinct No. 1. A precinct described as that area bounded on the south by the centerline of Anita Avenue from Marter Road to Wedgewood Drive; thence south on the centerline of Wedgewood Drive and thence easterly on the centerline of Vernier Road commencing northerly to the city limits line; to the west on the centerline of Marter Road to the northerly city limits line; designating Ferry School as the place of voting. 
(2)  Election precinct No. 2. A precinct described as that area bounded by the northerly city limits line, commencing at Marter Road and going southerly on centerline of Marter Road to Anita Avenue; thence westerly on the centerline of Anita Avenue from Marter Road to Mack Avenue; thence northerly on the centerline of Mack Avenue to Ridgemont Avenue; thence west on the centerline of Ridgemont Avenue to the westerly city limits line; designating Mason School as the place of voting. 
(3)  Election precinct No. 3. A precinct described as that area bounded on the north by the centerline of Ridgemont Avenue; thence south on the centerline of Mack Avenue; thence easterly on the centerline of Anita Avenue to Wedgewood Drive; thence southerly on the centerline of Wedgewood Drive to Vernier Road; thence westerly on the centerline of Vernier Road; thence southerly on the centerline of Fairway Drive; thence westerly on the centerline of South Oxford Road; thence westerly on the centerline of Oxford Road; thence northerly on the centerline of Mack Avenue; thence westerly on the centerline of Country Club; thence northerly on Jackson Avenue to Lancaster Avenue to the westerly city limits; designating First Evangelical Lutheran Church as the place of voting. 
(4)  Election precinct No. 4. A precinct described as that area bounded on the south by the southerly city limits line; on the west by the westerly city limits line; on the north by the centerline of Huntington Boulevard commencing at the westerly city limits line and continuing easterly to the centerline of Mack Avenue; thence southerly on the centerline of Mack Avenue to the southerly city limits line respectively; designating the Municipal Community Center as the place of voting. 
(5)  Election precinct No. 5. A precinct described as that area bounded by the northerly city limits line commencing easterly by the centerline of Lancaster Avenue to Jackson Avenue; thence southerly on the centerline of Jackson Avenue to Country Club Drive; thence easterly on the centerline of Country Club Drive to Mack Avenue; thence southerly on the centerline of Mack Avenue to Oxford Road; thence easterly on the centerline of Oxford Road to the centerline of South Oxford Road to Fairway Drive; thence southerly on the centerline of Fairway Drive to Fairford Road; thence westerly on the centerline of Fairford Road to Torrey Road; thence southerly on the centerline of Torrey Road to the easterly subdivision line of Torrey Woods No. 3 Subdivision (Liber 70, Page 27 of Plats), the easterly subdivision line of Edward Schultz Grosse Pointe Hunt Club Subdivision (Liber 71, Page 67 of Plats) and thence southerly by the centerline of Chalfonte Avenue to the southerly city limits line; thence commence westerly on the city limits line to the centerline of Mack Avenue going northerly to the centerline of Huntington Boulevard to the westerly city limits line; designating Montieth School as the place of voting. 
(6)  Election precinct No. 6. A precinct described as that area bounded on the south by the southerly city limits line; on the west by the centerline of Chalfonte Avenue, the easterly subdivision line of Edward Schultz Grosse Pointe Hunt Club Subdivision (Liber 71, Page 67 of Plats), the easterly subdivision of Torrey Woods No. 3 Subdivision (Liber 70, Page 25 of Plats); thence easterly on the centerline of Torrey Road; thence northerly on the centerline of Torrey Road; thence easterly on the centerline of Fairford Road; thence northerly on the centerline of Fairway Drive to Vernier Road; thence southerly on the centerline of Vernier Road to the southerly city limits line; designating Barnes School as the place of voting. 
(Code 1975, § 1-8-1; Code 1997, § 2-461; Ord. No. 694, § 1, 1-15-1996) 
State Law reference- Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq. 
Sec. 2-516. - Nominating petition deadline. 
    The candidate filing deadline for nominating petitions at all odd year general elections for city council shall be 4:00 p.m. on the 12th Tuesday before the odd year general election, as required by the Michigan Election Law. In the event state law is amended on this topic, the state law shall control. 
(Ord. No. 836, 1-3-2011) 
Secs. 2-517-2-538. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; Local Government Fiscal Responsibility Act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; Fiscal Stabilization Act, MCL 141.1001 et seq.; Uniform Budgeting And Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-539-2-569. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FUNDS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 2-570-2-586. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Reserved 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 826, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2009, repealed subdivision II, §§ 2-587-2-592, which pertained to community enhancement funds and derived from Code 1975, §§ 1-22-1-1-22-5; Ord. No. 700, § 1, adopted July 15, 1996; and Code 1997, §§ 2-521-2-526. 

Secs. 2-587-2-617. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Parkway Beautification Fund 

Sec. 2-618. - Created. 
    The city comptroller shall establish upon the accounting records of this city a fund to be known as the parkway beautification fund. 
(Code 1975, § 1-16-1; Code 1997, § 2-546) 
Sec. 2-619. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the parkway beautification fund is to make available to the public a designated fund for the purpose of depositing therein gifts and donations from the public, which gifts and donations and the interest earnings therefrom shall be utilized for maintenance and improvement of the Veterans' Memorial Parkway median divider of Vernier Road within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 1-16-2; Code 1997, § 2-547) 
Sec. 2-620. - Utilization. 
    The city agrees with each donor who makes a donation or gift to the city for deposit in the parkway beautification fund that such funds will be invested at interest and such interest earnings will be credited to the fund. Expenditures from the fund in any fiscal year shall be limited to the interest earnings of such fund and not more than five percent of the principal balance. All expenditures from the fund shall require prior authorization of the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 1-16-3; Code 1997, § 2-548) 
Sec. 2-621. - Projects eligible. 
    Projects eligible to receive funds from the parkway beautification fund shall be recommended for approval by the beautification commission, tree commission or a special study commission to the city council and may consist of landscaping, tree replacement and planting, shrubs, improved sprinkler systems, park benches and similar projects designed to enhance the aesthetics and beauty of the median area of the parkway. 
(Code 1975, § 1-16-4; Code 1997, § 2-549) 
Sec. 2-622. - Dissolution. 
    The parkway beautification fund established in this division shall be continued and operated by the city until June 30, 2002, unless such fund shall be continued thereafter by readoption of this division or similar regulations by the city council. If such fund is dissolved by the expiration of the time limitation or by a court of competent jurisdiction or for any other reason, then any fund balance at such time of dissolution shall be utilized for projects similar in nature to be those specified in this division. No funds from the parkway beautification fund shall be transferred or become part of the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 1-16-5; Code 1997, § 2-550) 
Secs. 2-623-2-647. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RETURNED CHECKS 

Sec. 2-648. - Service charge. 
    In all cases of any check dishonored by a bank for insufficient funds or no account which is returned to the city, the city shall add a service charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the account or obligation for which the check was originally issued. 
(Code 1975, § 1-23-1; Code 1997, § 2-571) 
Sec. 2-649. - Checks issued to the court or violations bureau. 
    In all cases where a check is issued to the court in payment of any fine or costs or issued to the violations bureau of the court in payment of any violation ticket and such check is returned to the city by reason of being dishonored by the bank for insufficient funds or no account, a service charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be added to the amount owing to the court or violations bureau as an additional cost to be paid prior to a clearance or satisfaction certificate being issued by the court or violations bureau. 
(Code 1975, § 1-23-2; Code 1997, § 2-572) 
Secs. 2-650-2-671. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-672. - Adoption of a purchasing system. 
    In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases and to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, a purchasing system is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12-1; Code 1997, § 2-591) 
Sec. 2-673. - Purchasing officer; powers and duties. 
    In accordance with the provisions of the City Charter, the city administrator, for the purposes of this division, shall also be the purchasing officer. As such purchasing officer, the administrator shall be responsible for the issuance of all purchase orders for equipment, material, supplies and services acquired by or furnished to the city, excepting such as are controlled by sections 8.8 and 13.6 of the City Charter. Such duties of the purchasing officer, as the administrator shall determine, may be assigned and combined with those of any other office or position, excepting those of the treasurer or comptroller. The purchasing officer, among other things, shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Purchasing of or contracting for supplies and equipment required by any department, division, commission or other city agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by the City Charter or as provided in this division, such administrative rules and procedures as the purchasing officer shall adopt and such other rules and procedures as shall be prescribed by the council. 
(2)  Negotiating and recommending the execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment and other public property. 
(3)  Acting to procure needed quality in supplies and equipment at the least expense. 
(4)  Discouraging uniform bidding and endeavoring to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases. 
(5)  Preparing appropriate rules and procedures covering the purchase of equipment, material, supplies and services; provided, however, that the purchasing procedure manual shall be prepared in conformity with the provisions of this division and the City Charter and may be amended or revised by the purchasing officer as conditions may warrant such action. 
(6)  Keeping informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products. 
(7)  Prescribing and maintaining such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of the provisions of this division and other rules and procedures. 
(8)  Supervising the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications. 
(9)  Recommending the transfer of surplus or unused equipment, materials, and supplies from one department or division to another as may be needed, and the sale of all equipment, materials and supplies which cannot be used or which have become unsuitable for use by the city; provided, always, that the provisions of section 13.6 of the City Charter shall be complied with. 
(10)  Maintaining a bidders' list, vendors' catalog file, and such records as may be needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing office. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12-2; Code 1997, § 2-592) 
Sec. 2-674. - Requisitions. 
    All departments, divisions, commissions and other agencies shall submit to the purchasing officer a requisition for the purchase of any equipment, materials, supplies and services upon a standard requisition form as approved by such officer. Whenever the cost involved is less than $5,000.00, the purchasing officer, in the officer's sole judgment, may require that quotations be obtained before any particular purchase is made. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12-3; Code 1997, § 2-593) 
Sec. 2-675. - Purchase orders. 
    Before any purchase is made in excess of $500.00, a purchase order shall be issued, except in such cases of emergency where specific exceptions are set forth in the purchasing procedure manual. The amount may be modified by council resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12-4; Code 1997, § 2-594) 
Sec. 2-676. - Encumbrance of funds. 
    Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for equipment, materials, supplies or services unless the comptroller shall have certified that sufficient unencumbered appropriations exist in the department, division, commission or agency fund account against which the purchase order is to be charged. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12-5; Code 1997, § 2-595) 
Sec. 2-677. - Formal contract procedure. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 8.8 and section 13.6 of the City Charter, all purchases and contracts of $5,000.00 or greater shall be made by competitive bidding and shall be by written contract with the lowest qualified bidder, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  Notice of inviting bids. The notice for inviting bids shall include a general description of the equipment, materials, supplies or services to be purchased or acquired, shall state where specifications and bid sheets may be procured, and the time and place when and where the bids will be opened. 
a.  Published notice. The notice inviting bids shall be given at least seven days before the date upon which the bids are to be opened. Such notice shall be published at least once in the designated official newspaper. 
b.  Bidders' list. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all qualified prospective suppliers whose names have been placed upon the bidders' list or who shall have requested, in writing, that their names be added to such list. 
c.  Bulletin board. The purchasing officer may also advertise pending purchases by a notice on a public bulletin board located in the municipal building. 
(2)  Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, a bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid security; provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit such bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been made, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award the contract to the next lowest qualified bidder. If the council awards the contract to the next lower bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security, if deemed forfeited by the council, shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second low bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder, and should there be any deficiency, the city may recover its damages against the bidder whose bid security has been so forfeited. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope as may be required by the purchasing officer. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the bid notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. At its discretion, the council may reject any or all bids presented. 
(5)  Award of contract. Contracts shall be awarded by the council to the lowest qualified bidder, except as otherwise provided in this section and by the City Charter. 
(6)  Bonds. The council may require the successful bidder to furnish bonds in such nature and amounts as will meet statutory requirements or as may be necessary for the protection of the best interests of the city. Any bond requirements shall be set forth in the published notice inviting bids, or in the specifications for the purchase. No contract shall be executed by the city until the bond requirements are met. 
(7)  Insurance. The council shall have authority to require sufficient types of insurance as it may deem necessary and in such amounts as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the council requires such insurance, the type and amount of insurance shall be described in the notice inviting bids or within the specifications. No contract shall be executed by the city until the insurance requirements are met. 
(8)  Voting by council. In order to award any contract or accept any proposed bid for an amount in excess of the lowest contract price bid or the lowest proposed bid under consideration, the minimum affirmative vote of five members of the council shall be required to award such contract or accept such bid. 
(Code 1997, § 2-596; Ord. No. 678, § 1, 9-12-1994) 
Secs. 2-678-2-697. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERSONAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-698. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Collectible currency means a medium of exchange including coins, bank notes, government notes, and paper money that has a value greater than face value. 
    Contraband means any property that is prohibited by any law to be owned, carried, concealed or possessed. 
    Currency means a medium of exchange including coins, bank notes, government notes and paper money that has a value not greater than face value. 
    Evidence means any property that furnishes or tends to furnish proof in a legal matter. 
    Hazardous material means explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, etiologic material, radioactive material, corrosive material or liquefied petroleum gas. 
    Junk means any property that does not have any fair market value or worth. 
    Legal owner means any individual, organization, partnership, company, corporation, or governmental agency who had care, custody, or control over the property and can establish ownership to the satisfaction of the law enforcement agency by description, title, sales receipt, bill of goods, or other means. Any person who represents the legal owner or an organization, partnership, company, corporation, governmental agency by affidavit, power of attorney, bill of goods, or title may be considered the legal owner for purposes of recovering the property. 
    Perishable property means any property subject to quick deterioration or spoilage except when maintained under proper conditions. 
    Property means anything which is the subject of ownership and is corporeal, tangible, visible, or personal, or that has an exchange value. 
    Property of major value means any property that is not collectible currency, contraband, currency, evidence, hazardous material, junk, perishable property, or property of minor value. 
    Property of minor value means any property the fair market value of which is less than the total cost of preparing a property report, plus the costs of storage and disposition, and which is not collectible currency, contraband, currency, evidence, hazardous material, junk, perishable property, or property of major value. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.21. 
Sec. 2-699. - Lost property-Generally. 
(a)  Duty to report. A person who finds lost property shall report the finding or deliver the property to the department of public safety. This shall include all property found in an abandoned vehicle. If the person wishes to receive the property if it is not claimed by the legal owner as provided in this division, the person shall provide his or her name and current address to the department of public safety and shall inform the department of any change in his address. 
(b)  Procedure for receiving. The property described under subsection (a) of this section shall be inspected by the department of public safety to determine the type of property that has been found. The property shall be classified into one of the following categories: 
(1)  Collectible currency. 
(2)  Contraband. 
(3)  Currency. 
(4)  Evidence. 
(5)  Hazardous material. 
(6)  Junk. 
(7)  Perishable property. 
(8)  Property of major value. 
(9)  Property of minor value. 
(c)  Inspection and classification. The department of public safety shall use the following method to determine the classification of property under subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Currency may be appraised to determine whether the currency, because of age, origin, metal content, or value as a collector's item, has a value other than its face value. Currency may be inspected by a person who has the expertise to determine if the currency is collectible currency. 
(2)  Property that is suspected of being contraband may be subjected to scientific evaluation or inspected by a qualified person. 
(3)  Property shall be considered evidence if the property is reasonably believed by the department of public safety or the city attorney to be evidence that could be used in a legal action. 
(4)  Whether or not property is hazardous material shall be determined by a qualified person who has expertise regarding hazardous material. 
(5)  Property that may be junk may be inspected to determine if it has any fair market value or worth. 
(6)  Perishable property may be inspected to determine if the property requires special storage. 
(7)  Whether property is of major or minor value shall be determined by a person who has expertise regarding the valuation of the property. 
(d)  Storage. Property that is reported or delivered pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be stored in a location as determined by the department of public safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.22. 
Sec. 2-700. - Same-Property reports. 
(a)  Property of major value. Within 48 hours of a report or delivery under subsection 2-699(a), the following reports shall be completed on property of major value, collectible currency found in one location for the total value, currency found in one location for the total value, hazardous material, and perishable property that has a major value: 
(1)  A general description of the property to provide a person who may be the legal owner with enough information to aid in determining ownership. This information shall be kept in a public building in a location that is open to the public during normal business hours. 
(2)  A detailed description of the property to provide the department of public safety with information to determine ownership. The description shall also include the total value of the property found in one location. The information required by this subdivision is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), and shall not be available to the public or any person claiming ownership. 
(b)  Property of minor value. Property that is determined under subsection 2-699(c)(7) to be of minor value may be kept by the department of public safety in a safe location and may be inspected by the department of public safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.23. 
Sec. 2-701. - Same-Returned to owner. 
(a)  Collectible currency and currency. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, collectible currency and currency shall be returned to the legal owner when the department of public safety is reasonably satisfied of that ownership. Pursuant to section 2-702, if the legal owner cannot be located or established, the property shall be disposed of pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Contraband. All contraband that is or may be evidence and any other found property that is or may be evidence in a criminal or civil action instituted by a governmental attorney shall be kept in a place of safekeeping until the governmental attorney releases the evidence. All contraband shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by law. Any found property that is evidence that is not contraband shall be returned to the legal owner unless prohibited by law. If the legal owner cannot be located, the property shall be classified as prescribed in subsection 2-699(b) and shall be disposed of pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Hazardous materials. When the legal owner of the hazardous material cannot be located or established or the hazardous material may pose an imminent danger to life or other property, then the hazardous material may be released to any governmental agency, private industry, institution, business, or person that can safely keep or dispose of the hazardous material and the container. 
(d)  Junk. Found property that is determined to be junk may be disposed of in any manner by the department of public safety. 
(e)  Evidence. Upon the conclusion of a criminal or civil action instituted by a governmental attorney, evidence may be returned to the legal owner unless prohibited by law or the evidence is required in another court action. If the legal owner cannot be located, the department of public safety shall classify the property as prescribed in subsection 2-699(b) and dispose of it pursuant to this division. 
(f)  Perishables. Perishable property shall be released to the legal owner of the property. Pursuant to section 2-702, if the legal owner cannot be located or established, the property shall be disposed of pursuant to this division. 
(g)  Major value. All property of major value shall be returned to the legal owner when the department of public safety is reasonably satisfied of that ownership. If the legal owner is not located and after six months from the date of the notice as prescribed in section 2-702, the property shall be disposed of pursuant to this division. 
(h)  Minor value. All property of minor value shall be returned to the legal owner when the department of public safety is reasonably satisfied of that ownership. If after three months the property has not been claimed by the legal owner, the property may be disposed of in any manner by the department of public safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.24. 
Sec. 2-702. - Notice. 
(a)  The department of public safety shall send a notice by first class mail to any known legal owner of collectible currency, currency, evidence, perishable property, or property of major value to the last known address of record. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date the property was found. 
(2)  The type of property found. 
(3)  The address where the property is located. 
(4)  The cost of storage per day, if any. 
(5)  A statement that the property must be claimed within six months of the date of the letter or the property shall be considered abandoned and disposed of under the provisions of this division. 
(6)  The name of the department of public safety, the address, and the telephone number where the legal owner can obtain the property. 
(b)  Property described in subsection (a) of this section not claimed within six months after the date of the notice may be disposed of pursuant to section 2-703. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.25. 
Sec. 2-703. - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Collectible currency, currency, perishable property, and property of major value that is not claimed as provided under subsection 2-702(b) shall be disposed of by the department of public safety as follows: 
(1)  Unless the finder of the property cannot be located or does not want the property, the property will be returned to the finder. 
(2)  If the finder of the property cannot be located or does not want the property, one of the following shall be done: 
a.  Retain the property for use by the department of public safety. 
b.  Sell the property at a public sale and deposit the money from the sale in the general fund of the city. 
c.  Release the property to a charitable organization as defined in section 2 of the Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act, Public Act No. 169 of 1975 (MCL 400.272). 
(b)  Property located in an abandoned vehicle shall be kept in a place of safekeeping. If the legal owner of the property is not located when the vehicle has been disposed of under the provisions regarding abandoned vehicles under the state vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the property shall be classified under subsection 2-699(b), and the property may be disposed of pursuant to section 2-702 and subsection (a) of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.26. 
Sec. 2-704. - Property disputes. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. the following courts shall have jurisdiction regarding a dispute concerning the legal ownership of any found property: 
(1)  A district court. 
(2)  A municipal court. 
(3)  A circuit court, if the amount in controversy exceeds $10,000.00. 
(b)  Filing of claim. When a dispute concerning the ownership of found property arises, any person claiming ownership of the property may file a claim in one of the above courts having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of the claim of ownership, the court shall do both of the following: 
(1)  Schedule a hearing to be held within 30 days of the filing of the claim for the purpose of determining the ownership of the property. 
(2)  Notify all persons claiming ownership of the property and the law enforcement agency of the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
(d)  Burden of proof. The person claiming ownership of the property who files a claim shall have the burden of establishing ownership of the property at the hearing. 
(e)  Ownership established. The court shall make a decision within ten days after the hearing as to the legal ownership of the property. 
(f)  Liability. Notwithstanding any other law, a state, county, city, municipality, township, governmental agency, or person shall not be criminally or civilly liable for complying with this division. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.27. 
Sec. 2-705. - Applicability of division. 
    This division does not apply to abandoned property to which Public Act No. 214 of 1979 (MCL 434.181 et seq.) applies. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 434.28. 
Secs. 2-706-2-723. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COST RECOVERY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 2-724-2-744. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Hazardous Materials and Emergency Responses[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Environmental remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-745. - Purpose. 
    This subdivision authorizes the collection of costs incurred by the city in providing emergency fire, HAZMAT, and/or ambulance services in situations which involve spills, leaks, releases, accidents or related occurrences of hazardous or dangerous materials or substances and costs incurred as a result of public safety department or emergency medical service (EMS) and other designated agents responding to emergencies as defined above. 
(Code 1997, § 67-2; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-746. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost recovery means fees, charges and expenses incurred by the public safety department or emergency medical services (EMS) associated with response to hazardous materials incidents; false alarms and utility failures. This term includes, but is not limited to, costs associated with the response, mitigation, decontamination, cleanup and standby for hazardous or dangerous materials and substances; repair or replacement of equipment, apparatus, materials and supplies; expenses incurred to ensure the protection of public health, safety and welfare of the city and the persons therein without limitation; and in providing emergency, public safety services, manpower, mutual aid and outside agency support and/or resources. 
    Hazardous or dangerous materials means any and all substances, including, but not limited to, alcohol, gunpowder, blasting agents, petroleum fuels, refined and crude petroleum products, explosives, corrosives, acids, poisons, insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers, chemicals, combustible or flammable liquids, solids or gases, cryogenic products, or other commodities the singular or combined mixtures of which pose a hazard to the public health, safety, welfare, or endanger, cause, or are capable of causing loss, injury or damage to persons, property or the environment. 
    Utility failure means the failure, disruption or disabling of a cable, conduit, wire, pipeline, or other device used to transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals, water, sanitary or storm sewer, where the party responsible for maintaining the utility fails to undertake repairs, corrective actions, or fails to maintain adequate security within a reasonable time, not to exceed four hours from the time an agent of the city arrives and provides notice to the utility. 
(Code 1997, § 67-3; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-747. - Authority to collect costs. 
    The city shall have the authority to collect all costs incurred, as defined in section 2-746. 
(Code 1997, § 67-4; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-748. - Persons responsible for costs. 
    All costs shall be charged against the owner, operator or persons responsible for the property, equipment, vehicle or container causing, contributing, allowing or failing to keep, store, transport or otherwise handle or dispose of hazardous or dangerous materials or substances. 
(Code 1997, § 67-5; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-749. - Utility failure. 
    The owner and/or operator of the utility that fails shall be responsible. Such costs shall constitute a debt of the persons responsible and be collectible in the same manner as any legal obligations. 
(Code 1997, § 67-6; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-750. - Statement for services rendered. 
    The city shall submit an itemized statement providing the costs associated with the emergency services described in section 2-746, to the person or persons responsible by first class mail or personal service. 
(Code 1997, § 67-7; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-751. - Payment. 
    Persons responsible for emergency services who fail to remit the fees within 30 days of the date of the statement of services rendered shall be considered delinquent unless an extension of time for payment is approved by a duly authorized agent of the city. All delinquent accounts shall accrue a late fee of one percent per month and shall be collected as provided by law. 
(Code 1997, § 67-8; Ord. No. 785, 3-17-2003) 
Secs. 2-752-2-770. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Ambulances 

Sec. 2-771. - Purpose and applicability. 
    This subdivision shall apply to and authorizes the recovery of costs incurred by the city in situations which involve emergency medical services (EMS), and other responses by the public safety department and its designated agents relating to emergencies as itemized by this division. 
(Ord. No. 804, § 68-2, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 2-772. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost recovery means fees, charges and expenses incurred by the public safety department, emergency medical services (EMS), or their agents, associated with response to medical emergencies to ensure the protection of public health, safety and welfare of the city and the persons therein without limitation; and in providing emergency, public safety services, manpower, mutual aid and outside agency support and/or resources. 
(Ord. No. 804, § 68-3, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 2-773. - Authority to collect costs. 
    The city or its designated agent shall have the authority to collect all fees and costs incurred as provided by this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 804, § 68-4, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 2-774. - Persons responsible for costs. 
(a)  For any response by emergency medical services or the department of public safety, whether by request or need, the person or entity involved in the response who is not otherwise exempt from the provisions of this subdivision shall pay the charges, fees, costs and expenses for such response. The director of public safety may allocate the expenses of such response to the party or parties causing the response to occur. If it is unclear who was the responsible party, the director of public safety may allocate the costs on a pro-rata basis. 
(b)  Residents of the city will only be charged that portion of the costs and expenses which are covered by insurance. In no event will any city resident, regardless of insurance coverage, be required to pay any fees or costs, including but not limited to copays, not covered by insurance. 
(Ord. No. 804, § 68-5, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 2-775. - Fees. 
    Costs for providing emergency medical services are as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 804, § 68-6, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 2-776. - Payment. 
    Persons responsible for emergency services who fail to remit the fees within 30 days of the date of the statement of services rendered shall be considered delinquent unless an extension of time for payment is approved by an authorized agent of the city. All delinquent accounts shall accrue a late fee of one percent per month and shall be collected as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 804, § 68-7, 6-6-2005) 
Secs. 2-777-2-779. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Cost Recovery for Traffic Accidents 

Sec. 2-780. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    At fault driver means the driver causing the accident as determined by the reporting officer. 
    Emergency response means providing, sending and/or utilizing public works, police, firefighting and/or rescue services by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle caused by a nonresident. 
    Expense of emergency response means the direct costs incurred in responding to a traffic accident as deemed to be necessary or expedient for the following: 
(1)  Personnel time and costs associated with the response. 
(2)  Transportation costs associated with the response. 
(3)  Equipment costs associated with the response. 
(4)  Administrative costs associated with the response. 
(5)  Legal costs associated with the response. 
(Ord. No. 841, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 2-781. - Findings. 
(a)  The city finds that a significant number of traffic accidents in the city involve at fault drivers who do not financially support the public safety department through property taxes. As a result, a greater operational and/or financial burden is placed upon the public safety and public works department by nonresidents who have been found at fault in accidents. 
(b)  The city also finds that emergency public safety and public works services for vehicular accidents continues to increase resulting in increased demands on all areas of city services. The city further finds that the public safety department response to motor vehicle accidents decreases costs to insurance companies by providing various safety services. The city finds that using property tax increases to provide for the increase in service demands is not appropriate since many of the motor vehicle accidents involve individuals not owning property or paying taxes within the city. The city also finds it appropriate to establish procedures which would exempt taxpayers from out of pocket expenses. As a result, the city finds that it is necessary to institute a system of cost recovery for emergency department of public safety and works response to motor vehicle accidents. 
(Ord. No. 841, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 2-782. - Liability for expenses. 
(a)  Any person determined to be "at-fault" in a motor vehicle accident, which results in an emergency response as defined in this subdivision, shall be responsible for the expenses of the emergency response. 
(b)  Any person who is the at fault party in any motor vehicle accident shall be responsible and/or liable for the expenses of the emergency response. The cost of an emergency response for a motor vehicle accident in the city shall be a cost charged to the motor vehicle insurance company of the at fault party, or in the case of uninsured motorists, the responsible or at fault party individually, for the accident as determined by the public safety department. 
(d)  For the purpose of this subdivision, claims for costs shall be initially filed with the motor vehicle insurance company of the responsible party as add on costs for the claim for damages to the vehicle, property or injuries. The claims shall be filed with the insurance company of the responsible or at fault party, and in the case of an uninsured motorist, the responsible or at fault party individually, the owner of the vehicle or other responsible parties. 
(e)  The city administrator and the director of public safety shall prepare policies and procedures for collection and billing, and establish a fee schedule subject to council resolution. The procedures will insure that taxpayers of the city are exempt from any out of pocket costs. An independent agency may be designated as the city's collection agent subject to council resolution. 
(f)  All amounts collected pursuant to this subdivision shall be placed in a specific account established by the city and deposited in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 841, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 2-783. - Civil liability. 
    Costs established pursuant to this subdivision shall be construed to be a responsibility and liability of a civil nature on the part of the driver and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene or enlarge or reduce any criminal liability or motor vehicle code responsibility including fines imposed by a judge on a driver for any misdemeanor or civil infraction. Reduction in the charges by the prosecutor or city attorney shall not impair the city's ability to collect under this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 841, 9-12-2011) 
Secs. 2-784-2-805. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq. 

Sec. 2-806. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.), as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this article or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article (section 2-811). 
    Municipal civil infraction means a violation of any provision of this Code specifically designated as a civil infraction and not a misdemeanor. A violation includes any act which is prohibited or declared unlawful, as well as any omission or failure to act when declared unlawful, as well as any omission or failure to act when required by this Code. Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. A list of municipal civil infractions may be adopted from time to time by council resolution. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
(Code 1997, § 2-681) 
Sec. 2-807. - Designation of authorized city officials. 
    The following personnel of the city have the authority to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Building/zoning inspector or designated agent. 
(2)  Department of public services director. 
(3)  City administrator. 
(4)  Members and director of the department of public safety. 
(5)  Chief inspector of the division of safety inspections. 
(6)  Clerk or designated agent. 
(Code 1997, § 2-682; Ord. No. 862, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 2-808. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of: 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or 
(2)  A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Code 1997, § 2-683) 
Sec. 2-809. - Municipal civil infraction citations-Issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the municipal court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act (MCL 600.8705). 
(4)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief." 
(5)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided by subsection (7)b. of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy of the citation on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Code 1997, § 2-684) 
Sec. 2-810. - Same-Contents. 
(a)  A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The municipal civil infraction alleged to have been violated; 
(3)  The place where the alleged violator shall appear in court; 
(4)  The telephone number of the court; and 
(5)  The time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  The municipal civil infraction citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The municipal civil infraction citation shall inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The municipal civil infraction citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1997, § 2-685) 
Sec. 2-811. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau, as authorized under section 8396 of the Act (MCL 600.8396), to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this article or any ordinance. 
(b)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection afforded by law. 
(c)  Limitation to scope of authority. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(d)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations in subsections 2-809(6) and (7). In addition to any other information required by this article or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau; 
(2)  The methods by which an appearance may be made; 
(3)  The address and telephone number of the bureau; 
(4)  The hours during which the bureau is open; 
(5)  The amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation; and 
(6)  The consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(e)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(f)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal civil infraction violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the municipal court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Code 1997, § 2-686) 
Sec. 2-812. - Failure to appear; penalty. 
    A person served with a municipal civil infraction citation as provided in subsection 2-809(6) who fails to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Failure to appear will also result in the entry of a default judgment on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1997, § 2-687) 
Sec. 2-813. - Fine schedule. 
(a)  Unless a different schedule of fines or penalty is provided for by any ordinance, the following schedule of civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal civil infraction violation notices shall apply: 
(1)  First offense within a two-year period-Not to exceed $350.00 plus court costs. 
(2)  Second offense within a two-year period-Not to exceed $500.00 plus court costs. 
(3)  Third offense within a two-year period-Misdemeanor. 
(b)  Whether a subsequent offense occurs within a three-year period shall be determined based on the date of the commission of the offense. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan liquor control code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR AND TAVERN LICENSES 

Sec. 4-19. - Restrictions on city council authority to signify approval of class C/tavern liquor licenses. 
    The city council shall not signify approval to the state liquor control commission of the issuance of any class C/tavern liquor license for use within the city when the number of class C/tavern liquor licenses issued or approved for use within the city are eleven in number. The term "issued or approved for use within the city" shall include applications for class C/tavern licenses which have been recommended for issuance by the city council, but have not been acted upon by the state liquor control commission, and shall include class C/tavern liquor licenses in escrow as provided by the rules of the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1975, § 4-4-2; Code 1997, § 50-2; Ord. No. 797, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-20. - Transfer of existing licenses not restricted. 
    The provisions of this article shall not restrict the authority of the city council to signify its approval to the state liquor control commission for the transfer of any existing class C or tavern license issued or approved for use within the city to any prospective transferee of such license. 
(Code 1975, § 4-4-4; Code 1997, § 50-4; Ord. No. 797, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-21. - Effective date; approved by voters. 
    The provisions of this article became effective when they were approved by a majority of the electors of the city voting in an election held August 3, 2004. 
(Code 1975, § 4-4-5; Code 1997, § 50-5; Ord. No. 797, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-22. - Statement of purpose and applicability. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to allow the city to establish and administer a policy for the issuance and transfer of class C, tavern and other on-premises licenses and to manage the number of liquor licenses in the city. 
(b)  This article applies to applications for licenses to sell beer, wine or spirits for on-premises consumption including tavern licenses, class C licenses, resort licenses, brewpub and microbrewer licenses, club licenses and hotel licenses. This article shall not apply to applications for SDM and SDD licenses, "24-hour permits" or other special licenses granted by the liquor control commission. 
(Code 1997, § 50-6; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-23. - Licensing policy. 
(a)  New liquor licenses, transfer of ownership of existing licenses and transfers into the city of new licenses will be approved at the sole discretion of the council, subject to LCC regulations. 
(b)  It shall be the policy of the city to notify all known existing class C and tavern-type liquor license holders of proposed changes in this article via first class mail at least ten business days in advance of the council acting on a change, and to publish a public notice whenever the council elects to make a new license available. 
(Code 1997, § 50-7; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-24. - Application and review procedures. 
    Each applicant for a new license, the transfer into the city of a license or the transfer of an existing license shall make a request to the city in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Application. Applications in affidavit form shall be made to the city council in writing on a liquor license application form provided by the city clerk, signed by the applicant if an individual or signed by a duly authorized agent if a partnership or corporation exists. This application process does not relieve the applicant of complying with LCC application requirements. The fee, as required by section 4-29, shall be paid by the applicant to cover costs to review and process the application as determined by this article. The application shall contain the following statements and information: 
a.  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and an affidavit stating whether or not the corporation is a privately held corporation. If the corporation is a privately held corporation, it shall also submit an affidavit stating the number of shares of stock which it has issued, to whom the stock was issued, the amount of stock issued to each stockholder, the date of issuance of the stock and the individual certificate numbers of the stock issued. 
b.  The citizenship of the applicant, place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization. 
c.  The character of the business and business reputation of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objectives for which it was organized. This requirement shall be fulfilled by the attachment of a current certified copy of the articles of incorporation. 
d.  The length of time the applicant has been in business of that character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its articles of incorporation were issued. 
e.  The applicant's financial status and the ability of the applicant to build and/or operate the proposed facility. 
f.  Proof of ownership of the property or lease of the property to be used and operated under such license and the legal description of the property. 
g.  A statement as to whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in the application and the disposition of such application. 
h.  A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, violence or alcoholic liquors, and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the state. 
i.  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state, of the United States or any ordinance of the city in the conduct of its business. 
j.  A statement as to what type of license is requested. 
k.  A completed and signed Proof of Financial Responsibility Form (LC-95). 
l.  A copy of all records which may be in the possession of the LCC pertaining to the applicant, its investigation of the applicant, and previous and existing liquor licenses issued to the applicant. 
(2)  Site location, design, operational and implementation information. In addition to the filing of information as required in subsection (1) of this section, the following information shall be submitted by the applicant: 
a.  A location map of the property where the license is to be located shall be provided. The map shall show the relationship of the proposed licensed facility to surrounding property and uses and any church or school building within 500 feet from the proposed facility. 
b.  A site plan showing the location of the building on the lot where the proposed licensed facility is to be operated, the architectural design and building elevations, and other pertinent physical features of the proposed building. 
c.  The floor plans, seating arrangements, interior design, and the type of furniture and fixtures to be used in the proposed restaurant facilities. 
d.  If the building is already constructed, then, in addition to the above items, the applicant shall furnish proposed renovation plans for the interior of the premises or any proposed exterior building alterations. 
e.  A statement as to when the applicant intends to commence construction or renovation of the proposed building or facility and when the applicant expects to complete such construction. 
f.  A statement as to the proposed hours of operation, menu, staff and culinary facilities and capabilities. 
g.  Submittal by the applicant of a proposed restaurant improvement plan and ongoing development goals to maintain quality service should a license be approved. 
(3)  Other information. The applicant shall furnish other information as is requested by the city, including, but not limited to, the release of information forms, disclosure forms and hold harmless agreements, as may be deemed appropriate by city administration. 
(4)  City departmental review. Upon receipt of an application and plans, the city administrator will refer same to the director of public safety, building department, comptroller, city attorney and other city officers or employees, who will prepare a thorough review and investigation, including a complete history of past business experience and liquor law violations, if any, to be made of the persons and/or premises. The applicant shall provide all requested information to, and fully cooperate with, all city departments requesting any and all additional relevant information. The findings resulting from such review and investigation shall be reported to the city administrator, who then will report the findings to the council. 
(5)  Public hearing and review. 
a.  Hearing. The council shall hold a public hearing upon a request for a new license, transfer of an existing license to new owners, or for the transfer of a new license into the city. 
b.  Notice. Notice of all hearings shall be provided to the applicant and all property owners within 300 feet of the proposed establishment, all LCC class C license holders and tavern license holders. Notice shall also be published in a local newspaper in accordance with city policy at least ten days prior to any hearing. 
c.  Appearance. The applicant will be required to appear at the hearing before the council and make a written and brief oral presentation concerning the request. For purposes of this subsection, the term "applicant" shall refer to all individuals holding or proposed to hold a five percent or more interest in the business or license, unless the applicant is a publicly traded company. 
(6)  Review factors. In reviewing a request for a new license, transfers of ownership of existing licenses or transfers into the city of new on-premises licensees, the council may consider the following factors: 
a.  The appropriate relationship between buildings and land uses. 
b.  Total number of similar licenses in the city. 
c.  Input from residents and surrounding business owners. 
d.  Impact of the establishment on surrounding businesses and neighborhoods. 
e.  Pedestrian and vehicular movement. 
f.  Parking availability. 
g.  Number of seats/occupancy compared to the surrounding area. 
h.  Substantial renovation of existing buildings. 
i.  Concentration of drinking establishments and impact on policing requirements. 
j.  General policing requirements. 
k.  Business history. 
l.  Business experience. 
m.  LCC violation history. 
n.  Diversification of the type of commercial activity in a given area or block. 
o.  Ratio of food to alcohol sales. 
p.  Type or character of the establishment, e.g., full-service restaurant, "bar only" or hotel. 
q.  Overall benefit of the plan to the city. 
r.  The applicant's financial status and his ability to build or operate the proposed facility, including whether appropriate lease arrangements exist. 
s.  The applicant's (including all individuals holding a five percent or greater interest) past criminal convictions for crimes involving moral turpitude, violence or alcohol. 
t.  The uniqueness of the proposed facility when compared with other existing or proposed facilities. 
u.  The permanence of the proposed establishment in the community, as evidenced by the proposed or actual commitments made by the applicant. 
v.  The effect that the proposed establishment would have in contributing to the economic stability or revitalization of areas with the city. 
w.  The cost burden to the city. 
x.  Any other factor that may affect the health, safety and welfare or the best interests of the city and its residents. 
These factors are only intended to be guidelines to assist the council in making its determination and nothing in this article shall otherwise limit the council's discretion in making its determination. 
(7)  Council action. At the hearing to consider the application, the council may act as follows: 
a.  Grant approval, either full or conditional, of the application. 
b.  Reject the application, stating the reasons for its denial. 
c.  Postpone action on the application. 
d.  Recommend or not recommend transfer of a license to the LCC if applicable. 
e.  Take other appropriate action in discretion of the council. 
(Code 1997, § 50-8; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-25. - Transfer of ownership. 
    Requests for transfer of ownership of existing licensed establishments shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the council after an evaluation of the factors listed in section 4-24(6). If the continuation of an existing operation is contemplated, the applicant must present a plan that indicates that it will continue the existing operation as established or explain in writing any proposed changes. If there are proposed changes in the operations, then the request for transfer of ownership shall be subject to the reviews outlined in this article. 
(Code 1997, § 50-9; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-26. - Revocation and nonrenewal. 
(a)  Each establishment within the city for which a liquor license is granted shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the city and the state. Upon any violation of this article, the council may, after notice and hearing, request that the liquor control commission revoke or not renew such license. 
(b)  Upon any violation of this article, state law or LCC regulations, the city will notify the licensee of the specific violation and afford the licensee an opportunity to come into compliance with this article. The licensee must reach compliance in that time established by the city administrator, but in no event more than ten days after notification to licensee by the city of such violation. Absent compliance within that time established by the city administrator, the city may hold the above-mentioned hearing and request that the liquor control commission not renew and/or revoke such license. 
(c)  Before filing any objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license with the liquor control commission, the city shall serve the licensee with notice and proceed in accordance with this article. The city shall serve the licensee by first class mail mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing with notice of hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Date, time and place of hearing. 
(2)  Notice of the proposed action. 
(3)  Reasons for the proposed action. 
(4)  Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify. 
(5)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence or any testimony that may refute or respond to the claims of adverse witnesses. 
(6)  A statement requiring the licensee to notify the city attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if the licensee intends to contest the proposed action, and to provide the names of witnesses known at the time who will testify on the licensee's behalf. 
(d)  Upon completion of the hearing, the council shall submit to the licensee and the liquor control commission a written statement of its findings and determination. 
(Code 1997, § 50-10; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-27. - Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. 
    In accordance with applicable state regulations, the council may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license to the liquor control commission upon a determination, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, that any of the following exists: 
(1)  Failure to comply with all standards, plans or agreements entered into in consideration for the issuance, transfer or continuance of the license or permit, or failure to comply with all agreements or consent judgments entered into subsequent to the issuance of the license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to comply with an approved plan of operation and other plans, specifications, or representations made or submitted to the city by the licensee. 
(3)  Violations of the state liquor laws or regulations of the liquor control commission. 
(4)  Violations of state laws or local ordinances including, but not limited to, those laws or ordinances concerning the public health, safety or public welfare. 
(5)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Failure to correct violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes; 
b.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises, which is a violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood; 
c.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; and 
d.  Entertainment on the premises or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinance or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises. 
(6)  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 50-11; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-28. - Termination of escrowed licenses. 
    The council may, through resolution, request that the liquor control commission terminate an on-premises license that has been placed in escrow for more than one year after its expiration. 
(Code 1997, § 50-12; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-29. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for a new license, for transfer of an existing license and for renewal of an existing license or permit shall pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1997, § 50-13; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-30. - Additional restrictions on licenses. 
    No license under this article shall be issued: 
(1)  To a person whose liquor license has been revoked or not renewed for cause under this article, comparable city ordinance, or state law or administrative rule. 
(2)  To a partnership or a limited liability company (LLC), unless all the members of the entity qualify to obtain a license. 
(3)  To a corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason. 
(4)  To a person who has been convicted of a crime punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law under which he was convicted; a crime involving theft, dishonesty or false statement (including tax evasion) regardless of punishment; or a crime or administrative violation of a federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquors or controlled substances. 
(5)  To a fast-food or drive-through type establishment or other establishment which has characteristics such as counter-only service or no wait staff. 
(6)  To a person who fails to make timely payments to the city of outstanding or delinquent taxes, utility charges, license fees, services rendered by the city or any other charges or monies due to the city. 
(7)  To a person who, at the time of application or renewal, would not have been eligible for such a license at the time the license was first applied for. 
(8)  To a person who cannot establish that a license will be used by the licensee within six months of LCC approval and will not be held for investment. 
(Code 1997, § 50-14; Ord. No. 801, 1-17-2005) 
Sec. 4-31. - Dance permits. 
(a)  Permit required. Dancing is prohibited unless a dance permit is approved by the city council and the LCC. Only a "dance permit," as that term is defined by the LCC, not a "dance-entertainment" permit or other type of permit, may be issued. A dance permit may only be issued in a C-2 district. 
(b)  Application. A written application on a form to be provided by the city shall be submitted to the city clerk. The city clerk shall forward the request to the city administrator, the director of public safety, and the building inspector for a recommendation. The application shall contain the following: A plan or drawing of the proposed square footage of that floor. 
(1)  A dance permit agreement signed by the applicant or its authorized agent which contains the following: 
a.  A statement that there has been no material change in the facts represented in the license application for their liquor license. If there has been a material change, the licensee shall provide the city with a revised application for a liquor license form stating the type and date of such change. 
b.  A statement of whether any remodeling or new construction is intended for use in conjunction with the permit, and if so, its description, when the work is to be started and when the work is to be completed. 
c.  The hours and days which the dancing is proposed to occur. 
d.  Additional requirements as contained in the agreement. 
(2)  No application shall be processed unless accompanied by the dance permit agreement signed by the applicant. 
(3)  Additional information may be required by city administration to assure that the application meets the requirements as detailed in this section. 
(c)  Review. Once the city administrator determines that sufficient information is available for review, a public hearing will be held before the city council. Notices will be sent in accordance with the zoning enabling act notification procedures. In addition, notices will also be sent out to existing licensees under this chapter. Prior to the public hearing, the city administrator, director of public safety and building inspector shall make a recommendation regarding the application. 
(d)  Criteria for review. The city council has sole discretion to grant or deny a dance permit based on the following: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. No dance permit will be granted unless the council makes favorable findings of fact regarding all of the following requirements: 
a.  That dancing will be an incidental use of the establishment and not its primary use. 
b.  That the square footage of the dance floor shall not exceed 144 square feet. 
c.  That the dance floor is entirely indoors. 
d.  That the premises are safe, adequate and suitable for the proposed activity. 
e.  That the granting of a dance permit will not have an adverse affect on the peace, health, safety or welfare of the patrons or the residents of the city. 
(2)  Discretionary factors. Even if the minimum requirements are met, the city council still has to grant or deny the dance permit request based on the review factors found in section 50-8(4)(a)-(x). Findings of fact on review factors (a)-(x) may be given, but are not required. 
(e)  Exemptions. Nothing in this chapter or Code shall be interpreted to prohibit city sponsored dances, school sponsored dances, church sponsored dances or dancing at existing country clubs. 
(f)  Nontransferable. A permit granted by the council may not be transferred or assigned. Any request for a transfer or assignment of a dance permit must follow the procedures for transfer of a liquor license as found in this chapter. 
(g)  Compliance. Failure to comply with any ordinance requirement, dance agreement requirement, or LCC requirement subjects the permit holder to revocation proceedings, municipal and circuit court action, and other administrative action. 
(h)  Annual review. The administration shall conduct an annual administrative review of any dance permit. The purpose of the review is to determine the status of any complaints, problems, or violations sufficient to trigger the possibility of nonrenewal or revocation of the dance permit in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 50-15, 2-26-2007) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.; endangered species protection, MCL 324.36501 et seq.; wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Nuisances committed by animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog or other animal to permit, either willfully or through failure to control such animal, any such dog or other animal to commit any nuisance by defecating and to then allow such nuisance to thereafter remain on public sidewalks, public parks or any other public property or upon any private property other than that of the owner or person who has custody or control of such dog or other animal. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog or other animal to accompany such dog or other animal upon the public streets, sidewalks or other public property or upon private property not owned or under such person's control unless such owner or person in charge, custody or control of such animal shall have possession of a trowel, shovel or other similar device and a bag or box or other similar container for the purpose of removing any nuisance committed by such dog or other animal. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to leader, guide, hearing and service animals while in service. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-23; Code 1997, § 6-1) 
State Law reference- Common law liability for dogs, MCL 287.288. 
Sec. 6-2. - Feeding wild animals. 
    No person shall keep, feed or encourage the presence within the city of any wild animals, rodents or vermin, including, but not limited to, an excessive number of birds, to the extent that the presence of such wild animals creates a public or private nuisance. An example of a public or private nuisance under this section may be, but is not limited to, the excessive deposit of fecal matter on public or private property. Encouraging or feeding of wild animals under this section shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The placing, either directly or indirectly, of animal or bird feed on the ground which encourages the lingering or congregation of wild animals, rodents or vermin (other than birds); or 
(2)  The placing, either directly or indirectly, of animal or bird feed on the ground which results in an excessive amount of birds which constitute a public or private nuisance. 
(Code 1997, § 6-2; Ord. No. 794, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-3. - Livestock. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Livestock means horses, cows, calves, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, chickens, geese, ducks, pigeons or other like or similar animals or fowl. 
(b)  Harboring. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep livestock in the city with the exception of the Grosse Pointe Woods Hunt Club. 
(Code 1975, § 8-13-2; Code 1997, § 6-157) 
Sec. 6-4. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, except for article II, division 3 of this chapter, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Secs. 6-5-6-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS AND WILD ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-27. - Scope. 
    For the purpose of this article, any person who shall allow a dog, cat or wild animal to habitually remain or to be lodged within the store, building, enclosure or premises of such person shall be considered as possessing or harboring a dog, cat or wild animal within the meaning of this article. The term "wild animal," as used in this article, shall not include animals kept in cages and housed within a building, such as hamsters, rabbits, white mice and other similar pets. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-2; Code 1997, § 6-31) 
Sec. 6-28. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, keep, shelter or have custody of a dog, cat or wild animal within the corporate limits of the city contrary to the provisions of this article. Wild animals are prohibited, and are defined to mean any live animal which is generally not bred by humans except in zoological, laboratory or similar settings including the following: Any non-human primate, including but not limited to, animals commonly known as monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans, gorillas, gibbons, apes and baboon, alligator, alligator (family), crocodiles, badger, bear, bison, cat (wild family) including but not limited to, cougars, cheetahs, jaguars and tigers, coyote, deer, dog (wild family), dog-wolf, elephant, insects of the venomous type, lizard (poisonous), martin, opossum (family), ostrich, raccoon, skunk, snakes of the venomous or dangerous type, weasel (family), any other animal which a person is prohibited from possessing by state or federal law. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-1; Code 1997, § 6-32; Ord. No. 864, 7-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-29. - Barking or howling dogs. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog that by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to pedestrians upon the public highway. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-8; Code 1997, § 6-33) 
Sec. 6-30. - Animals exposed to rabies. 
    Any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal which has been afflicted with rabies, or has bitten or attacked or been bitten or attacked by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies, or that has the symptoms of rabies, shall immediately notify the public safety department that they have such an animal and shall deliver up to the public safety department the animal for impounding and observation. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-10; Code 1997, § 6-34) 
State Law reference- Rules for control of rabies, MCL 333.5111. 
Sec. 6-31. - Owner to pay costs of impoundment, boarding or destruction. 
    All costs of impounding, boarding or destroying any animal shall be borne by the owner of such animal. Any person found guilty of violating section 6-94(a) shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary or other expenses, for identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such dog. Payment of charges shall be made within ten days after written notice of such charges, and failure to make such payment shall be a violation of this article and shall be so punishable. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-17; Code 1997, § 6-35) 
Sec. 6-32. - Destruction or sale of impounded animals. 
(a)  If any animal is impounded for observation and it shall develop that such animal is afflicted with rabies or the animal is not picked up by its rightful owner within three days after the expiration of the observation period, it shall be destroyed. 
(b)  Any animal impounded, the owner of which can be ascertained, shall be destroyed if the owner fails to pick up such animal within three days after written notice instructing the owner to do so has been given. 
(c)  Any animal impounded, the owner of which cannot be ascertained, shall be destroyed if not claimed or picked up within five days after impounding. 
(d)  All animals impounded, if not picked up within the time limits stated in this section and not afflicted with rabies, shall be destroyed unless such animal is worthy and valuable, in which event such animal shall be sold at the pound by public auction to the highest bidder at the hour of 12:00 noon next succeeding the period of retention specified in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-18; Code 1997, § 6-36) 
Sec. 6-33. - Administrative fee and boarding charge for impounded animals. 
    Under the provisions of this article, the administrative fee to be charged prior to the release of any impounded animal is to be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, plus the boarding charges by the impoundment facility. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-19; Code 1997, § 6-37) 
Sec. 6-34. - Control of female dogs in heat. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of a female dog in heat to permit the dog to be upon the streets or highways and in other public places unless the female dog is properly restrained as set forth in section 6-36. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-20; Code 1997, § 6-38) 
Sec. 6-35. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
    Any person who shall have in their possession any animal as set forth in section 6-30 or any animal which has attacked or bitten any person or other animal shall notify the public safety department of such fact, and produce and surrender such animal to the public safety department for impounding and observation. Any animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this article shall be subject to impounding. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-11; Code 1997, § 6-39) 
Sec. 6-36. - Dog leash required. 
    No person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall permit such dog to be upon the streets, highways and other public places unless such dog shall be attached to a substantial leash, which leash shall be under the control of a person capable of restraining the actions of such dog. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-12; Code 1997, § 6-40) 
Sec. 6-37. - Owner responsible for animal. 
    Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog or being with a dog or other animal shall be responsible for and shall be held accountable for any and all acts or actions of such dog or other animal and shall not allow or permit such dog to enter upon, be upon or trespass upon the property of any other person without such person's express consent, nor shall any such person permit or allow any such dog to enter upon or be upon any public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities, or any of the school grounds, where one or more signs, warning that no animals are allowed upon such premises, have been posted or placed in a conspicuous place thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-13; Code 1997, § 6-41) 
Sec. 6-38. - Maximum number of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, keep, shelter or have custody of more than three dogs, or more than four cats, or a combination of dogs and cats greater than four, any of which are over four months old, on the same premises or property; except in any commercial animal establishment, animal shelter, or veterinary hospital or clinic. 
(b)  Any appeal relating to the permissible number of cats and dogs provided for immediately above, or appeals relating to wild animals, shall be heard by the city council. The applicant shall be a resident of the property where the animal(s) is proposed to be kept. The animal control officer shall investigate the application and make a written report and recommendation to the council. Adjoining property owners will be notified of the hearing date before the council. The council shall set a hearing fee by resolution. The council in its sole discretion may deny or grant the applicant's request after consideration of the following criteria: (i) the reasons or the circumstances surrounding the request; (ii) the risk of disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood if the request is granted; (iii) any prior violations or complaints relating to this chapter; and (iv) the total number of animals allowed by this chapter which are presently kept or will be kept on the property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-14; Code 1997, § 6-42; Ord. No. 864, 7-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-39. - Abandoning animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or release any animal for the purpose of abandoning the animal. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-15; Code 1997, § 6-43) 
Sec. 6-40. - Animals running at large. 
    Any animal found at large contrary to the provisions of this article shall be seized, impounded and disposed of as provided in this article; provided, however, that if such animal shall be elusive and incapable of being seized, the department of public safety shall have the authority to destroy such animal forthwith. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-16; Code 1997, § 6-44) 
Secs. 6-41-6-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog licensing, MCL 287.266 et seq. 

Sec. 6-69. - Application. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning, possessing or harboring a dog, cat or wild animal to first obtain a license for that purpose, which license shall be obtainable from the city clerk upon application in writing. The application shall state the full name and address of the applicant, and shall contain a statement indicating the breed, sex, age, color and markings of such animal. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-3; Code 1997, § 6-71; Ord. No. 878, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 6-70. - Rabies vaccination required. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning, possessing or harboring a dog, cat or wild animal of the age of four months or older to have such animal immunized against rabies. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by proof of vaccination of the dog, cat or wild animal for rabies with a vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, signed by an accredited veterinarian. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-4; Code 1997, § 6-72; Ord. No. 878, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 6-71. - Issuance of license and tag; fee. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for an animal license, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license permitting the applicant to own, harbor or possess an animal. 
(b)  In addition, the city clerk shall issue a check or tag containing the license number, together with a suitable inscription indicating that the license has been issued under the provisions of this article for the animal for which application for license has been made. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of such license, the applicant shall pay to the clerk a license fee for each animal license as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, whether the animal is male, female or unsexed. A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be charged for each duplicate license issued. All license fees so received shall be deposited by the clerk into the treasury of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-5; Code 1997, § 6-73) 
Sec. 6-72. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall either expire on March 1 of each year, or upon expiration of the rabies vaccination certificate, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-6; Code 1997, § 6-74; Ord. No. 878, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 6-73. - Animals to wear collar and tag. 
    Any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal shall provide such animal with a substantial collar of leather, iron, copper, brass or other durable material, which may be elasticized, to which shall be securely attached the license check or tag issued under the provisions of this article, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove such collar or the check or tag attached thereto from any animal without the consent of the licensee. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-7; Code 1997, § 6-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 287.262. 
Sec. 6-74. - Time for licensing. 
    The provisions of this article relative to the licensing and vaccinating of animals shall apply with like effect to persons acquiring possession of dogs, cats and wild animals after the date specified, except that such application for license shall be made and such vaccination shall be performed within 48 hours after such dogs, cats or wild animals over four months of age have been acquired. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-21; Code 1997, § 6-76) 
Sec. 6-75. - Notification of sale of animal. 
    It shall be the duty of a licensee who shall sell or dispose of any animal licensed under the provisions of this article to notify the clerk of such fact within 48 hours after sale or disposition of such animal, and to furnish information as to the new owner thereof and such owner's address. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-22; Code 1997, § 6-77) 
Secs. 6-76-6-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VICIOUS DOGS AND OTHER VICIOUS ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq. 

Sec. 6-94. - Vicious dogs and other vicious animals prohibited. 
(a)  Keeping pit bull terriers prohibited. Because of the great inherent danger to the public health, welfare and safety, no person shall own, harbor or keep any dog commonly described as a pit bull terrier within the city. The term "pit bull terrier," as used in this section, shall be defined as any of the following: 
(1)  A bull terrier breed of dog. 
(2)  A Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog. 
(3)  An American Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog. 
(4)  An American pit bull terrier breed of dog. 
(5)  A dog of mixed breed or of other breed than the breeds listed in this subsection, which breed or mixed breed is known as a pit bull dog or pit bull terrier and has the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of any of the breeds listed in this subsection or any combination thereof. 
Any such dog shall be impounded by an animal warden and held until a determination is made by a court of competent jurisdiction that the animal is a pit bull terrier. The court shall order that any dog determined to be a pit bull terrier shall be destroyed or removed from the city. 
(b)  Keeping vicious animal prohibited; exception. No person shall own, harbor or keep a vicious dog or vicious animal. This subsection shall not apply to guard dogs maintained for security purposes, provided that such guard dog has been professionally trained for that purpose and the nature of the dog is noted upon the license application at the time such license is issued. As used in this subsection, the term "vicious dog" means: 
(1)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, or to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(2)  Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites or has attacked or bitten a human being; or 
(3)  Any dog which, without provocation, seriously injures or kills another dog or domestic animal. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-9; Code 1997, § 6-101) 
Sec. 6-95. - Administrative hearings concerning vicious dogs. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Administrative hearing officer means the city administrator or the acting city administrator. 
    Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, or to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(2)  Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites or has attacked or bitten a human being. 
(b)  Hearing required. Whenever a violation ticket is issued by a member of the department of public safety or the animal warden of the city which complaint alleges that a person is in possession of or is harboring a vicious dog, such person shall also be given a notice of administrative hearing, which notice shall contain a date and time for an administrative hearing whereat the administrative hearing officer will make a determination whether such animal meets the definition of a vicious dog and whether or not the animal shall be removed from the city pending the adjudication of the complaint by the court. The notice of hearing shall establish a hearing date not later than three working days from and after the date of the issuance of the complaint alleging the harboring or possession of a vicious dog and notify the person of the administrative hearing fee as set by council resolution from time to time. The fee shall be paid to the municipal court as court costs. The hearing date may be adjourned by the administrative hearing officer at the request of the party to whom the violation ticket was issued, but such adjournment shall not be for a period longer than five working days. 
(c)  Hearing procedure. 
(1)  At the administrative hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall receive and review any reports of the public safety department concerning the events preceding the issuance of the complaint of possessing or harboring a vicious dog, and shall hear and consider any statement of the complainant in such matter or any witnesses to such events and any comments or statement of the owner or person alleged to be in possession or harboring the dog involved in the complaint. 
(2)  The administrative hearing officer shall determine, based upon information received at the administrative hearing, the following: 
a.  The name of the owner or person in possession of or harboring the alleged vicious dog. 
b.  Whether such dog did or does meet the provisions of the definition of vicious dog contained in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Determination. After conducting the hearing provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the hearing officer shall prepare a written report of his findings of fact and conclusions as to whether the dog involved does in fact meet the definition of a vicious dog. 
(e)  Order to remove dog from city. If the conclusion of the administrative hearing officer is that the dog is a vicious dog as defined in subsection (a) of this section, the administrative hearing officer may order that the owner or person harboring such dog shall cause such dog to be removed from the city and remain outside of the city until the original vicious dog complaint is adjudicated by the municipal court. A copy of the administrative hearing officer's order that the dog shall be removed from the city and remain outside of the city pending the adjudication of the court complaint shall be personally delivered and served upon the person found to be the owner of the dog or person in possession or harboring such dog. The order shall provide that the owner or person in possession of or harboring such dog shall have the dog removed from the city within 24 hours of receipt of such notice. 
(f)  Failure to abide by order of hearing officer. Should the owner or person in possession or harboring such dog determined to be a vicious dog, after receiving the order of the administrative hearing officer directing that such dog be removed from the city and remain outside of the city until the court has adjudicated the original complaint that such dog is a vicious dog, fail to abide by such order, such person shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this Code and may be proceeded against for such violation. 
(g)  Violation. Each day that the owner or person in possession of or harboring such vicious dog which has been ordered to be removed from the city fails to remove such dog from the city shall be deemed to be a separate violation of this Code, and upon conviction thereof such person shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-21-1-8-21-6; Code 1997, § 6-102) 
Sec. 6-96. - State law. 
    Nothing in this division prevents the city from pursuing dangerous animal proceedings under state law. 
Secs. 6-97-6-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 

Sec. 6-119. - Office created. 
    The position of the animal control officer is hereby created in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-24; Code 1997, § 6-131) 
Sec. 6-120. - Appointment. 
    The city administrator may designate one of the employees of the city as the animal control officer. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-25; Code 1997, § 6-132) 
Sec. 6-121. - Equipment. 
    The animal control officer shall be issued equipment for the performance of the duties of animal control officer but shall not be permitted to carry a pistol or revolver, handcuffs or a blackjack while on duty. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-27; Code 1997, § 6-134) 
Sec. 6-122. - Duties. 
    The animal control officer shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article pertaining to the owning, possessing or harboring of dogs, and the licensing and immunization of dogs in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-28; Code 1997, § 6-135) 
Sec. 6-123. - Authority to impound or destroy dogs running at large. 
    The animal control officer shall have the power to seize, impound and dispose of dogs found at large in the city in violation of this article, in the manner provided by this article. If such dog is incapable of being seized, the animal control officer shall have the power and authority to destroy such dog forthwith. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-29; Code 1997, § 6-136) 
Sec. 6-124. - Enforcement powers. 
    The animal control officer shall not have the authority to make an arrest, but may issue ordinance violation tickets or sign ordinance violation complaints and prosecute such tickets and complaints. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-30; Code 1997, § 6-137) 
Sec. 6-125. - Animal control officer to be under jurisdiction of department of public safety. 
    The animal control officer, when acting as such, shall be under the jurisdiction of the department of public safety, but shall not be considered a member of such department. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-31; Code 1997, § 6-138) 
Sec. 6-126. - Office to be part-time position. 
    The performance of the duties of the animal control officer shall be considered as part of the duties of the employee so designated as an employee of the city, and such position shall not be considered a full-time position or office. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-32; Code 1997, § 6-139) 
Sec. 6-127. - Care of impounded animals. 
    All impounded animals, whether impounded for observation or otherwise, shall be delivered to a veterinarian for safekeeping and destruction if necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11-33; Code 1997, § 6-140) 
Secs. 6-128-6-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RODENT CONTROL 

Sec. 6-153. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means any building which is accessory to the main building. 
    Occupant means the individual, partnership or corporation that has the use of or occupies any building, structure or vacant land. 
    Owner means the individual, partnership or corporation that is listed on the last tax assessment records of the building, structure or vacant land. 
    Rodent means any variety of species of rats. 
    Rodent extermination means the elimination of rats from a building, structure or vacant land by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing or similar means, so that there is no evidence of rat infestation remaining. 
    Rodent harborage means any condition which provides food, water, shelter or protection for rodents, thus favoring their multiplication or continued existence in, under or outside of a building, structure, yard, alleyway or vacant land. 
(Code 1997, § 6-166; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-154. - Conditions permitting rodent harborage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to permit a condition of rodent harborage to exist in any building or structure or on any occupied or vacant land. 
(Code 1997, § 6-167; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-155. - Requirements for prevention of rodent harborage. 
    All owners and/or occupants in the city, in order to prevent rodent harborage, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Stored material, such as firewood as defined in section 8-403, coal, pipe, boxes, wood, building materials and similar materials shall be neatly stored up off the ground at least eight inches, shall be piled no higher than four feet above ground level and shall not be stored in any front yard or required side yard. In addition to these requirements, storage of firewood will also be subject to chapter 8, article XIII. 
(2)  All garbage and debris, not including properly composted material, shall be stored inside unless kept in metal or ratproof containers with tightfitting lids and shall be placed at the curb on the day before collection, as prescribed by ordinance. 
(3)  All lots, vacant or occupied, and all buildings and structures shall be kept free of all litter, garbage and debris at all times. 
(4)  No person shall feed wild birds or animals with other than commercially available bird food, including seed, suet and other commercially available feed in a suitable container for the distribution of such birdseed. Such container shall be elevated at least 48 inches above ground level. In the event the city, through one of its designated departments, inspectors or employees, determines that the feeding of wild birds or animals is a cause or a contributing factor to rodent harborage, the city, through its building official, shall declare that the lot from which feeding is occurring is a no-feeding zone for a period of no less than 60 days and no more than 180 days. 
(Code 1997, § 6-168; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-156. - Inspections. 
    The city, through one of its designated departments, inspectors or employees, has the option to and shall be authorized to inspect every reported rodent-infested building, structure or vacant land and to make a determination of whether there is rodent harborage or infestation. 
(Code 1997, § 6-169; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-157. - Notice of violations. 
    When any structure, building, yard, alleyway or vacant land is found to be in violation of this article, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified in writing of such violation and corrective measures that are to be taken to eliminate such violation and that said notice shall be complied with within a specified period of time, being no less than ten days. Such notice is sufficient if sent by first class mail, certified mail and posted in a conspicuous part of the building, structure or vacant land. 
(1)  When any structure, building or vacant land is found to have unlawful accumulations of any materials, debris or garbage which may constitute a cause or a contributing factor of rat harborage, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified to store such accumulations as required by this article or to remove such accumulations from the property. 
(2)  When any structure, building or vacant land is found to be rodent-infested, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified to take immediate rodent extermination measures and to continue same until all evidence of rodent-infestation is eliminated. 
(Code 1997, § 6-170; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-158. - Failure to comply; extermination by city; costs. 
    Upon the failure of any owner and/or occupant to comply with the directives of any notice issued by the city pursuant to this article, the city has the option to and shall be authorized to take reasonable and appropriate measures that are necessary to remove unlawful accumulations and to exterminate for rodents, and the costs thereof shall be collected in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1997, § 6-171; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-159. - Collection of costs as taxes. 
    The owner of such property shall be notified of the amount for such costs as incurred by the city, by first class mail, certified mail and posting at the address shown on the records. Upon failure of the owner to pay same within 30 days after mailing of the notice of the amount, the city shall add same to the next city tax roll, and it shall be collected in the same manner as provided by law as a single lot assessment. 
(Code 1997, § 6-172; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 6-21-2004) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Hours limited. 
(a)  Construction work and equipment generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or cause to be used or operated within the city any steam, gasoline or motor-driven or powered excavating, grading, construction and/or erection equipment, or like or similar equipment, which, by reason of its use or operation, creates or has a tendency to create the emission of odors, fumes or smoke, or which creates noise or vibration, resulting in the disturbance of the peace and quiet of the city upon any Sunday or legal holiday prior to 12:00 noon, or upon any other day of the week prior to 7:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  Piledrivers and similar equipment. Any construction work involving the driving of piles into the ground using a piledriver or similar equipment shall be limited to the time between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., local time, weekdays and shall not be conducted on Sundays. 
(c)  Variances. The city administrator or his designated representative may grant a variance from the restrictions contained in this section upon determining that a necessity exists for extending the permitted hours of operation. Any such variance shall be in writing, signed by the city administrator or his designated representative, and a copy of such authorization shall be furnished to the city council, the director of the department of public safety and the contractor engaged in such work. 
(d)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply where such use or operation of such equipment is required to safeguard life, limb or property, in which event such use or operation may be permitted upon written order of the public safety department. 
(Code 1975, §§ 6-3-1-6-3-3; Code 1997, § 10-1) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SINGLE STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 8-21. - Election to enforce. 
    The city shall enforce the standards contained in the state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 1997, § 10-127; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 4-3-2000) 
Sec. 8-22. - Enforcing agency defined. 
    The building official of the city is designated as the enforcing agency for the administration and enforcement of the code. 
(Code 1997, § 10-128; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 4-3-2000) 
Sec. 8-23. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Creation. A construction board of appeals shall be created consisting of three members. 
(b)  Membership of board. The members of the board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council and shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of the board of appeals. 
(c)  Appeals. Any interested person or the person's authorized agent may appeal a decision of the enforcing agency to the board of appeals in writing on an application obtained from the enforcing agency. The board of appeals shall hear the appeal and file its decision with a statement of reasons for the decision with the enforcing agency not more than 30 days after submission of the appeal. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal. 
(d)  Procedure. The board of appeals shall adopt rules establishing its own procedures. 
(e)  Open hearings. The business which the board of appeals may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the board of appeals held in compliance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
(f)  Appeal to state construction code commission. An interested person, or the interested person's authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the board of appeals to the state construction code commission within ten business days after filing of the decision with the enforcing agency. 
(Code 1997, § 10-129; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 4-3-2000) 
Sec. 8-24. - Fees. 
    Fees charged for the issuance of all permits, inspections, registrations, and testing shall be established by resolution adopted from time to time by the city council. Such fees shall be payable to the city and shall be used only for the operation of the enforcing agency and the construction board of appeals. 
(Code 1997, § 10-130; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 4-3-2000) 
Secs. 8-25-8-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 8-54. - Adoption. 
    A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. Violation of a provision of this code shall be considered a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1997, § 10-231; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 8-55. - Additions, deletions and amendments. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code adopted in this article is amended and revised in the following respects: 
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 111.2 is deleted. 
Sections 111.2.1 through 111.2.5 are deleted. 
Sections 111.5 and 111.6 are deleted. 
Section 304.14 is deleted. 
Section 602.3 is amended to read as follows: 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain the room temperatures specified in section 602.2 during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60 degrees Fahrenheit (16 degrees Celsius) during other hours. 
Section 602.4 is amended to read as follows: 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Every enclosed, occupied work space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain a temperature of not less that 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during all working hours. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Code 1997, § 10-232; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 753, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
Sec. 8-56. - Power of enforcement. 
    The division of safety inspection and any designated or authorized representative thereto, as may be determined by the city administrator, shall have full power and responsibility for the performance of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 10-233; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-57. - Records. 
    The division of safety inspection shall be responsible for maintaining complete records of all inspections made; certificates of permits issued; preparation of any reports and/or performance of any other duties as may be assigned by the city administrator. 
(Code 1997, § 10-234; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-58. - Other regulations. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other regulations as may be prescribed by this Code. 
(Code 1997, § 10-235; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-59. - Duties and powers of code official. 
    The division of safety inspection shall be responsible for the enforcement of all the provisions of this article relative to the maintenance of structures and premises, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by other regulations contained in this Code. 
(Code 1997, § 10-236; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-60. - Notices and orders. 
    The division of safety inspection shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to insure compliance with the requirements of this article for the safety, health and general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1997, § 10-237; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-61. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter occupy or continue to occupy, or for any owner or agent thereof, to permit the occupation or continued occupation of any dwelling, commercial building, or structure or part thereof for any purpose which dwelling or building becomes vacant or undergoes a change of occupants unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the division of safety inspection with respect to such dwelling or commercial building or structure and such certificate has not expired. A certificate of occupancy issued by the division of safety inspection for a structure or part thereof which is used for commercial purposes shall remain in effect for a four-year period from the date of issuance of such certificate. A certificate of occupancy issued by the division of safety inspection for all other dwellings or structures or parts thereof not covered by sections 8-208-8-218 shall expire upon the first change in occupancy occurring more than two years after the date of the application or reapplication of the certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall also bear this legend in capital letters of boldface type: "This certificate does not constitute any representation or warranty as to the condition of the premises, buildings or structures described herein (or any aspect of such condition): interested persons are advised and encouraged to make their own inspection of the premises in order to determine the condition thereof." 
(Code 1997, § 10-238; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-62. - Application and fees. 
    Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the owner, or designated agent, upon a form provided by the division of safety inspection and the payment of an inspection fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for an inspection of residential premises, including accessory buildings for such premises, and a like fee for inspection of a commercial building or structure. Such fee shall include one reinspection to determine compliance. In the event the applicant fails to have the property available for inspection at a time and date arranged for within the division of safety inspection resulting in the inspector making a trip to such property and being unable to make the inspection and having to reschedule the inspection, the applicant shall be required to pay an additional reinspection fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1997, § 10-239; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 776, § 1, 1-7-2002) 
Sec. 8-63. - Inspection conformance with standards. 
    Upon receipt of the application fee, the division of safety inspection shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of such premises, building or structure within ten days and if such is in conformance with the standards, as set forth in this article, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. If the premises, building or structure are not in compliance with the provisions of this article, the division of safety inspection shall give notice of any defects or violations within three working days following such an inspection and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such provisions or standards have been complied with to the reasonable satisfaction of the division of safety inspection. Reinspection to determine compliance shall be completed within 90 days from the date of the initial inspection. Such time limitation may be extended by the division of safety inspection for a period not to exceed 90 days for cause and in the sole discretion of the division of safety inspection. Failure of the applicant to have the property reinspected within the time limits set forth herein shall require a new application to be filed and inspection fees paid and a new inspection to occur prior to the issuance of any occupancy certificate. 
(Code 1997, § 10-240; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-64. - Delivery of certificate to prospective purchaser, assumption of duty to comply by same. 
    The owner shall thereafter and prior to the consummation of the sale and transfer of the premises, deliver a copy of the certificate of occupancy to the prospective purchaser and shall then file an affidavit with the division of safety inspection upon a form furnished by the said division, setting forth that the owner has delivered a copy of the certificate issued by the division of safety inspection to the prospective purchaser, transferee, lessee or tenant. If the prospective purchaser, transferee, lessee or tenant agrees to assume the duty of repairing or correcting the defects, if any, stated in the report of the division of safety inspection, described in section 8-63, the proposed purchaser, transferee, lessee, or tenant shall, on a form provided by the division of safety inspection, indicate the agreement by his signature. The owner shall thereafter cause the signed agreement of the purchaser, transferee, lessee, or tenant to be delivered to the division of safety inspection and upon delivery of same, the owner shall no longer be responsible hereunder. 
(Code 1997, § 10-241; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-65. - Notice of violation. 
    Any owner, purchaser, transferee, lessee, or tenant who has received actual or constructive notice of the existence of a notice of violation or compliance order shall be bound by such notice as of the date of the transfer without further service or notice upon him. 
(Code 1997, § 10-242; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-66. - Conditional certificate of occupancy. 
    In the event, for any reason, an owner or prospective purchaser, transferee, lessee or tenant requests that a certificate of occupancy be issued prior to complete conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and if the absence of complete conformance does not, in the judgment of the division of safety inspection, constitute material health or safety hazards, a conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the condition that complete conformance be achieved within a reasonable time specified by the division of safety inspection, but in not more than 90 days. The division of safety inspection may grant an extension of an additional 90 days for good cause. In the event of issuance of a conditional certificate of occupancy, the owner or purchaser, transferee, lessee or tenant shall notify the said division by or before the end of the time period specified by the division for achieving conformance, that said conformance has been achieved, and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued if the division of safety inspection is satisfied as to compliance by the owner or prospective purchaser, transferee, lessee or tenant. If the owner or prospective purchaser, transferee, lessee or tenant fails to comply as agreed, the division of safety inspection shall issue a violation to the owner or tenant of the property. 
(Code 1997, § 10-243; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-67. - Credentials. 
    Any representative of the division of safety inspection shall disclose proper credentials before inspecting any and all buildings and premises in the performance of their duties under this article. 
(Code 1997, § 10-244; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-68. - Appeal of determination. 
(a)  Appeal of determination to planning commission. Any person who feels aggrieved by any notice of defect or with any determination made by the division of safety inspection under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal such notice of defect or determination by filing a notice of appeal to the planning commission, along with an appeal hearing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, payable to the city. Such notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter to be filed with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the notice, violation or determination being appealed and shall state the petitioner's reasons for such appeal. Upon receipt of notice of appeal, the planning commission shall conduct a hearing at its next regular meeting. The petitioner and a representative of the division of safety inspection may present such information at appeal. The planning commission shall, by majority vote of the commissioners in attendance, determine whether the notice of defect or determination made by the division of safety inspection shall be modified, vacated or remain as issued. 
(b)  Appeal of determination to city council. Any person, who feels aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal to such city council, along with an appeal hearing fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, payable to the city. Such notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter to be filed with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the notice, violation of determination being appealed and shall state the petitioner's reasons for such appeal. Upon receipt of notice of appeal, the city council shall conduct a hearing at its next regular meeting. The petitioner and a representative of the division of safety inspection may present such information at appeal. The city council shall, by majority vote of the commissioners in attendance, determine whether the notice of defect or determination made by the division of safety inspection shall be modified, vacated or remain as issued. 
(Code 1997, § 10-245; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-69. - Inspection standards. 
    The division of safety inspection shall use the following standards as the minimum acceptable conditions for the maintenance of all buildings, structures and property within the city. All buildings, structures and property inspected under the provisions of this article shall be required to be repaired or refurbished to the extent that same shall meet the minimum conditions as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Structural-Interior and exterior. 
a.  Chimney. All chimneys shall be inspected for deteriorating or crumbling tops, missing or deteriorated mortar joints or missing bricks. Chimneys with any such conditions shall require repair. All chimneys shall be equipped with a screen cover. 
b.  Roof. All roofs shall be inspected for evidence of leaks, missing shingles and small holes that would be likely to permit the entry of rainwater that would promote wood rot to structural members of the building. Any roof with such condition shall require repair sufficient to preclude water entry. Any rotten structural component shall be repaired so as to eliminate any structural hazard. 
c.  Gutters and downspouts. All gutters and downspouts shall be inspected to determine whether they are sagging or pulling away from the fascia board or other supporting member. Galvanized gutters and downspouts shall be painted to retard rust. Evidence of holes or leakage shall require repair. 
d.  Entrance porches and dust porches. 
1.  Wood porches shall be inspected for signs of deteriorated decking, missing or structurally unsound railings, unpainted or untreated wood steps which would permit rot or heaving. Any of such aforementioned conditions shall require repair or remedial action to eliminate such condition. 
2.  Concrete porches shall be inspected for evidence of structural or other significant cracks, excessive settlement, spalling or tipping affecting safety. Any porch found to have any of such conditions shall be required to be repaired by tuck-pointing, replacement or rebuilding. 
e.  Paint. Painted surfaces shall be inspected for signs of excessive peeling, blistering or flaking. Bare wood (beams, doors, etc.) shall be inspected for evidence of rot or deterioration. Defective painted surfaces shall be restored by scraping and repainting. Defective wood surfaces shall be restored by replacement if structurally unsound or by application of a wood preservative. 
f.  Debris. All walkways, basements, attics, garages and yards shall be inspected for accumulation of debris. Debris under stairwells or adjacent to furnace areas shall be removed to eliminate fire hazards. 
g.  Vermin. All structures shall be inspected to determine the existence of ratproofing. Evidence of rodent occupation shall require corrective action to eliminate such rodent population within and upon the premises. 
h.  Stairways. All stairways shall be inspected for evidence of rotten wood or inadequate structural conditions that could render such stairs unsafe under heavy loads. Any such defective condition shall require repair or replacement to strengthen such stairs so as to be safe under heavy loads. 
i.  Handrails. All handrails shall be inspected to determine that they are adequately secured and structurally sound. Any handrail not securely fastened shall be repaired. 
j.  Windows. All windows shall be inspected for signs of rotten wood and broken or cracked glass. Rotten wood shall be replaced, and glass repairs, if required, shall be made with approved safety glazing where applicable. 
k.  Doors. All doors shall be inspected. Broken doors shall be repaired or replaced. Cracked glass and peeling paint shall be repaired. Exposed wood doors shall be treated with wood preservative. Garage doors shall be in an operable condition. 
l.  Walls and ceilings. All walls and ceilings shall be inspected for areas of excessive peeling or flaking paint and cracked or deteriorated plaster, including holes in same (hairline cracks are excluded). Repairs required shall be limited to the area involved. 
m.  Floors. All wood, tile and linoleum floors shall be inspected for sections that are rotted, missing or broken. Sagging floors shall be checked to determine if the joists require additional bracing or support for safety. 
n.  Structure and basement. All basement walls shall be inspected for evidence of foundation failure. The condition thereof shall be noted on the inspection report, and repairs shall be required if the building inspector indicates in writing that the foundation failure is significant enough to require repairs for the safety of any owners or occupants. 
o.  Fences. All fences shall be inspected for rotting wood, structural soundness and shall be in good repair. In the event any fence shall be found to be in disrepair, the fence deficiency shall not be correctable by removal, without replacement of the fence or part thereof, unless the adjoining property owner shall have consented to such fence removal in writing and such consent shall have been filed with the city. 
(2)  Electrical wiring and equipment. 
a.  Circuits. All electrical circuits shall be inspected to determine whether improper splices have been made or whether the fuses contained in the circuit are of the correct load for the system. Improper splices and circuits containing improper fuses shall be repaired. 
b.  Service. All service cables and equipment shall be inspected for general good condition. Worn or frayed service lines shall be replaced if they constitute a hazard. 
c.  Extension cords. Any and all extension cords attached to walls, used instead of permanent wiring, shall not be permitted. Extension cords run under carpeting and from one room to another or through walls or ceilings shall be eliminated. 
d.  System wiring. The wiring system shall be inspected for illegal extensions of the system to provide light, heat or power. Any illegal extension shall be corrected or removed. 
e.  Illumination. Operable light fixtures shall exist in the kitchen, laundry, bathrooms, toilet rooms, hallways, furnace room and basement areas. Pendant chord fixtures shall be replaced with keyless or pull chain type fixtures. Shower room fixtures shall be approved by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL) for wet locations. 
f.  Wall switches. All kitchen, bathroom, hallways and stairways where insufficient lighting constitutes a hazard shall be equipped with a wall switch control near the entrance way to such area. 
g.  Receptacle outlets. The minimum acceptable number of receptacle outlets is one wall outlet in each habitable room, two wall outlets in any kitchen, one wall outlet in the bathroom and one wall outlet in the laundry area. 
h.  Fixtures. All broken or inoperable fixtures shall be removed or replaced. Improper connections shall be eliminated. 
(3)  Plumbing . 
a.  Waste lines. All waste lines shall be inspected for evidence of leakage. Leaking lines shall be repaired. 
b.  Fixture venting. All fixtures requiring venting shall be inspected to determine proper connections. Vent stacks through the roof shall be inspected for tightness of seal. 
c.  Water heater. The vent pipe shall be inspected for sagging and for tightness of seal to the chimney. Sagging vent pipes shall be supported or replaced. Rusted vent pipes shall be replaced. The pressure relief valve and overflow pipe shall be inspected. The pressure relief valve and overflow pipes shall be installed if they are absent. 
d.  Sprinkler system and hose connections. All sprinkler systems and hose connections shall be inspected to determine the existence of a vacuum breaker in the system. Vacuum breakers shall be required at all sprinkler system and hose connection points. 
e.  Automatic dishwashers. Automatic dishwashers shall be inspected to determine the existence of an air gap device; where none exists, it shall be installed. 
(4)  Heating. 
a.  Chimney cleanout. All chimneys shall be inspected for the existence of cleanout door with tight fit and in operating condition. Unplugged openings in the chimney shall require closing. 
b.  Vent connectors. All connecting pipes shall be inspected for sag and rusting. Sagging vent pipes shall be supported or replaced. Rusting vent pipes shall be replaced. 
c.  Leaks. Steam and hot water heating systems shall be inspected for leaks. Leaking systems shall require repair. 
d.  Controls and internal furnace equipment. All furnace controls and internal furnace equipment shall be viewed as to general appearance only. Operating condition will not be inspected or certified. 
e.  Smoke detectors. Each residence shall have a minimum of one smoke detector per level, including the basement. Such detector shall be UL listed and comply with Standard 217. Each detector shall be in operating condition. 
The above guidelines are intended to be a general summary. Specific defects applicable to individual dwellings or other structures on said premises may be enlarged upon by the inspector in his report, which is available to all parties involved in the transaction. Some items are impracticable to inspect, e.g., interior of furnace, hot water tank, footings, etc. 
(Code 1997, § 10-246; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 870, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 8-70. - Cross connections to the public water supply. 
    The division of safety inspection and any designated or authorized representative thereof, during the property inspection required by this article, shall inspect the freshwater distribution system located on the premises for the presence of cross connections to the municipal water supply system. Any such cross connection found shall be required to be corrected within a reasonable time established by the department of safety inspections commensurate with the potential hazard involved. 
(Code 1997, § 10-247; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-71. - Downspouts disconnect. 
    Downspouts shall be inspected to be certain they are disconnected from the sewer system and are in compliance with section 44-230. 
(Code 1997, § 10-248; Ord. No. 762, § 1, 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 8-72. - Costs. 
    Costs incurred by the city to enforce this article may be assessed as a single lot assessment. 
Secs. 8-73-8-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIR CONDITIONING CONDENSING UNITS 

Sec. 8-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air conditioning condensing unit means that portion of residential air conditioning equipment located outside the dwelling and containing a fan or compressor unit. 
    Notice of public hearing means a written notice sent by the city via ordinary mail to the property owners as their names and addresses appear on the city tax records, at least seven days prior to the scheduled public hearing, advising such property owner of the nature, date, time and place of such hearing. 
    Public hearing means a hearing conducted by the city council upon the request of a petitioner seeking authority to install an air conditioning condensing unit. 
    Side yard shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in the zoning code, being chapter 50 of this Code, except that portion of the side yard within ten feet of the front of any residential home which for the purpose of this division shall be deemed to be within the front yard. 
(Code 1975, § 6-21-1; Code 1997, § 10-91) 
Sec. 8-123. - Installation permit. 
    Permits to install air conditioning condensing units shall be required for installation sites in front and side yards. Requirements for such permits are: 
(1)  Side yards. The owner of the residential property nearest to and adjacent to the side yard of the proposed site shall have consented, in writing, to such installation and such consent shall be filed with the city at the time such permit is issued, or if the written consent of the adjacent property owner nearest the side yard of the proposed installation site cannot be obtained, then a permit for such installation shall not be issued unless approved by the city council after a public hearing is held on such petition and notice of such public hearing is mailed by the city to the property owner of the residential property nearest and adjacent to the property containing the proposed installation site. 
(2)  Front yards. The owners of the residential property on both sides adjacent to the property whereat the proposed installation site is located and the owners of the three residential properties directly across the street from the property wherein the proposed installation site is located shall consent in writing to such proposed installation and such consents shall be filed with the city at the time such permit is issued, or if such consents cannot be obtained, then a permit for such installation shall not be issued unless approved by the city council after a public hearing thereon, notice of such hearing being mailed to the property owners on both sides adjacent to the property whereat the proposed installation site is located and the owners of the three residential properties directly across the street from the property whereat the proposed installation site is located. 
(3)  Side yards adjacent to the street on corner lots. A permit for the installation of an air conditioning condensing unit to be located in a side yard adjacent to a street on a corner lot shall not be issued unless approved in writing by the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 6-21-2; Code 1997, § 10-92; Ord. No. 755, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
Sec. 8-124. - Fee for public hearings. 
    Any petitioner for an air conditioning condenser installation permit that requires a public hearing by the city council shall pay a hearing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city at the time of filing a request for a public hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 6-21-3; Code 1997, § 10-93) 
Secs. 8-125-8-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXTERIOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 8-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Outside security lighting means any electrically operated light, except incandescent lights without a reflecting surface and not exceeding 150 watts, mounted or installed on the exterior of any building or on or upon any exterior object located upon a property or parcel of real estate within any residential district of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 6-20-1; Code 1997, § 10-531) 
Sec. 8-148. - Prohibition. 
    No owner or tenant of any residential property shall authorize, maintain or permit the operation of outside security lighting from any residential property owned, leased, rented or under their control, which outside security lighting shines upon or onto any adjoining residential property. 
(Code 1975, § 6-20-2; Code 1997, § 10-532) 
Sec. 8-149. - Shielding. 
    The owner or tenant of any residential property where outside security lighting is installed shall not permit such lighting to operate unless such lighting is shielded in a manner so as to prevent light from such installation from shining into or upon adjoining residential property. 
(Code 1975, § 6-20-3; Code 1997, § 10-533) 
Secs. 8-150-8-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSE NUMBERS 

Sec. 8-167. - House numbering map. 
    The city engineer shall provide a so called house numbering map for the city, upon which shall be indicated the street number assigned to each building structure. Such house numbering map may be altered or added to so as to provide street numbers for properties subdivided or laid out for building development, subsequent to the preparation of the original house numbering map. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-1; Code 1997, § 10-361) 
Sec. 8-168. - Authentication of map. 
    The city engineer shall authenticate the official house numbering map under the engineer's hand and seal. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-2; Code 1997, § 10-362) 
Sec. 8-169. - Assignment of numbers. 
    The street number for all lots or plots of property shall appear on the house numbering map and the number so assigned shall be used to indicate the street number of the premises to which the number has been assigned. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-3; Code 1997, § 10-363) 
Sec. 8-170. - Duty to place number. 
    The owner and/or occupant of each and every house or building structure shall be required to place thereon, in a conspicuous place in the front part of the house or building structure, the properly assigned street number, in plain and readily distinguishable figures, numbers or letters, which shall be at least 21/2 inches and not more than six inches in height. The figures, numerals or letters shall consist of substantial and permanent materials which will adequately serve the purpose for which the same are intended to be used. In the case of commercial or business establishments accessible from a public alley, easement or rear door, the proper and correct number thereof shall be placed in a conspicuous place on both the front and rear portion of the building structure. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-4; Code 1997, § 10-364) 
Sec. 8-171. - Method of numbering. 
    All houses and building structures fronting on a public street or highway, or having access to a public alley, shall be numbered in accordance with the house numbering map prepared by the city engineer and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-5; Code 1997, § 10-365) 
Sec. 8-172. - Authority to assign. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the division of safety inspection to assign the proper number to the owner and/or occupants of all buildings or structures erected in the city. 
(b)  Upon issuance of a building permit for new structures, the division of safety inspection shall assign the proper street number to such structure in accordance with the house numbering map. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-6; Code 1997, § 10-366) 
Sec. 8-173. - Illegible or incorrect numbers. 
(a)  If any house or building structure shall be unnumbered, shall be incorrectly numbered or the number thereof shall become illegible, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the premises to cause such house or building structure to be numbered correctly or to cause an illegible number to be replaced within ten days after notification, in writing, from the division of safety inspection of the fact that there is a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be served by certified United States mail, or by personal delivery of a copy of such notice, to the owner or occupant of the premises affected, or by posting a copy of such notice on the front of the building or building structure involved. Such notice shall specify the correct number of the building or structure as such number appears on the official house numbering map of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy or deface any notice posted on the premises as provided in this section until the premises affected have been correctly and properly numbered as required by the provisions of such notice and this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8-7; Code 1997, § 10-367) 
Secs. 8-174-8-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXTERIOR BUILDING MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-200. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the permanency of desirable residential and commercial buildings, promote the stability of property values and prevent and deter the decline of real estate values and tax base within the city caused by blight, thereby advancing the general welfare of the citizens of the community. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-1; Code 1997, § 10-281) 
Sec. 8-201. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings located within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-2; Code 1997, § 10-282) 
Sec. 8-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure built on land within the city and shall include dwellings, garages, sheds, outbuildings, accessory buildings, stores and similar buildings. 
    Maintenance requirements means the minimum standards of maintenance and state of repair of the exterior of buildings as set forth in this article. 
    Owner means that person holding legal title to the parcel of real estate upon which a building is situated, according to the records of the county register of deeds. If such title is in the name of a partnership, the individual partners shall be deemed owners. If the title is in the name of a firm or corporation, the individual officers of such firm or corporation shall be deemed to be the owners for the purposes of enforcement of this article. If the parcel of real estate upon which the building is situated is subject to and sold under a land contract or similar sales agreement, the land contract vendees or purchasers shall be deemed to be the owners for the purpose of the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-3; Code 1997, § 10-283) 
Sec. 8-203. - Minimum requirements. 
    Building exteriors shall be maintained to meet or exceed the following requirements: 
(1)  Exterior painted surfaces shall not contain areas of flaking or peeling paint in an amount greater than five percent of the painted surface area. 
(2)  Gutters or downspouts shall not contain holes through such gutter or downspout material caused by rusting or oxidation, nor shall any gutters or downspouts be loose or hanging from such building by reason of deteriorated or broken fastenings. Plants shall not be permitted to grow in gutters. 
(3)  Exterior siding of buildings consisting of brick, shingles, wood, vinyl or other material shall be maintained so that such exterior siding shall protect the structure from the elements, and no area of the exterior of such building greater than five percent of the entire exterior surface of the building shall be without the exterior siding materials utilized on such surfaces. 
(4)  Porches, railings, exterior trim and decorative overhangs on buildings shall be kept in a condition of repair so as not to allow or permit such porches, railings, exterior trim and decorative overhangs to rot, collapse, pull or fall away from such structure or become weakened so as to be a danger to any person. 
(5)  The roofs of any building shall be maintained so as to prevent the exposure of the internal roof supports to the elements. 
(6)  The exterior walls of buildings shall be maintained so as to be upright and not in danger of collapse. 
(7)  Window or door openings in any building shall not be boarded or closed with plywood or other materials. Windows shall be maintained in an unbroken condition, free of cracks in the glass. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-4; Code 1997, § 10-284) 
Sec. 8-204. - Enforcement. 
    The division of safety inspection shall be chargeable with enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-5; Code 1997, § 10-285) 
Sec. 8-205. - Notice to repair. 
    The owner of any building within the city shall be notified in writing by the division of safety inspection of any violation of the minimum property maintenance requirements of this article. Such notice shall list the street address of the building and describe the part or portion of the building needing correction. The owner shall be allowed ten days to correct such deficiency, which time period may be extended for an additional period not to exceed 90 days upon application of the owner for good cause. Failure by the owner to cause the building to be repaired or refurbished in compliance with the minimum maintenance standards of this article after having received notice as provided in this section and within the time allowed for such compliance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-6; Code 1997, § 10-286) 
Sec. 8-206. - Appeal rights. 
    Any owner receiving notice of a violation of this article and believing such notice to be unwarranted may appeal the notice of violation to the city council within 30 days from the date of such notice by submitting a notice or letter claiming an appeal and setting forth the reasons that the owner believes establish that the notice to repair was unwarranted. The city council shall hold a hearing on the matter and receive information from the division of safety inspection and the owner. The city council may then determine to modify or cancel such notice to repair or may uphold the determination of the division of safety inspection and require that the building be repaired or refurbished to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-19-7; Code 1997, § 10-287) 
Sec. 8-207. - Paint color requirements in commercial zoning districts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Colonial or Early American paint colors means those paint colors in the color chart on file with the building department. 
(b)  Colors permitted. Any building owner, agent, tenant or lessee who intends to paint a newly constructed or remodeled building or intends to repaint the exterior of an existing building located within the commercial zoning district of the city shall limit such paint colors on file with the building department. 
(c)  Duty of division of safety inspection. The division of safety inspection shall maintain color charts showing paint colors for the use of the public in selecting paint colors that will be in conformance with the provisions of this section. The council may make changes to the color chart by resolution. 
(Code 1997, § 10-288; Ord. No. 687, § 1, 5-15-1995) 
Sec. 8-208. - Purpose and scope of rental property provisions; compliance with codes; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. In order to preserve the value of existing property, safeguard the public, prevent blight and encourage nonoccupant owners to maintain their rental property within the city, it is necessary to institute a program to register and inspect nonowner occupied rental property in the city and to continue to inspect on a periodic basis. Therefore, these sections require a minimum level of acceptability for nonowner occupied rental property. The standards adopted are the comprehensive regulations of the city property maintenance code and the exterior building maintenance code, sections 8-54-8-71 and 8-200-8-207. Owners of nonowner-occupied rental property as defined by this article are required to comply with these codes and the other provisions of the Municipal Charter, Municipal Code, or ordinances, as amended. 
(b)  Compliance. It is the policy of the city that its staff will work cooperatively with landlords, tenants, neighborhood associations and other interested groups and individuals to help ensure safe, decent and sanitary rental housing through the systematic registration and inspection of rental properties pursuant to the requirements prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Absentee owner means the owner of rental property that lives outside the city limits. 
    Certificate of approval means a document issued by the building official or designated agent that verifies that the property meets the requirements of this article. A certificate of approval is similar to a certificate of occupancy issued under the property maintenance code, except that a certificate of approval relates to rental properties subject to this article. 
    Dwelling means all of the following as defined in section 50-1: 
(1)  Dwelling; 
(2)  Multiple dwelling; 
(3)  One-family dwelling; 
(4)  Two-family dwelling; 
(5)  Two-family income dwelling; and 
(6)  Dwelling unit. 
    Lease means any arrangement providing for the possession or occupancy of a dwelling pursuant to a written or unwritten lease or other agreement regardless of the length of time involved. 
    Nonowner-occupied means a dwelling not occupied by its owner or by members of his family. If an owner occupies one unit of a two-family dwelling, the entire dwelling is not subject to the terms of this article. 
    Occupied means all of the following as defined by section 50-1: arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented, leased or intended to be inhabited, not necessarily for dwelling purposes. 
    Owner means any person who shall: 
(1)  Have the legal or equitable title to a dwelling with or without the accompanying actual possession thereof; 
(2)  Be the land contract purchaser of any premises or dwelling; or 
(3)  Have the charge, care, custody, possession or control of any dwelling as owner or agent of the owner or as fiduciary. 
    Rental property means any dwelling which is leased or rented; except hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living/independent living facilities, or homes for the aged which are licensed by the state, provided that copies of the state inspection report and license for these facilities shall be submitted to the building official annually. 
(Code 1997, § 10-289; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-209. - Registration of rental properties; inspection. 
(a)  Generally. Owners of multiresidential rental properties and owners of nonowner-occupied rental property shall register with the building department all such properties owned by them within the city no later than November 1, 2004. Any property converted or used for rental property after November 1, 2004, must also comply with this article. All absentee owners and corporate/fiduciary owners (including, but not limited to, owners such as partnerships, limited liability companies and other similar forms of ownership) shall designate a registered agent located in the state. At the time of registration, all owners shall request an inspection of the premises. 
(b)  Violation for failure to register. Failure to register such property and/or failure to request an inspection prior to November 1, 2004, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Required information. A property owner for any rental property shall file a declaration with the city in a form prescribed by the city, which includes owner information, plus a current list of all persons who are residents of such a dwelling pursuant to the rental or lease agreement for purposes of taxes, school enrollment, issuance of park passes or any other lawful purpose. The declaration shall specifically identify the residents of each rental property including names and whether each resident/tenant is an adult or minor. If a resident or tenant is added during the term of a lease, the owner shall be responsible for filing with the city an amended list to add such additional party and file the same with the city within 30 days of any change. 
(d)  Owners holding current certificates of occupancy and general requirements in the event of change of tenants or ownership. 
(1)  Current certificates of occupancy. Owners holding valid certificates of occupancy or conditional certificates of occupancy as of November 1, 2004: 
a.  Must register in accordance with this article; and 
b.  Are excused from the inspection requirements of this article unless one of the following occurs: 
1.  The certificate of occupancy or conditional certificate of occupancy expires or becomes invalid. 
2.  There is a change of tenants. 
3.  There is a change in ownership. 
(2)  Owners not holding certificates of occupancy. Owners not holding valid certificates of occupancy or conditional certificates of occupancy as of November 1, 2004, must comply with all provisions of this article effective November 1, 2004. 
(3)  Owners receiving a new certificate of approval under this article. If there is a change of tenants or ownership during the two-year certificate of approval period, the following additional rules apply: 
a.  The owner must reregister. 
b.  The owner must schedule and allow an inspection. 
c.  The building official has the discretion to waive the inspection fees if he determines that the circumstances have not dramatically changed since issuance of the last certificate and the inspection time is minimal. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  After November 1, 2004, or upon discovery of an owner's failure to request an inspection or reregister, the city shall have the authority to inspect all nonowner-occupied rental property during regular inspection hours upon reasonable notice and then require compliance with this article. 
(2)  In addition to regular inspections, an inspection is authorized if a municipal public safety official or other municipal official issues a citation or receives complaints evidencing a high incident of recurrent or uncorrected violations of any provision of the Charter, this Code or other ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 10-290; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-210. - Certificate of approval required. 
    Any owner of nonowner-occupied rental property subject to this article shall obtain a certificate of approval for the rental property every two years. The start of the two-year period begins on the date the application is submitted and the fee is paid, whichever is later. In the event of a change of tenants or change of ownership within the two-year period, the owner is responsible for reregistering the property within 30 days of change of occupants or ownership. No owner shall permit occupancy of his rental property unless such owner has first obtained a certificate of approval of the property in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 10-291; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-211. - Certificate of approval contents. 
    The certificate of approval shall state that the building department or its designee has inspected the rental property and that the department has determined that the property complies with the minimum standards of habitability adopted by this article. The certificate shall bear the following legend in capital letters: 
THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY AS TO THE CONDITION OF THE PREMISES DESCRIBED HEREIN (OR ANY ASPECT OF SUCH CONDITION), AND INTERESTED PERSONS ARE ADVISED AND ENCOURAGED TO MAKE THEIR OWN INSPECTIONS OF THE PREMISES IN ORDER TO DETERMINE THE CONDITION THEREOF. THE SUBJECT PREMISES HAVE BEEN VISUALLY INSPECTED BY A CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER EMPLOYED FOR THIS PURPOSE. THE INSPECTION AND RELATED REPORTS ARE EVIDENCE ONLY OF WHAT HAS BEEN OBSERVED AND WHAT HE/SHE WAS ABLE TO REASONABLY OBSERVE AT THE TIME OF INSPECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MINIMUM STANDARDS ESTABLISHED HEREUNDER. 
(Code 1997, § 10-292) 
Sec. 8-212. - Application and fees. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of approval may be made by the owner or his designated agent upon a form provided by the building department and payment of an inspection fee. The fee schedule is as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(1)  All multiple dwellings are subject to the registration requirements of this article. However, inspections of multiple dwellings shall be conducted annually based on the fee schedule. For multiple dwellings the annual inspection will include inspection of the exteriors, the interior common elements, and a random inspection of the interior units in the building officials discretion based on the general condition of the property as a whole. 
(2)  The inspection fee shall include one reinspection to determine compliance. In the event the applicant fails to have the property available for inspection at the time and date arranged by the building department in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by reference in this article, and the inspection is required to be rescheduled, the applicant shall be required to pay an additional reinspection fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Further, an additional sum of 50 percent of the original inspection fee will be charged for reinspection of the structure/premises, if necessary, to determine that corrections have been completed in order to issue the final certificate of approval in the event of the first inspection reveals the corrections were not properly completed. 
(b)  Council may amend the fees in this section by resolution. 
(Code 1997, § 10-293) 
Sec. 8-213. - Inspection; appeals; time for compliance. 
(a)  Inspection. Upon receipt of the inspection fee, the building official or a designated agent shall inspect the property, buildings or structures. If the inspection reveals compliance with the standards, as adopted by this article, a certificate of approval shall be issued after posting such approval determination notice at the city hall for no less than three days prior to final issuance. If the premises, buildings or structures are not in compliance with the provisions of this article or has been cited for municipal nuisance violations under the provisions of the Charter or the Code, the application may be denied. A public nuisance is hereby declared and defined to include the commission, creation or maintenance of any violation under the Code, and includes whatever is forbidden by any other provision of the Code that relates to annoyance or injury to another or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public. If only building violations are cited, the building department shall give notice of any defects, violations and necessary repairs following such an inspection, and a certificate of approval shall not be issued until such provisions or standards have been complied with to the reasonable satisfaction of the building official. Such notice shall list the street address of the building and describe the part or portion of the building needing correcting, and a time limit within which to correct all violations. 
(b)  Appeal. An owner or any person who feels aggrieved by an action of the building official in issuing or not issuing a certificate of approval, shall have a right to appeal to the city council in accordance with section 8-68(a) and (b). 
(c)  Mediation. In the event a citation is issued under this article in the municipal court, the municipal court adjudicating the matter has the option of ordering the case into mediation. In the event an appeal is taken to the city council under this article, the council, sitting on the record as a neighborhood appeal commission, may order mediation prior to deciding the appeal. Mediation will be in the form and manner as detailed by the court or council. 
(d)  Preservation of rights. In addition to the rights provided to persons under this article, persons' rights to seek redress in the event of a private nuisance are hereby preserved. 
(Code 1997, § 10-294; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-214. - Conditional certificate of approval. 
    A conditional certificate of approval may be issued by the building official based on the standards found in section 8-66. 
(Code 1997, § 10-295; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-215. - Bonds. 
    The building division shall have the authority to require submission of a cash or surety bond in the amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of repairs as determined by the building official prior to issuance of a conditional certificate of approval or in the event the department agrees to extend the time for compliance or in the event the inspection of the premises, buildings or structures after the time set forth for compliance has expired reveals that all the deficiencies have not been corrected. The bond or any monies deposited as same shall be refunded within 30 days after certificate of approval is issued. 
(Code 1997, § 10-296; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-216. - Enforcement-Search warrant. 
    If the building department has reason to believe that any premises are being occupied in violation of this article or any term, condition or order of the building official or his designee, including the failure to register for an inspection by the dates specified in this article or established by the building department or council, anyone or a combination of the following steps may be taken: 
(1)  The owner or occupant will be contacted and notified of the requirements of this article; and an inspection will be requested. 
(2)  If permission is refused, a search warrant shall be requested from the municipal court. 
(3)  If the warrant request is granted, the premises will be inspected and the owner or occupant will be given written notice of any violations. The owner or other responsible party will be billed for the regular inspection fee, any court costs and attorney fees incurred in securing the search warrant. If not paid, these amounts will become a lien on the property. 
(4)  If the violations are not corrected within the time limits set by the building department, charges may be brought under this article or other applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 10-297; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-217. - Compliance by owner/nonowner/owner's representative. 
    Both the owner and occupant are responsible for article compliance. Either the owner or the occupant, or both, may be charged with violations of this article, as well as separate charges for other violations of city ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 10-298; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 8-218. - Violations. 
    Violation of any requirement for compliance, term or any order or condition set forth in this article or violation of any such requirement imposed by the building official or his designee made hereunder or occupancy of any premises in contravention of this article or in contravention of a conditional or regular certificate of approval shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor offense, the municipal court may terminate a certificate of approval and order a reinspection of the property. Costs incurred by the city to enforce this article may be assessed as a single lot assessment. 
(Code 1997, § 10-299; Ord. No. 798, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 8-219-8-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ABANDONED AND FORECLOSED STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 831, adopted July 12, 2010, repealed art. VIII, §§ 8-245-8-255 entitled "Vacant Dwelling Units". Ord. No. 832 also adopted on July 12, 2010 replaced art. VIII as set out herein. Former art. VIII derived from: Code 1975, §§ 6-13-1-6-13-11; and Code 1997, §§ 10-401-10-411. 

Sec. 8-245. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned means a property that is vacant and subject to one of the following situations: (1) is under a current complaint for foreclosure or notice of foreclosure, notice of trustee's sale, or pending tax sale; (2) property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure; (3) any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
    Accessible property means a property that is accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall, or other means. 
    Accessible structure means a structure or building that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
    Agreement means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after a sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
    Assignment of rents means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a mortgage from one lender or entity to another. 
    Beneficiary means a lender under a note secured by a mortgage, or a beneficiary's assignee. 
    Building official means the Building Official of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods or his or her designee. 
    Buyer means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale or similar document. 
    Dangerous building means any building or structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by section 8-54 of this Code. 
    Days means consecutive calendar days. 
    Deed in lieu of foreclosure means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder or a mortgage upon consent of the beneficiary of the mortgage. 
    Default means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation of any kind. 
    Distressed means a property that is under a current notice of default or notice of trustee's sale or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor defaults. 
    Local means within 40 road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
    Mortgage means an instrument by which title to real estate is pledged to a third party trustee or beneficiary as security for a real estate loan. 
    Neighborhood standard means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a 300-foot radius of an individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, and any other abandoned property within the 300-foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
    Out-of-area means in excess of 40 road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
    Owner means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property, excluding governmental agencies. 
    Owner of record means the person having recorded title to the property. 
    Property means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
    Residential building means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, including any buildings or structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as residential whether or not it is legally permitted or zoned for such use. 
    Secure or secured means such measures as may be directed by the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Building Official or his or her designee that render the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining padlocking of gates, repair or boarding of doors, broken windows or other openings. In the case of broken windows, securing means the reglazing or boarding of the window. In addition, secure or secured means closing and locking widows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that may allow a person to access the interior of a property or structure(s). 
    Trustee means the person, firm, or corporation holding a mortgage on a property, sometimes referred to as the lender or mortgagee, or a trustee's assignee. 
    Trustor means a borrower under a mortgage, who pledges property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt, sometimes referred to as a mortgagor, or a trustor's assignee. 
    Vacant means a building or structure that is not legally occupied, and exhibits evidence of vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-246. - Inspection and registration required. 
(a)  Upon default by the trustor, any beneficiary or trustee, who holds a mortgage on a property located within the city, shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the mortgage, to the extent permitted by law or under the mortgage within five days after either: (1) filing a complaint for foreclosure (if foreclosure is by judicial action); or (2) publishing a notice of foreclosure (if foreclosure is by advertisement). If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall register the property within ten days of the inspection with the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Building Department on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected monthly, to the extent permitted by law and the mortgage, by the beneficiary/trustee or his designee, until: (1) the trustor or other party remedies the default; or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall register the property within ten days of that inspection with the building official on forms provided by the city. 
(c)  In either case the registration shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property. 
(d)  An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be received no later than January 31 of the year due. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
(e)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. Such properties shall be registered with the city in accordance with the terms of this section upon transfer even if occupied at the time of transfer. 
(f)  Properties subject to this article shall remain under the requirements and standards of this article as long as they remain vacant. 
(g)  A person, firm, or corporation that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration to the building official within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-247. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Vacant and abandoned properties subject to this section shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry bush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circular, flyers, notices, and discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is vacant or abandoned. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
(c)  Front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was required. Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, groundcovers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Landscape does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
(d)  Maintenance includes but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning, and mowing of required landscape, and removal of all trimmings as required by chapter 46 of this Code. 
(e)  Pools and spas shall be either kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants or debris, or drained and kept dry, or drained and covered. In any case, properties with pools or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the current State of Michigan Building Code. 
(f)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, and restrictions or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property, and does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of general obligations regarding property maintenance found in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-248. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this section shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  If the property is owned by a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this article and any other applicable laws are being met. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-249. - Additional authority. 
    In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this article or other chapters of this Code, the building official or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner or owner of record of any property affected by this article to implement additional maintenance or security measures including but not limited to, securing any/all door, window, or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline or potential vandalism of the property, or further secured the property as defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-250. - Fees. 
    The annual fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-251. - Failure to secure and maintain. 
    If a property has not been maintained or secured, the city or its contracted agent, may maintain or secure the property and assess costs to the owner, beneficiary or trustee. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-252. - Re-occupancy. 
    A property subject to this article may not be occupied until all outstanding costs, assessments or liens owed to the city have been paid in full and a certificate of occupancy or approval is issued in accordance with section 8-61 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-253. - Violation/abatement. 
    Violations of this article may be enforced as allowed in this Code, and shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Alternatively, at the sole discretion of the city, the city may issue to the beneficiary/trustee/owner or owner of record a notice to abate. The notice to abate shall include: 
(1)  The nature and location of the violation; 
(2)  The time within which the violation must be abated; 
(3)  Notice that the city may act to abate the violation if it is not abated by the owner within a reasonable time stated in the notice, which may not exceed 15 days; 
(4)  Notice that the cost of such action by the city, plus an administrative fee, shall be a personal debt of the owner, which may be assessed as a lien against the property until paid; and 
(5)  Notice that any refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-254. - Authorization for city abatement. 
    Upon failure of a beneficiary/trustee/owner or owner of record to abate a violation as ordered in a notice to abate, the city may abate the nuisance. This abatement may be performed by the city, by a contract vendor, or by other means determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-255. - Administrative fees. 
    The fees necessary for the administration of this article shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. Such administrative fees shall be assessed for the city's time involved in the following: 
(1)  Notice to abate; 
(2)  Search warrant; 
(3)  Contact request or warning of abatement action; 
(4)  Warning letter; 
(5)  Civil infraction preparation; 
(6)  Additional inspections; 
(7)  Vehicle removal; 
(8)  Attorney fees; 
(9)  Denied entry. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-256. - Charge for costs. 
    When the city has abated a cited nuisance, the cost of abatement, plus any applicable administrative charges as established by city council resolution, shall be billed to the property owner or beneficiary/trustee. Such billing shall be a debt of the owner or beneficiary/trustee to the city, which may be assessed as a lien against the property, including interest thereon, until paid. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-257. - Nonforeclosed vacant property. 
    If a property is not in foreclosure but is otherwise vacant as defined by this article, the owner shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Maintain the property in accordance with section 8-246. 
(2)  Register the property in accordance with section 8-246. 
(3)  Pay the fee identified pursuant to section 8-249 herein. 
(4)  Keep the property secure in accordance with sections 8-246 and 8-247 herein. 
(5)  Not permit re-occupancy until all outstanding costs, assessments and liens owed to the city are paid in full. 
(6)  If the owner leases or lets the property, the owner shall comply with section 8-208 of the City Code in addition to these requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-258. - Penalty. 
    In the event a violation is pursued as a civil infraction, violations are subject to the fines found in section 2-813, plus other penalties applicable under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-259. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this article may appeal in accordance with the procedures applicable to municipal civil infractions or abatement actions. 
(Ord. No. 832, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 8-260-8-273. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FENCES 

Sec. 8-274. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjacent property means a property having a common boundary line. 
    Fence means any structure erected or placed along or within four feet of the property line to act as a boundary marker or erected for the purpose of restricting access to or from a lot or parcel of land, whether enclosing all or a part of said lot or parcel in all zoning districts. 
    Front yard means that portion of the front yard established between the sidewalk and ten feet behind the front most main building line. If a sidewalk does not exist, the front yard shall mean that portion of the front yard established between the end of the city right-of-way and ten feet behind the front most main building line. 
    Ornamental tops means wood, vinyl or metal decorative caps placed on the tops of fence posts, corners, ends or gateposts. 
    Property grade line, for determining the height of a fence or landscaping used in place of fencing, means the level of the ground or pavement adjacent to the fence or landscaping. 
    Rear yard means that portion of the yard between the rearmost corner of the main building line and the rear property line. 
    Side yard means that portion of the yard between the residential home and side property line, beginning at ten feet back from the front most main building line to the rearmost corner of the main building line. 
(Code 1997, § 10-321; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-275. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of premises to erect, place or install any fence in violation of the provisions of this article. No resident may plant or permit the planting of any shrubs, bushes or hedges that will be used as fences in a front yard in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 10-322; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-276. - Permit. 
    Before any fence shall be erected, placed or installed, a permit therefore shall be obtained from the building inspector, upon application in writing. Such application shall set forth a description of the fence proposed to be erected, placed or installed and the location thereof, together with such additional information as shall be required to evidence compliance with the provisions of this article. Upon the issuance of a permit for the erection, placing or installing of a fence, a permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid. 
(Code 1997, § 10-323; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-200; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-20150) 
Sec. 8-277. - Landscape screening-Front yard. 
    Shrubs, bushes or hedges, to be used in the place of front yard fencing, shall be limited to a height of 30 inches from the property grade line. Such shrubs, bushes or hedges shall be kept trimmed by the owner or occupant of the property so as not to extend over the property lot line. 
(Code 1997, § 10-324; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-278. - Fence ownership. 
    Ownership of a fence shall be determined by the fence permit applicant as follows: 
(1)  By a search of permits issued to the property in question and adjacent properties; or 
(2)  By mutual agreement of the adjacent property owners. If a fence is located upon a lot line and ownership cannot be determined, then each party owning property adjacent to the fence shall be responsible for the care, upkeep and maintenance of the fence facing their property; or 
(3)  By proof showing that a current or former property owner built the fence; or 
(4)  The building official may determine ownership by other means if subsections (1), (2) or (3) are insufficient. 
(Code 1997, § 10-325; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-279. - General requirements and maintenance. 
    The following are general requirements for fences: 
(1)  All fences shall be constructed of open lattice work of metal, wood, vinyl or of woven wire in such a manner so that there shall be a minimum of two-inch openings throughout 50 percent of the length or height of the fence. 
(2)  Fences shall not be constructed with sharp points at the uppermost portion of the fence. 
(3)  The supporting framework of any fence shall not face adjacent properties or streets. 
(4)  Fences shall not be attached to existing fences, i.e., cyclone fence attached to wooden fence. 
(5)  No fence shall be erected adjacent to another fence. 
(6)  No fence shall have barbed wire, razor wire, electrical current, concertina wire or other similar material. 
(7)  The owner of any fence shall maintain their fence in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(8)  All fences shall be maintained plumb and true with adequate support in a safe manner. The owner of a fence shall remove and/or repair a fence that is dangerous, dilapidated or otherwise in violation of this Code. 
(9)  Any person who erects, builds and/or constructs any fence upon property which such person owns and/or leases shall be responsible for the repair, upkeep and maintenance of the fence. 
(10)  Any person who owns property upon which a fence has been constructed by a previous owner shall be responsible for the care, upkeep and maintenance of the fence. 
(11)  It shall be the responsibility of the person installing the fence to ensure such fence is placed on or within their own property line. 
(Code 1997, § 10-326; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-280. - Front yard fences. 
    Front yard fences shall have a minimum height of 24 inches and a maximum height of 30 inches from the property grade line. Front yard fences shall be placed a minimum of 18 inches from the sidewalk. If a sidewalk does not exist, front yard fences shall be placed a minimum of 18 inches from the edge of the established public right-of-way. 
(Code 1997, § 10-327; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-281. - Rear yard fences. 
    Rear yard fences shall be constructed to a maximum height of four feet from the property grade line. 
(Code 1997, § 10-328; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-282. - Side yard fences. 
    The following are requirements for side yard fences: 
(1)  Side yard fences shall be constructed to a maximum height of four feet from the property grade line. 
(2)  Side yard fences on the street side of corner lots may be constructed to a maximum height of six feet from the property grade line. 
(3)  Side yard fences on corner lots shall be placed a minimum of 18 inches from the sidewalk. If a sidewalk does not exist, side yard fences shall be placed a minimum of 18 inches from the edge of the established public right-of-way. 
(Code 1997, § 10-329; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-283. - Ornamental fence tops. 
    Ornamental tops shall not be considered as a part of the allowable fence height and are limited to a maximum height of eight inches. 
(Code 1997, § 10-330; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 8-284. - Exceptions to this article. 
(a)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided in this article, exceptions from the provisions of this article shall be made under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Rear fences. Rear yard fences may be constructed to a maximum height of six feet from the property grade line with the adjacent property owners' consent. Consent from the adjacent property owners must be submitted to the building department in writing with the permit application. If a rear yard is directly parallel to a public street and not a residential lot, property owners are then the city, and consent from the city administrator is required. 
(2)  Side yard fences. Side yard fences may be constructed to a maximum height of six feet from the property grade line with the adjacent property owners' consent. Consent from the adjacent property owners must be submitted to the building department in writing with the permit application. If a side yard is directly parallel to a public street and not a residential lot, property owners are then the city, and consent from the city administrator is required. 
(3)  Solid fences. Notwithstanding the general requirements found in subsection 8-279(1), solid fences are permitted under the following circumstances: 
a.  For that portion of a fence that faces a street on a corner lot; 
b.  When a fence faces an alley. 
(4)  Special circumstances. Applications meeting the requirements of this article and subsections (a)(1), (2) or (3) above do not require a public hearing, and shall be approved by the building inspector if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter. All other exceptions from the provisions of this article require a public hearing and approval from the city council. The council may consider any or all of the following, along with other information: 
a.  Balancing the relative hardships between the property owner and adjacent property owners; 
b.  Whether special circumstances or conditions exist; 
c.  Whether pedestrian or vehicular vision will be affected; 
d.  The general health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood. 
(b)  Public hearing. Any applicant seeking a hearing under the provisions of this article shall pay to the city a hearing notice fee set by council resolution for the scheduling of such hearing. Payment shall be made at the time the application is made for a hearing. The public hearing fee may be modified by a resolution of the city council as adopted from time to time. The city shall mail notice of the hearing to adjacent property owners at least seven days prior to the hearing date. 
(Code 1997, § 10-331; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 865, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 871, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 879, 10-15-2018) 
Secs. 8-285-8-301. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PLAY EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 8-302. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Play equipment and play structures mean any structure built on site or fabricated and assembled on-site that is designed to be used by climbing thereon or entering therein. Sheds designed for and used for the storage of yard equipment shall be considered as accessory buildings under the provisions of this Code and shall not be deemed to be play equipment or play structures. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-1; Code 1997, § 10-561) 
Sec. 8-303. - Prohibition. 
    No person who is an owner or tenant of any residential property within the city shall install or maintain play equipment or play structures upon any residential property owned or under their control within the city if such play structure or play equipment does not conform to the regulations contained in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-2; Code 1997, § 10-562) 
Sec. 8-304. - Height and location restrictions. 
    No play equipment or play structure shall be installed or maintained within the residential areas of the city, which exceeds ten feet in height, nor shall such play equipment or play structure be installed or maintained within ten feet of the property line of the property whereat such equipment is installed or maintained. No play equipment or play structure shall be installed or maintained in the front yard area of any residence. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-3; Code 1997, § 10-563) 
Sec. 8-305. - Variance. 
    Any property owner or tenant desiring to install or maintain play equipment or play structures of a height greater than ten feet or within ten feet of the property line shall obtain a variance from the provisions of this article from the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-4; Code 1997, § 10-564) 
Sec. 8-306. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Existing play structures. Upon the city clerk receiving a request for an appeal from the provisions of this article for a variance for an existing play structure, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing by the city council and shall cause to be sent a notice of hearing by ordinary mail to the property owners whose property abuts the site of the existing installation as the name of such owners appear on the tax rolls of the city. The petitioner shall pay a hearing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city. 
(b)  Proposed installation of play structures. Upon the city clerk receiving a request for an appeal from the provisions of this article for the installation of a proposed play structure, which requires a variance from the city council and an appeal fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time payable to the city, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing by the city council and shall cause to be sent a notice of such hearing by ordinary mail to the property owners whose property abuts the site of the proposed installation as the names of such owners appear on the tax rolls of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-5; Code 1997, § 10-565) 
Sec. 8-307. - Grant or denial of variance. 
    The city council after conducting a public hearing upon any request for a variance under the provisions of this article may grant such request, or may grant such request upon conditions deemed necessary in order to minimize the impact of such proposed structure upon the abutting properties. Such request for a variance may be denied by the city council upon a determination that such installation would have an adverse impact upon the abutting properties. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-6; Code 1997, § 10-566) 
Sec. 8-308. - Existing installations. 
    Any owner or tenant of residential property within the city whereat play equipment or play structures exist or are maintained on April 5, 1992, and such play equipment or play structure is not in conformance with the provisions of this article shall be granted 90 days to remove such structure, modify such structure so that it conforms to this article or seek and obtain a variance from the provisions of this article from the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 6-22-7; Code 1997, § 10-567) 
Secs. 8-309-8-334. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - STRUCTURES IN FRONT YARDS 

Sec. 8-335. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Structure means any item or object built or constructed of separate parts and placed or maintained upon the ground, excepting a fence, a pole containing a basketball hoop, a flagpole, a light pole, a mailbox or an air conditioning condensing unit, or an unenclosed outside porch. 
(Code 1997, § 10-606; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-336. - Prohibitions. 
    No owner or tenant of any real property in any residential district of the city shall construct or maintain any structure in the front yard of any residential property within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 10-607; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-337. - Existing front yard structures. 
    Any owner or tenant of residential property within the city whereat an existing structure is maintained on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which structure is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be granted 90 days to remove such structure, modify such structure so that it conforms to these provisions, or seek and obtain a variance from the provisions of this article from the city council. 
(Code 1997, § 10-608; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-338. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Existing structures. Upon the city clerk receiving a written request for an appeal from the provisions of this article for a variance for an existing front yard structure, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing by the city council and shall cause to be sent a notice of hearing by ordinary mail to the property owners whose property abuts the site of the existing structure as the names of such owners appear on the tax rolls of the city. 
(b)  Proposed installations. Upon the city clerk receiving a written request for an appeal from provisions of this article for the installation of a structure, which proposed installation requires a variance from the city council, and an appeal fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city. Upon receipt of the appeal fee, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing by the city council and shall cause to be sent a notice of such hearing by ordinary mail to the property owners whose property abuts the site of the proposed installation as the names of such owners appear on the tax rolls of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 10-609; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-339. - Variances. 
    The city council, after conducting a public hearing upon any request for a variance under the provisions of this article, may grant such request, or may grant such request upon conditions deemed necessary in order to minimize the impact of such structure upon the abutting properties. 
(Code 1997, § 10-610; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 12-2-1996) 
Secs. 8-340-8-366. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ARBOR-LIKE STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-367. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arbor-like structure means any structure of wood, metal, plastic or combination thereof placed on or installed upon any residential property which exceeds seven feet in height and is not designed or intended for walking upon but designed to provide shade or a support for growing vines or bushes. 
(Code 1997, § 10-631; Ord. No. 705, § 1(8-21-1), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-368. - Prohibitions. 
    It shall be a violation of this Code for any real property owner or tenant of real property to construct or maintain an arbor-like structure upon any residential property within the city contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 10-632; Ord. No. 705, § 1(8-21-2), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-369. - Regulations. 
    No arbor-like structure shall be installed or maintained within the residential areas of the city which exceeds seven feet in height, nor shall such arbor-like structure be installed or maintained within ten feet of the property lines of the real property whereat such structure is proposed to be or is installed. No such structure shall be installed or maintained in a front yard. 
(Code 1997, § 10-633; Ord. No. 705, § 1(8-21-3), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-370. - Existing arborlike structures. 
    Any owner or tenant of residential property within the city whereat an arbor-like structure exists or is maintained on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and such arbor-like structure is not in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be granted 90 days to remove such structure, modify such structure so that it conforms to these provisions or seek and obtain a variance from the provisions of this chapter from the city council. 
(Code 1997, § 10-634; Ord. No. 705, § 1(8-21-6), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-371. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Existing structures. Upon the city clerk receiving a written request for an appeal from the provisions of this article for a variance for an existing arbor-like structure, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing by the city council and shall cause to be sent a notice of hearing by ordinary mail to the property owners whose property abuts the site of the existing installation as the names of such owners appear on the tax rolls of the city. 
(b)  Proposed installations. Upon the city clerk receiving a written request for an appeal from the provisions of this article for the installation of an arbor-like structure, which proposed installation requires a variance from the city council, an appeal fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city. Upon receipt of the appeal fee, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing by the city council and shall cause to be sent a notice of such hearing by ordinary mail to the property owners whose property abuts the site of the proposed installation as the names of such owners appear on the tax rolls of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 10-635; Ord. No. 705, § 1(8-21-4), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 8-372. - Variances. 
    The city council, after conducting a public hearing upon any request for a variance under the provisions of this article, may grant such request, or may grant such request upon conditions deemed necessary in order to minimize the impact of such structure upon the butting properties. 
(Code 1997, § 10-636; Ord. No. 705, § 1(8-21-5), 12-2-1996) 
Secs. 8-373-8-402. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FIREWOOD STORAGE 

Sec. 8-403. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firewood means and includes cut logs, scrap wood, boards, wooden shingles, cut brush and similar materials kept or stored outside upon property within the city that are capable of being burned in a stove or fireplace. 
(Code 1975, § 6-16-1; Code 1997, § 10-441) 
Sec. 8-404. - Locations restricted. 
    Any firewood stored or kept outside upon property within the city shall not be placed or kept within four feet of any fence or property line of the property where such firewood is located, nor within the front yard setback area of any property as established in the zoning regulations (chapter 50). 
(Code 1975, § 6-16-2; Code 1997, § 10-442) 
Sec. 8-405. - Elevation. 
    All firewood kept or stored outside upon property within the city shall be elevated at least eight inches above any area upon which such firewood is stored or kept in stacks or piles. 
(Code 1975, § 6-16-3; Code 1997, § 10-443) 
Secs. 8-406-8-423. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - COMMERCIAL SECURITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-424. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bars and accordion gates means those iron, metal, plastic or other material devices used or intended to be used or installed either inside or outside of windows or doors and designed to prevent entry or access through such window or door areas when in place. 
    City administrator means the city administrator or his representative designated for the purpose of the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-22-1; Code 1997, § 14-311) 
Secs. 8-425-8-446. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 8-447. - Required for installation of bars or accordion gates. 
    No person shall install or permit the installation of bars or accordion gates on the front or side of any building located within a commercial, restricted office or C-2 high intensity zoning district within the city, whether inside or outside of such building, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 4-22-2; Code 1997, § 14-341) 
Sec. 8-448. - Requirements for permit. 
    The applicant for a permit to install bars or accordion gates shall submit such request to the city planning commission for review. Such request shall state the address of the property where such installation is proposed, shall contain a sketch or photograph of the type and design of the bars or accordion gates as they will appear on such building and shall state the reasons the applicant desires to make such installation. The planning commission shall approve such application only upon a determination that there is no other reasonable or feasible method available to provide security for the premises for which the application is sought. Upon approval by the planning commission and the payment of the permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city, the city administrator shall issue a permit for such installation. 
(Code 1975, § 4-22-3; Code 1997, § 14-342) 
Sec. 8-449. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8-450. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Alarm system. The term "alarm system" shall mean an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention to which public safety departments are expected to respond, except for an alarm system on a motor vehicle. 
    False alarm. The term "false alarm" means the activation of an alarm system causing a sound or visual signal through mechanical failure, faulty equipment, malfunction, improper installations, or the negligent, improper or mistaken use of an alarm system by a person. Negligence shall be established when there is no evidence of criminal activity, illegal entry, fire, or need for medical attention upon the activation of the alarm system. A false alarm does not include the following: 
(1)  Severe storm conditions. 
(2)  Alarm system malfunction, if corrective measures have been taken or installed within five days thereafter, and a copy of a repair order by a licensed alarm system contractor is provided within 30 days of the false alarm. 
(3)  False alarms that can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or disturbance of telecommunications facilities. 
(4)  Utility pole accidents. 
(5)  A testing of the alarm system when prior notification has been received by the public safety department. 
Person.  Person means an individual, owner, employee, tenant, occupant, firm, business, corporation, LCC or similar entity, or an agent of a person. Person does not include a commercial bank subject to 12 USC 1881-1884. 
Subscriber.  The term "subscriber" includes but is not limited to, any public service, utility, public safety department or police agency. 
Telephone  number. The term "telephone number" includes a primary number and any additional numbers assigned by a telecommunications company to connect with a subscriber when the primary telephone number is in use. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-451. - Automatic dialing prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to install, use, operate, adjust, arrange for, sell or contract to provide a device or combination of devices that will initiate the automatic dialing or connection directly to any Grosse Pointe Woods Public Safety Department or other municipal telephone number, except if written consent is obtained in advance from the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-452. - Registration required by owner. 
    Any person that owns, leases or occupies a premises in which an alarm system is installed, used, or maintained shall register such alarm system with the Grosse Pointe Woods Public Safety Department on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-453. - Registration fees. 
    A registration fee shall be set by council resolution to cover administrative costs to record the alarm location and contact personnel. Failure to register an alarm system shall result in an additional fee to cover the costs incurred to register the alarm system, contact personnel and to search for a registration in addition to possible court costs. These fees may be modified by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-454. - Name, address and phone numbers required. 
    A person that registers a system with the Grosse Pointe Woods Public Safety Department shall provide the director of public safety or the director's designated agent with the name, telephone number and address of the premises where the alarm system is located, and also the name and telephone number of at least one other person, firm or entity who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who, within a 30-minute response time, can open the premises in which the alarm system is installed and deactivate the audible and/or visible signal. This information is to be updated every three years with a re-registration of the alarm system, or sooner by the owner if the contact information changes. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-455. - Automatic shutoff required. 
    It shall be a violation for any person to maintain and operate an alarm system equipped with audible signal(s) (bells, horns, sirens, etc.) that is not equipped with a shutoff device that automatically silences the audible signal(s) within ten minutes of signal activation. This section shall not apply to fire alarm systems. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-456. - Liability. 
    Any person using, owning, leasing, or occupying a premises in which an alarm system exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derived, shall comply with the requirements of this article by January 1, 2012, and shall be jointly and severally liable for violations of this article section. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-457. - Violations. 
    The occurrence of a false alarm or other violation of this article shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction. Administrative fees for first and subsequent activations and late fees shall be set by council resolution. Late fees of two percent per month shall apply to any outstanding balance 30 days past the invoice date or older. In the event the above-specified fees are not paid by June 1 subsequent to the invoice, then all such fees and penalties shall become a lien upon the land where the alarm system is located and may be collected by the addition of same to the tax rolls or assessments imposed by the city on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-458. - License required by installer. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to engage in the business of installing an alarm system unless such person has been licensed by the State of Michigan in accordance with Public Act No. 190 of 1975, as amended (MCL 338.1051). All violations of this article by any person shall be considered a civil infraction and punishable by a civil fine of up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 842, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 8-459. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - EMERGENCY ELECTRICAL GENERATORS 

Sec. 8-460. - Installation and definition. 
    Emergency generators may be permanently installed and utilized in all residential zoning districts within the city, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this article. This article regulates permanently installed emergency generators, defined as a generator that is intended to remain outside of a residence for a lengthy or continuous period of time, regardless of the length of time of any power outage, as opposed to portable generators. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-461. - Permit required. 
    Permits shall be obtained from the city building department prior to the commencement of any construction or installation of a generator. Applicants shall submit two copies of the following: 
(1)  The application form, and the permit fee, that may be modified by the council by resolution periodically. 
(2)  A dimensioned site plan indicating compliance with this section and the manufacturer's specifications. 
(3)  The manufacturer's specifications/cut sheets for the generator, the ATS (automatic transfer switch) and any fuel storage tanks, showing listings from a nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-462. - Final inspection. 
    As soon as construction of a generator has been completed, a final inspection shall be requested by the applicant to ensure compliance with all terms and conditions of this article, and the generator shall not be used prior to receiving final inspection approval. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-463. - Permanent location. 
    The generator must be permanently affixed on a concrete slab or prefabricated equivalent located at least 15 feet away from any property line and must be behind the residence. Generators on any side or front yard areas of a residence are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-464. - Enclosure; production of sounds; service doors; exhaust gases. 
(a)  The generating unit and muffler must be enclosed within a sound attenuated cabinet. The enclosure service doors on the cabinet must be locked to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
(b)  Sound produced at full load is to be less than 85 dBA as measured at any and all property lines. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-465. - Fuels. 
    Acceptable fuels include natural gas, gasoline or diesel. Connections made to a natural gas line of a residence must be in accordance with all applicable codes. Other fuel sources must meet all state and local code requirements. Portable fuel sources are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-466. - Electrical. 
    Only a fully automatic transfer switch (ATS) gear (double throw disconnect switch gear) is to be installed. Transfer panels must be locked to prevent unauthorized access to the switch gear. Panels must be approved by a recognized certification agency, such as UL or CSA, and must comply with all applicable electrical requirements adopted by the State of Michigan and the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. A warning sign shall be placed at the service entrance equipment indicating type and location of an on-site emergency power source. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-467. - Maintenance. 
    Property owners are responsible for keeping the electrical installation and operation within all applicable code and ordinance requirements. Automatic maintenance exercise testing is limited to not more than ten minutes each week, Monday - Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-468. - Landscaping. 
    Appropriate landscaping must be installed around a generator unit in order to screen the unit and to assist in muffling or reducing sound levels. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-469. - Use. 
    Generators are to be used only in emergencies where the normal power source to the residence has been disrupted. As soon as normal power has been restored, the owner shall cease operation of the generator. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 8-470. - Appeals. 
    Permit denials may be appealed to the city council based on an appeal fee of $250.00 that may be modified by the council by resolution periodically. Adjoining property owners shall be notified of the appeal by regular mail within seven days prior to the hearing. In determining whether or not to grant an exception to the requirements of the article, the city council may consider the following: 
(1)  The practical difficulties faced by the applicant in adhering to the requirements of the article. 
(2)  The nature and extent of any adverse impact upon adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Whether or not approval based on conditions will appropriately minimize the impact of the request to adjoining property owners. 
(Ord. No. 860, 2-23-2015) 
Secs. 8-471-8-500. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 10-19. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to begin to conduct any business, commercial, professional or service operation in any building or premises within the city without first having obtained a business license from the city clerk. Violation of this chapter constitutes a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-1; Code 1997, § 14-31; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-20. - Application for business license and determination of permitted use. 
    Any person conducting any business, commercial, professional or service operation in any building or premises within the city shall make application for a business license as required by this article. Such application shall be made on forms supplied by the city clerk, which shall contain sufficient information supplied by the applicant so that the building inspector can determine what type of business, commercial, professional or service operation that the applicant proposes to conduct within the city and the proposed location of such. The building inspector shall then determine if the proposed use is a permitted use in the district in which the proposed use is located. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-2; Code 1997, § 14-32; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-21. - Appeal. 
(a)  Should any person be denied a business license under the provisions of this article and desire to appeal such denial, such claim of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the denial, and the matter shall be reviewed by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to impose reasonable conditions or restrictions upon any business license issued under the authority of this section, which conditions or restrictions shall be applicable to the original license and any renewal thereof. 
(c)  The city council shall hold a public hearing upon such request, with written notice of the hearing being mailed to all commercial establishments and residential properties located within 300 feet of the location where the proposed business licensee intends to operate. The applicant for such business license shall pay to the city a hearing fee as established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the costs of publication of the required notices. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-3; Code 1997, § 14-33; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-22. - Issuance of business license; service fees. 
(a)  Issuance. Upon the receipt of an application for a business license and subsequent approval thereof, the city clerk shall cause such business license to be issued upon the payment of a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time per license, provided that proof of payment of any county and city personal property taxes shall be submitted as a prerequisite prior to the issuance or reissuance of any such business license as required in this article, excepting licenses issued for new occupancies. 
(b)  County health officer's certificate . In all cases where the certification of the county health officer is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making application and the premises, in which he proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege, comply with all the sanitary requirements of the state and of the city. 
(c)  Compliance with fire regulations. In all cases where the certification of the director of public safety (acting as fire chief) or his designated representative is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making application and the premises, in which he proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege, comply with all the fire regulations of the state and of the city. 
(d)  Building inspector's certificate. In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the building inspector shall certify the proposed use is not prohibited by the regulations of the state and of the city. 
(e)  License validity. The license year shall begin April 1 of each year and shall terminate at 12:00 midnight on March 31 of the following year. All business licenses or duplicates thereof shall be renewed on or before April 1 of each successive year upon the payment of the fees and proof of payment of the personal property taxes as prescribed in this section. Late renewals shall pay double fees. The city clerk shall prorate the amount of the license fee for the first license year on a monthly basis. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-4; Code 1997, § 14-34; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 845, 2-27-2012) 
Sec. 10-23. - Assignability of business licenses. 
    Business licenses shall not be assignable. However, any person may agree to surrender the license to the city clerk for cancellation contingent upon the city clerk issuing a new business license to a person to be designated by the party surrendering the license for cancellation. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-5; Code 1997, § 14-35; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-24. - Duplicate licenses. 
    Upon application to the city clerk, a duplicate business license may be issued to replace any license that may have become lost or destroyed. Such license shall clearly be marked as a duplicate and shall be a replacement of the original license. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-6; Code 1997, § 14-36; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-25. - Cancellation of license. 
    The city clerk shall cause to be canceled on the records required to be kept under the provisions of this article any business license for any business, commercial, professional or service establishment which ceases to operate within the city for a period longer than 30 consecutive days. This section shall not apply to any such establishment which at the time of securing such business license, or any time thereafter, shall notify the city clerk that such business, commercial, professional or service occupation is seasonal in nature and will not be conducted on a continuous basis throughout the calendar year. If such notice is furnished to the city clerk, the prospective occupant or holder of such business license shall advise the city clerk in writing of the dates when such operations shall be conducted. Failure to maintain such business, commercial, professional or service operation during the periods of time indicated shall be grounds for cancellation of the business license. Any party feeling aggrieved by such cancellation may appeal such action of the city clerk in accordance with procedures set forth in section 10-21. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-7; Code 1997, § 14-37; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-26. - Utilization of fees. 
    All fees received for the issuance of a business license shall be credited to a special fund as may be designated by the city comptroller, and shall primarily be utilized for the purpose of improving or maintaining ecological, environmental or aesthetic values of any area zoned for business, commercial, professional or service operations within the city, or for any other purpose as may be designated by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-8; Code 1997, § 14-38; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 5-17-1999; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-27. - Posting of notice in business establishments. 
(a)  The owner of any building located within the city, which building is within a commercial or restricted office zoning district, shall cause to be displayed and shall maintain a copy of the following notice upon the inside of the rear door of such building or in some other conspicuous location within the building, such notice to read as follows: 
Notice-This building shall not be occupied by a tenant or owner without such tenant or owner first having obtained a business license from the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
(b)  Notice forms shall be on file and available from the city clerk and shall be four inches by seven inches minimum size. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15-9; Code 1997, § 14-39; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-28. - Changes in license status. 
    Any person or entity obtaining a business license is responsible for notifying the city clerk if any of the following occur: 
(1)  The licensee vacates or moves from the property referenced in the existing license. 
(2)  The licensee sells or otherwise transfers the interest in the license. 
    Failure to notify the city clerk constitutes a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 866, 11-16-2015) 
Sec. 10-29. - Going out of business sales. 
    The city hereby incorporates by reference Public Act 39 of 1961, regulating "going out of business sales" and other similar types of sales as defined in the Act (MCL 442.211 et seq). Persons conducting such sales as defined by the Act shall follow the Act's requirements and obtain a permit from the city clerk in accordance with the Act. A violation of this section, if prosecuted as a City Code offense, is a 90-day misdemeanor with fines as provided in Public Act 39 of 1961. 
(Ord. No. 866, 11-16-2015) 
Secs. 10-30-10-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BILLIARDS, POOL, BOWLING 

Sec. 10-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Billiard and pool means and includes the several games played on a table known as a billiard table, surrounded by an elastic ledge or cushions with or without pockets, with balls which are impelled by cue, and shall include all forms of games known as carom billiards, pocket billiards, three-cushion billiards, English billiards and all other games played on a billiard table and shall also include the so-called games of pool which shall include the games of 15-ball pool, eight-ball pool, rotation pool, bottle pool and all other games played on a so-called pigeonhole table. 
    Billiard and pool room means a public place where games of billiards and pool are permitted to be played. 
    Bowling means any of the several games played on a level surface with balls which are thrown by the hand at wooden pins and shall include all forms of games known as ten pins, nine pins, duck pins or any other game played on a bowling alley. 
    Bowling room means any public place where the game of bowling is played or permitted to be played. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7-2; Code 1997, § 14-111) 
Sec. 10-59. - Alcoholic liquors restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, licensee, manager or employee of any bowling alley, billiard or pool room to consume alcoholic liquors on the premises unless duly licensed therefor, and it shall be the duty of each of the aforesaid persons to enforce or cause to be enforced this section. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7-9; Code 1997, § 14-112) 
State Law reference- Alcoholic liquor licenses, MCL 436.1501 et seq. 
Sec. 10-60. - Employment of minors. 
    No minor under the age of 16 years shall be allowed to work in any bowling alley, billiard or pool room; and the minors who have attained their 16th birthday and not completed their 17th birthday working in such places must have working permits issued by the superintendent of schools in the district in which such person resides. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7-10; Code 1997, § 14-113) 
State Law reference- Youth employment standards act, MCL 409.101 et seq.; employment of minors, MCL 419.301 et seq. 
Sec. 10-61. - Gambling, obstructions to exterior vision prohibited. 
    No dice shall be thrown nor shall pool or shake pool be used for gambling, nor shall cards be raffled or other games of chance or any form of gambling be permitted in any billiard, pool or bowling room or in the room in which such tables are located or at any cigar stand or any other business in the same room, whether or not such room is divided by a partition, nor shall any checks be given which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash. No screens or other obstructions shall be placed in the doors or windows of such billiard, pool or bowling room, and such windows and doors must at all times be free and clear of such screens or other obstructions so as to permit an unobstructed view into such billiard, pool and bowling room. This section, however, shall not be construed to prevent the giving of cards or merchandise prizes to billiard or pool players or bowlers in a tournament league or any other competitive play. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7-11; Code 1997, § 14-114) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 10-62. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to private residences, schools or municipal institutions. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7-13; Code 1997, § 14-115) 
Secs. 10-63-10-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-83. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade means any place of business, establishment or room open to the public wherein five or more commercial amusement devices are installed. 
    Commercial amusement device means an instrument, machine or contrivance which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin or token or the use of which may be permitted by the payment of a fee, and which provides amusement, information or entertainment. Not included in this definition are devices that furnish music and which are commonly referred to as jukeboxes, scales for the purpose of giving weights, medical devices providing blood pressure readings and bowling lanes. 
    Off-street parking space means a space of a minimum of 19 feet by nine feet located within 300 feet of the main entrance of the establishment intending to install or having installed one or more commercial amusement devices, such space being accessible for the parking of a motor vehicle and not located upon the streets or alleys within the city. 
    Owner means any person who occupies or conducts any place of business, establishment or room set aside in any commercial establishment in which any commercial amusement device is installed. In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be deemed an owner. In the case of a corporation, the officers of the corporation shall be deemed to be the owners under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-1; Code 1997, § 14-251) 
Secs. 10-84-10-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-110. - Required. 
(a)  No owner shall install or permit the installation of any commercial amusement device in any premises under such owner's control without first having obtained a license for such device from the city clerk. No such commercial amusement device shall be permitted to operate or remain within any premises of any owner without a valid license for such device being in existence for such machine at such location. 
(b)  No arcade shall be established or maintained within the city without the owner first having obtained an arcade license from the city clerk. No arcade shall be operated in the city without a valid arcade license being in existence for such location. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-2; Code 1997, § 14-271) 
Sec. 10-111. - Requirements to obtain. 
(a)  Any owner desiring to install one or more commercial amusement devices shall first file an application for a license with the city clerk upon forms approved by the city clerk. Any such application shall be accompanied by the payment of the license fee, to the city, in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each commercial amusement device for which a license is sought. 
(b)  Any owner desiring to install or desiring to have in operation five or more commercial amusement devices at one location shall first obtain an arcade license for the location from the city clerk, in addition to the commercial amusement device licenses required for the individual commercial amusement devices to be located in such arcade. There shall be no additional fee for an arcade license. 
(c)  The license application required by this section shall state the name and address of the owner of the proposed installation, the number of commercial amusement devices, a description of such machines, the manufacturer's name and address, the serial number of such machines, if available, and the proposed location of each machine within the premises, including the distance in feet from any wall, table, chair or other obstruction. 
(d)  The city clerk shall not approve or issue a license for any commercial amusement device unless all of the following conditions prevail: 
(1)  A distance of six feet of clear area shall exist in all directions measured from any part of the machine, except a machine may be placed against a wall, divider, or other obstruction on one side of a machine. 
(2)  All electrical wiring leading to such machine shall be installed in such a manner that no electrical wire shall be located on the floor surrounding the machine. 
(e)  The city clerk shall not approve or issue a license for an arcade unless the owner certifies to the city clerk that there are available, for the exclusive use of the arcade, two off-street parking spaces for each commercial amusement device to be installed in the arcade. Such off-street parking requirement shall be in addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required or approved for any existing occupancy of any business located in the same building or establishment wherein the arcade is proposed to be located. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-3; Code 1997, § 14-272) 
Sec. 10-112. - Renewal. 
(a)  Any owner may apply for the renewal of any commercial amusement device license issued under the provisions of this article by certifying to the city clerk that the same conditions prevail as existed when the original license was issued and by paying a license renewal fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city for each license. Renewal licenses shall be issued for a 12-month period. If identical conditions do not prevail, the owner seeking any license renewal shall file a new application therefor and comply with the requirements for the issuance of a new license. 
(b)  Arcade licenses may be renewed upon application of the owner and the owner's certification to the city clerk that the same conditions prevail as existed when the original arcade license was issued. Renewal licenses shall be issued for a 12-month period. If identical provisions do not prevail, the owner seeking any such renewal shall be required to file an application for a new arcade license and shall comply with the requirements for issuance of a new license. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-5; Code 1997, § 14-274) 
Sec. 10-113. - Revocation. 
    Any license issued to any owner for any commercial amusement device may be revoked by the city council upon a finding by the city council that the licensee has violated any conditions of such license. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-7; Code 1997, § 14-275) 
Sec. 10-114. - Public liability and property damage insurance. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any applicant under this article until the applicant shall have filed with and the same shall have been approved by the city comptroller, policies of public liability and property damage insurance in the minimum amounts as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The insurance required by this section shall be furnished by a firm or corporation duly licensed or permitted to do insurance business in the state. Such insurance shall be kept and maintained in continuous force and effect so long as the applicant shall be licensed under this article. No license shall be valid in the event of the cancellation of such insurance. 
(c)  There shall be attached to all liability insurance policies pursuant to the requirements of this section, and filed with the city clerk, the following endorsement in substantially the following form: 
In consideration of the premium stated in the policy to which this endorsement is attached, the company agrees the policy to which this endorsement is attached shall not expire, nor shall cancellation take effect, until after ten days' notice, in writing, by the company, shall have been given to the City of Grosse Pointe Woods at its offices. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-8; Code 1997, § 14-276) 
Sec. 10-115. - Nontransferability. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-9; Code 1997, § 14-277) 
Sec. 10-116. - Conditions of operation. 
    The owner of any establishment having one or more licensed commercial amusement devices shall: 
(1)  Have an adult supervisor on the premises and within the establishment at all times when the commercial amusement devices shall be operable or available for operation by the public. 
(2)  Not permit any commercial amusement device to be operated by any child under the age of 12 years unless such child is accompanied by his natural parent or legal guardian who remains on the premises while such child is operating the machine. 
(3)  Not permit such commercial amusement devices to be operated, except during the following hours: 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., local time, Monday through Friday, September 10 through June 10 of each year; 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., local time, Saturday and Sunday all year, and from June 11 through September 9 of each year. 
(4)  Not permit food or beverages to be in the area within six feet of any commercial amusement device. 
(5)  Not allow or permit any machines to be operated if such machines are determined to be unsafe after an inspection by the division of safety inspection. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20-6; Code 1997, § 14-279) 
Secs. 10-117-10-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CHRISTMAS TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-146. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling Christmas trees contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6-1; Code 1997, § 14-176) 
Sec. 10-147. - Maintenance of site. 
(a)  The site upon which any business engaged in the selling of Christmas trees is permitted to be conducted shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner, and under no circumstances shall public streets, highways and places be encroached upon, nor shall there be any encroaching upon property other than that for which a license has been issued under this article. 
(b)  The licensee shall be responsible for the proper conduct of the business licensed under this article, and prior to the expiration of the license shall clean up the premises and shall remove all trees and debris to a place of disposal beyond the corporate limits of the city. No such trees or debris shall be disposed of by the burning thereof upon the licensed premises. 
(Code 1975, §§ 4-6-5, 4-6-6; Code 1997, § 14-178) 
Secs. 10-148-10-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-178. - Application; term of license. 
    Before engaging in the business of selling Christmas trees, an application, in writing, signed by the applicant, shall be filed with the city clerk stating, among other things, the applicant's address, the location of the proposed site where the business is to be conducted and the period for which a license is sought. The application must be accompanied by written evidence of the applicant's right to use the premises involved. All licenses shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance; provided that no license shall issue for a term exceeding 60 days. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6-2; Code 1997, § 14-211) 
Sec. 10-179. - Fee; bond. 
    The city clerk is authorized to issue licenses under this article upon payment of a license fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and the deposit of a cash bond in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time by the applicant. This fee may be modified by a resolution of the city council as adopted from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6-3; Code 1997, § 14-212) 
Sec. 10-180. - Use of bond funds. 
    The cash bond required to be deposited under the provisions of section 10-179 shall be used by the city to reimburse itself for any expenses incurred in removing trees and debris and general cleanup of the premises for which the bond is posted, made necessary by reason of the failure of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance of the bond shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6-7; Code 1997, § 14-213) 
Secs. 10-181-10-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS, VENDORS, SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-199-10-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-220. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a vendor, a peddler, a hawker or a huckster, or a house-to-house solicitor and canvasser or a refuse vendor, as hereinafter defined without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-1; Code 1997, § 14-731; Ord. No. 717, § 1, 10-20-1997) 
Sec. 10-221. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    House-to-house solicitor and canvasser means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot or any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such individual is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot or any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, dairy products or similar or like articles, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a conveyance; and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The term "peddler" shall include the terms "hawker" and "huckster." 
    Refuse vendor means any person, other than an employee or contractor, or employee of a contractor, of the city public works department, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot or any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street and removing or carting away any materials left curbside for collection under the provisions of chapter 34. A refuse vendor shall not collect, remove or cart away any paper, glass, plastic or metal cans. A refuse vendor shall not collect, remove or cart away any materials between the hour of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning. 
    Vendor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot or any type of conveyance who shall carry, convey or transport, from street to street, goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck farm products or provisions, dairy products or other similar or like articles for the purpose of making sales and deliveries to residents, merchants or places of business. The provisions hereof shall be deemed to mean and include sales and deliveries made from milk wagons, bread trucks and/or provision trucks operating over established routes or making sales and/or deliveries to established customers. 
(b)  It is expressly provided that the definitions of "peddler" and "vendor" shall not be deemed to apply to such businesses or business transactions wherein the order is taken or the purchase is made at the regular and permanent place of business, which order or purchase is thereafter delivered to residents or merchants of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-2; Code 1997, § 14-732; Ord. No. 717, § 1, 10-20-1997) 
Sec. 10-222. - Application. 
    Applicants for a license under this article must file with the clerk a sworn application, in triplicate, in writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of applicant. 
(2)  Address (legal and local). 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer. 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the state license number or other means of identification. 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-3; Code 1997, § 14-733) 
Sec. 10-223. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application for a license under this article, the original shall be referred to the department of public safety for investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. Good moral character shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest, and open manner, to be determined as provided in Public Act No. 381 of 1974 (MCL 338.41 et seq.). 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the director of public safety shall endorse on such application such disapproval and such reasons for the same, and return the application to the clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If as a result of such investigation the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the director of public safety shall endorse on the application such approval and return the application so endorsed to the clerk. If the application shall be the initial application for a license by the applicant, such application shall be referred to the council, and if the council shall determine that such applicant is a suitable, reputable and desirable person to engage in the business for which the application for a license has been filed, and that the business to be conducted thereunder is not detrimental to public safety, health and welfare, the council, by appropriate action, shall approve such application; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(d)  Vendors' licenses for use on the day of the annual fireworks display within the city, or the rain date for such fireworks display, shall be limited in number by resolution adopted by the city council. Such licenses may be restricted for use in areas of the city as established by council resolution. License costs for such licenses shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time adopted. Such licenses may be restricted in number as to the type of merchandise to be offered for sale by the vendors. Individual licenses shall be issued to each employee of a vendor who shall receive an ID badge or card from the city, the costs of which shall be established or adopted by council resolution from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-4; Code 1997, § 14-734; Ord. No. 725, § 1, 5-18-1998) 
Sec. 10-224. - License fees. 
(a)  Upon approval of any application for a license under this article, the clerk shall issue the required license. 
(b)  The fees for any license issued under the provisions of this article or any renewal thereof, excepting licenses issued for the July 4th celebration or the rain date thereof shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(c)  The license fees shall be payable to the city clerk upon approval of the license application. 
(d)  For all annual licenses issued after September 1, the fee shall be one-half of the amounts stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  For all licenses issued for a vendor or peddler, such license shall be valid for use from 9:00 a.m. to dusk or 7:00 p.m., local time, whichever occurs first. 
(f)  The number of licenses issued and outstanding for a refuse collector shall be limited to five in number. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-5; Code 1997, § 14-735; Ord. No. 725, § 1, 5-18-1998; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 5-3-1999; Ord. No. 752, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 861, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 10-225. - License plates and cards. 
    The clerk shall issue to each vendor or peddler licensed under this article a metallic plate or card which indicates the year for which the license was issued. If a vehicle is used by the licensee, the metallic plate shall be attached in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle. If no vehicle is used by the licensee, the card must be carried upon the licensee's person and displayed upon the request of any officer of the department of public safety or customer. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-6; Code 1997, § 14-736) 
Sec. 10-226. - Renewals. 
    Licenses issued under this article may be renewed from time to time by a previously licensed applicant in good standing and the filing of an application as provided in section 10-222; and upon approval by the director of the department of public safety of the applicant's character and business responsibility, and upon payment of proper license fees. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-7; Code 1997, § 14-737) 
Sec. 10-227. - Transfer of license. 
    No license issued under this article shall be transferred to or used by a person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-8; Code 1997, § 14-738) 
Sec. 10-228. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business as solicitor or as canvasser. 
(3)  Any violation of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  No refund of any license fee shall be made upon the revocation, cancellation or surrender of a license. 
(c)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee's last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-9; Code 1997, § 14-739) 
Sec. 10-229. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the clerk or the director of the department of public safety in the denial of a license applied for under this article shall have the right of appeal to and a hearing before the council. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in section 10-228 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the council in such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-10; Code 1997, § 14-740) 
Sec. 10-230. - Prohibited where posted. 
    No person shall conduct a solicitation at a residence or other building within the city on which there is displayed a sign in public view reading "no solicitors." This sign shall not exceed three inches by 12 inches in size and shall have letters one inch or greater in size. 
Sec. 10-231. - Ice cream vendor-Equipment. 
    Any vendor, as defined in this article, who utilizes a motor vehicle to sell or offer for sale ice cream, ice milk, frozen dairy products or ice flavored with syrup, to persons other than at the entrance to the residence of such persons, shall, in addition to the meeting the general requirements for vendor's license, have such vehicle equipped with the following: 
(1)  Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and as widely spaced laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five inches to seven inches in diameter and shall display two alternately flashing amber lights on the front of the vehicle and two alternately flashing red lights on the rear of the vehicle. Both front and rear lights shall be visible at a distance of 500 feet in ordinary sunlight. 
(2)  A stop signal arm that can be extended horizontally from the left side of the truck duplicating the design, sign size and specifications shown in subsection (4) of this section. This arm shall be red and white in color and contain two alternately flashing lights on each face of the arm, three inches to five inches in diameter and visible at a distance of 300 feet in ordinary sunlight. The color of the two lights facing to the front shall be amber and the color of the two lights facing to the rear shall be red. The bottom of the signal arm shall be 42 inches above the highway. 
(3)  The vehicle shall contain a convex mirror mounted on the front so that the driver, in his normal seating position, can see the area in front of the truck obscured by the hood. 
(4)  The stop signal arm required by subsection (2) of this section shall be constructed in such a manner that it substantially complies with the diagram on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-12; Code 1997, § 14-742) 
Sec. 10-232. - Same-Use of special lights and signal arm. 
    The operator of an ice cream vending truck shall, when stopped upon the streets of this city for the purpose of vending, activate the special flashing lights and extend the stop signal arm during the time such truck is stationary. The special lights and signal arm shall not be utilized while moving. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-13; Code 1997, § 14-743) 
Sec. 10-233. - Same-Operation of trucks. 
    The driver of an ice cream vending truck shall vend only when the truck is lawfully parked or stopped. Such truck shall not vend to persons standing in the street, nor shall such truck be backed up to make or attempt to make a sale. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-14; Code 1997, § 14-744) 
Sec. 10-234. - Same-Duties of motorists. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle meeting or overtaking an ice cream vending truck stopped on the street shall stop before reaching the vending truck when the flashing lights and stop signal arm are in use. After stopping, a driver may proceed past such truck at a reasonable and prudent speed, not exceeding 15 miles per hour, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian who crosses the roadway on or from the ice cream vending truck. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1-15; Code 1997, § 14-745) 
Secs. 10-235-10-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STREET SALES AND SOLICITATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 877, adopted Dec. 14, 2017, amended former Art. VII, §§ 10-262-10-265 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1975, §§ 2-16-1-2-17-4; Code of 1997, §§ 14-956-14-959. 

Sec. 10-262. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means a natural person as defined by Chapter 1, Sec. 1.2 and includes charitable or civic organizations as defined in this section. 
    Charitable or civic organization means a non-profit organization that is qualified under Sec. 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC 501, or a veterans' organization that has tax-exempt status under the internal revenue code. 
    Street sales and solicitations means the sale of goods or the solicitation of donations by persons using the streets of the city and attempting to or making such sales or attempting to or receiving donations from persons in motor vehicles upon the city streets. 
(Ord. No. 877, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 10-263. - Permit required. 
    Any charitable or civic organization desiring to conduct street sales or solicitations shall first obtain a permit authorizing such activity from the city clerk or the clerk's designated representative, at least 72 hours in advance of any such activity. 
(Ord. No. 877, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 10-264. - Requirements for permit. 
    Any charitable or civic organization requesting a permit authorizing street sales or solicitation shall provide information as required by the clerk's office and comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Provide proof of the organization's status as a civic or charitable organization; 
(2)  Identify the dates, times, and location of the proposed sales/solicitation; 
(3)  Provide proof of liability insurance naming the city as an additional named insured in an amount of at least $1,000,000.00; 
(4)  Any person soliciting on behalf of the organization must be 18 years of age or older; 
(5)  Any person must wear high-visibility safety apparel that meets current American standards promulgated by the International Safety Equipment Association; 
(6)  The portion of the roadway upon which the solicitation occurs cannot be a work zone and must be within an intersection where traffic control devices are present; 
(7)  Sales/solicitations must occur during daylight hours. 
(Ord. No. 877, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 10-265. - Revocation of permit. 
    The director of public safety or the director's authorized representative may immediately revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article for noncompliance with the conditions of this article by any person making sales or solicitations. 
(Ord. No. 877, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 10-266. - Violations. 
    Any person violating this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction with fines in accordance with section 2-813, as may be modified by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 877, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 10-267-10-293. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESIDENTIAL HANDBILLS 

Sec. 10-294. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residential handbills means papers, booklets and pamphlets of printed matter, excepting materials primarily containing political or religious materials, delivered by individuals to residential homes or apartments within the city, but does not include papers, letters, booklets or pamphlets delivered by the United States postal service or to daily or Sunday newspapers delivered over an established route or to magazine or telephone books delivered to subscribers by a private delivery service. 
(Code 1975, § 4-23-1; Code 1997, § 14-931) 
Sec. 10-295. - Delivery to posted property. 
    No person shall deliver or deposit residential handbills at any residential home or apartment where a sign or notice has been posted in a conspicuous location, which sign or notice states "no handbills" or "no vendors or solicitors." This sign shall not exceed three inches by 12 inches in size and shall have letters one inch or greater in size. 
(Code 1975, § 4-23-2; Code 1997, § 14-932) 
Sec. 10-296. - Violation of article; warning notice; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall deliver or deposit a residential handbill at any residential home or apartment which has been posted as provided in this article shall receive a written warning notice of such violation. 
(b)  Any person who, having received a written warning under the provisions of this section, shall again be found to be in violation of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be deemed to have been responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Any person who, having been found responsible for a civil infraction under the provisions of this article, shall be charged with a second or subsequent offense with violating the provisions of this article, shall be deemed, upon conviction thereof, to be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 4-23-3; Code 1997, § 14-933) 
Secs. 10-297-10-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NEWSPAPER SALES RACKS 

Sec. 10-326. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building front setback line means that line formed at the outer surface of a building, structure or enclosure wall with the surface ground level on that portion of the building or structure facing the adjacent street. 
    Newspaper sales stand or rack means a device designed or used for the storage or display of newspapers, magazines, books or periodicals, which device stands alone or is affixed temporarily or permanently to another object. 
(Code 1975, § 4-9-1; Code 1997, § 14-691) 
Sec. 10-327. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Each person desiring to locate or place a newspaper sales stand or rack between a building front setback line and the curb of any adjacent street shall first make application for the approval of the proposed location for such sales stand or rack from the director of public safety. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The proposed location, giving approximate distances between the building front setback line and the curb of the adjacent street. 
(2)  The proposed location with reference to the nearest intersection. 
(3)  The proposed location with reference to the property address of the lot or building in front of which such newspaper stand or rack is proposed to be placed. 
(b)  Such written application may contain a request for more than one proposed location. 
(c)  The applicant for such permit shall furnish any additional information that may reasonably be required by the director of public safety in order that the director of public safety may determine whether or not the proposed location of such sales stand or rack offers any material hazard to traffic or to pedestrians. 
(Code 1975, § 4-9-2; Code 1997, § 14-692) 
Sec. 10-328. - Approval of location. 
    The director of public safety shall review each application for the proposed location of a newspaper sales stand or rack to determine whether such proposed location is desirable from the standpoint of traffic flow, traffic safety and pedestrian safety, and shall approve or disapprove such location accordingly, and shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of the receipt of such application of such approval or disapproval. 
(Code 1975, § 4-9-3; Code 1997, § 14-693) 
Secs. 10-329-10-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS 

Sec. 10-360. - Certificate of registration-Required. 
    No person shall engage in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public as defined in Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.) without first having obtained a certificate of registration from the director of public safety. 
(Code 1975, § 4-19-1; Code 1997, § 14-901) 
Sec. 10-361. - Same-Fee; application. 
    The fee for the certificate of registration required by this article shall be adopted by council resolution from time to time. The applicant shall furnish the information required by Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), when applying for the certificate of registration. 
(Code 1975, § 4-19-2; Code 1997, § 14-902) 
Sec. 10-362. - Reports of transactions. 
    Each dealer in precious metals or gems required to be registered under the provisions of Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), shall furnish to the public safety department a record of each transaction on forms approved by the department, and such reports shall contain the information required by Public Act No. 95 of 1981 and shall be filed with the department of public safety as required by state statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 4-19-3; Code 1997, § 14-903) 
Secs. 10-363-10-408. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-409. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage means the rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction or percussion of the human body or parts of it by hand or with an instrument or apparatus. 
    Massage establishment and massage parlor mean a business establishment where massagers practice massage, a building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital or dispensary in which body massage is practiced on the human body, for other than cosmetic or beautifying purpose, with or without the use of nonpowered mechanical or bathing devices. The term "massage parlor" includes a health club, health spa or any physical fitness club that offers massage on occasion or incidental to its regular operation. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1117; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 3-15-1999) 
Sec. 10-410. - Certification. 
    Massagers employed within the city shall be certified in therapeutic massage by a national board for therapeutic massage and bodywork. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1117; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 3-15-1999) 
Secs. 10-411-10-431. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - FOOD SERVICE 

Sec. 10-432. - Adopted by reference. 
    The law relative to food service establishments and vending machines dispensing perishable foods and beverages, otherwise known as Public Act No. 92 of 2000 (MCL 289.1101 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference to article XIV of this chapter, governing health and sanitation within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 3-6-1; Code 1997, § 14-401) 
Sec. 10-433. - Enforcement. 
    Where Public Act No. 92 of 2000 (MCL 289.1101 et seq.) is applicable, it shall be enforced in conjunction with article XIV of this chapter. However, where such Act and article XIV of this chapter differ as to conditions, controls, requirements or standards, the more stringent conditions, controls, requirements or standards shall govern. 
(Code 1975, § 3-6-2; Code 1997, § 14-402) 
Secs. 10-434-10-464. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RESTAURANTS 

Sec. 10-465. - License. 
(a)  Required; posting. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant who does not possess an unrevoked license of current issue as provided in this article. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. 
(b)  Contents of application. A written application for such license shall be made to the clerk on forms provided at the office of the clerk and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Whether the applicant is a person, partnership, firm, corporation or organization. 
(2)  The names and addresses of the persons, members of partnerships or officers of the firm, corporation or organization making application. 
(3)  The name and address of the restaurant. 
(4)  The type of restaurant. 
(5)  The capacity of the dining room. 
(6)  An agreement to permit the county health officer to inspect the restaurant and everything in connection with it, to interview the employees at any reasonable time, and that the applicant will give true and complete information to the county health officer concerning the operation of the restaurant. 
(7)  The date of application. 
(8)  The signature of the applicant. 
(c)  Investigation by county health officer. The clerk shall, upon receiving such application, refer it to the county health officer to investigate the facts stated in the application and sanitary conditions in and around the place wherein it is proposed to operate the restaurant specified in the application. 
(d)  Approval of application and issuance of license. If it is found by the county health officer after investigation that the statements contained in the application are true and that the existing sanitary conditions in the place wherein it is proposed to operate the restaurant conform to the sanitary requirements of this article, the county health officer shall approve the application and return it to the clerk, who shall issue a license to the applicant permitting the applicant to operate the type of restaurant designated in the application, and no other, upon payment of a fee as provided in this section. 
(e)  Fee. The fee for a license as provided for in this section shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, and provided further that no fee shall be charged for a license granted to a fraternal, religious, educational or social organization. 
(f)  Disapproval of application. If it is found by the county health officer after investigation that the statements contained in the application are not true or that the applicant is not operating or cannot operate a restaurant conforming to the sanitary requirements of this article, the county health officer shall disapprove the application and return it to the clerk with a detailed statement of the reason for the disapproval. 
(g)  Review of disapproval. The clerk shall, upon receipt of such disapproval, present it with the application to the council at its first regular meeting which will allow the serving of ten days' notice upon the applicant, and shall, on or before ten days before such regular meeting, serve or cause to be served upon the applicant a notice of disapproval of the application by the county health officer, and the date of the regular meeting at which the application will be presented to the council. The council shall consider the disapproval of the county health officer and shall hear the applicant on the applicant's behalf, and shall act upon the application. The council shall establish its own rules of order for such review and hearing. If the application is denied by the council, the clerk shall give written notice to the applicant within five days of such denial and such applicant shall not open the restaurant designated in the application to the public thereafter. 
(h)  Suspension or revocation authorized. The county health officer shall have the power to revoke or suspend the license of any restaurant which is not or cannot be operated in conformance with the requirements of this article, by giving written notice, stating therein the reasons for such action of suspension or revocation to the licensee. A copy of this notice shall be sent to the licensing authority. 
(i)  Review of suspension or revocation. In the event of suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the council, if the licensee presents a request for such hearing, in writing, to the clerk within ten days from the date of revocation or suspension of the license. Such hearing shall be started at the following regular meeting of the council, and the council, after hearing and considering both sides of the case, shall act as sole judge of whether or not the revocation or suspension shall take effect. The council shall establish its own rules of order for such review and hearing. 
(j)  Expiration; renewal. All applications for license renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the license expires. 
(k)  Approval of new construction or alterations. Plans and specifications for new construction or alteration of the existing restaurant shall be submitted to the county health department for approval before issuance of a building or construction permit. 
(Code 1975, § 3-4-4; Code 1997, § 42-31) 
Sec. 10-466. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority of county health officer. The county health officer shall have the authority and duty to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Inspections. At least once every six months, or as often as necessary, the county health officer shall inspect every restaurant. The county health officer shall have authority to enter any building or part thereof which is used, or which the county health officer has reason to believe is used, for the storage, preparation, sale, serving or distribution of food or drink for human consumption, to inspect the premises, furniture, equipment, dishes or utensils used therein, and to determine whether or not the sanitary requirements of this article are complied with. 
(c)  Order to correct violation. If, on inspection, the county health officer finds any violation of the requirements of this article, the county health officer shall issue an order to the licensee or person in charge of the restaurant directing the correction of such violation within such reasonable time as the county health officer shall deem proper. 
(d)  Failure to correct violation. If the county health officer finds a continuation of the violation upon a second inspection after such reasonable time, the county health officer shall suspend the license of the restaurant until such violation has been corrected. 
(e)  Immediate suspension of license and closing of business. If the county health officer finds unsanitary conditions in any restaurant such that the conditions would be immediately dangerous to the health of the general public, the county health officer may immediately suspend the license of and close the restaurant until such unsanitary conditions are corrected, following which the county health officer shall give a written notice in a reasonable time to the licensee or the responsible representative in charge stating the reasons for closing the restaurant. A continuance to operate after receipt of such written notice shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 3-4-5; Code 1997, § 42-32) 
Sec. 10-467. - Interpretation by council. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the county health officer in accordance with the interpretations which may be adopted by the council. 
(Code 1975, § 3-4-9; Code 1997, § 42-33) 
Secs. 10-468-10-487. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - VALET PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-488. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Valet parking means the taking of possession of a motor vehicle from the operator by a person for the purpose of parking such vehicle as a service to the customers or clients of a business establishment, whether or not a charge is imposed for such service. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1091; Ord. No. 676, § 1(4-24-1), 8-1-1994) 
Secs. 10-489-10-514. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-515. - Required. 
    A license issued by the city shall be required by any business establishment intending to employ or actually employing a valet parking service or persons performing such service, excepting those businesses whereat the valet parking operation is performed within the confines of the business property so serviced. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1111; Ord. No. 676, § 1(4-24-2), 8-1-1994) 
Sec. 10-516. - Application. 
    Any person or business entity desiring to employ or utilize valet parking as a service to their customers or clients shall apply to the city clerk for a license to conduct such valet parking operation. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, legal status, address and telephone number of the applicant and the location where the valet parking service will operate. 
(2)  A diagram of the area to be utilized for the temporary dropoff and pickup of the motor vehicle showing the street involved, the nearest intersection and any on-street metered parking area to be utilized as a dropoff or pickup area. 
(3)  A statement and diagram showing where the vehicles will be parked by the valet parking employees. All vehicles accepted for valet parking must be parked in the designated parking area. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1112; Ord. No. 676, § 1(4-24-3), 8-1-1994) 
Sec. 10-517. - Review of application. 
    The application for a valet parking license shall be reviewed by the department of public safety, which shall determine whether or not the proposed pickup and dropoff area would create adverse traffic conditions. If, in the determination of the department of public safety, such proposed dropoff and pickup area will not create adverse traffic conditions, the department of public safety shall notify the city clerk of such fact and of the number of on-street parking spaces required for the dropoff and pickup area to be utilized by the valet parking operations. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1113; Ord. No. 676, § 1(4-24-4), 8-1-1994) 
Sec. 10-518. - Fees and time restrictions. 
(a)  The city clerk, upon receipt of the report from the department of public safety indicating the department's approval of the application for a license under this article, shall ascertain the number of metered on-street parking spaces that will be required for the valet parking operations and shall issue to the applicant a valet parking license. The applicant shall pay an annual licensing fee to the city in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each on-street metered parking space to be utilized by the valet parking operations. The licensing fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis for every month or portion thereof from the date of issue of the license to the date of expiration of the license for each metered parking space utilized. 
(b)  The license to operate a valet parking service shall include the right to utilize the designated on-street metered parking spaces during the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight, local time, unless other times are approved by the department of public safety. During such time periods, the licensee shall be permitted to cover the parking meters or otherwise place signs in the area indicating that such parking spaces are reserved for or dedicated to the use of valet parking. 
(c)  No valet parking license shall be issued to any business unless such business has a valid city license to operate. 
(d)  No valet parking license shall be transferable to another business. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1114; Ord. No. 676, § 1(4-24-5), 8-1-1994) 
Sec. 10-519. - Revocation; hearing. 
    The city council shall have the authority to terminate any license for valet parking issued under the provisions of this article if the director of public safety recommends such action to the city council based upon a determination that the valet parking operation authorized by such license is creating adverse traffic conditions. The city council shall, upon receipt of such recommendation from the director of public safety, hold a hearing on such request whereat the licensee may be offered the opportunity to address the concerns of the director of public safety. At such hearing, the city council may determine to revoke the valet parking license or continue such license for a limited time subject to any restrictions determined by the city council to be necessary to correct the situation. Should the city council determine to revoke the license, the city clerk shall issue a refund of the licensee fees previously paid on a pro rata basis. 
(Code 1997, § 14-1115; Ord. No. 676, § 1(4-24-6), 8-1-1994) 
Secs. 10-520-10-546. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - HORSE RIDING ACADEMIES; STABLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-547. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a riding academy or stable in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-1; Code 1997, § 14-491) 
Sec. 10-548. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Riding academy or stable mean any place of business operated for the purpose of boarding and housing of horses or furnishing saddle horses for hire. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-2; Code 1997, § 14-492) 
Sec. 10-549. - Premises to be kept clean. 
    The premises used for conducting a riding academy or stable shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and it shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation of refuse, manure and other offensive materials or substances upon such premises. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-5; Code 1997, § 14-493) 
Sec. 10-550. - Riding in specified places. 
    It shall be unlawful to ride a saddle horse upon any street, highway or public place other than that set aside for vehicular traffic; provided, however, that the department of public safety may establish bridle paths which saddle horses may be permitted to travel upon; such bridle paths shall be properly designated by signs erected by the department of public safety. It shall be unlawful to ride any saddle horse upon the space between the sidewalk and curb upon any highway or public place, or upon any sidewalk. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-6; Code 1997, § 14-494) 
Sec. 10-551. - Owner's responsibility for compliance. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any riding academy or stable to properly advise patrons of the regulations imposed in this article, and the owner or operator of such riding academy or stable shall be responsible for the proper observance of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-7; Code 1997, § 14-495) 
Secs. 10-552-10-580. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-581. - Application; investigation of site. 
    Before engaging in the business of operating a riding academy or stable, the owner thereof shall make application in writing to the council for a license therefor, which application shall state the name of the owner, the location of the business to be operated and the general nature and character of such business to be so conducted. Upon receipt of any such application, the council shall cause an investigation to be made for the purpose of determining the suitability and adequacy of the site at which such business is to be conducted. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-3; Code 1997, § 14-526) 
Sec. 10-582. - Fee. 
    If the application for a license under this article shall be approved, such license shall be issued upon payment of the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city clerk next succeeding its issuance. Renewals of permits shall be made in the same manner as provided in this article for the original license. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-4; Code 1997, § 14-527) 
Sec. 10-583. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The council may, upon notice to any licensee, revoke or suspend any license issued under the provisions of this article upon proof of any violations of the provisions of this article or if any premises used for a riding academy or stable is kept in an unsanitary and unhealthy condition. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3-8; Code 1997, § 14-528) 
Secs. 10-584-10-614. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - TREE TRIMMING AND REMOVAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-615-10-631. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-632. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a tree trimming or tree removal service within the city without first obtaining a license to conduct such service from the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 4-16-1; Code 1997, § 14-1061) 
Sec. 10-633. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license under the terms of this article shall make application for such license to the city clerk on forms provided. Each application shall be referred to the director of public services for the director's approval prior to the issuance of a license by the city clerk. The director of public services may withhold approval of an application if the applicant has been found guilty or pleaded guilty or no contest to a charge of violation of this Code concerning the removal and disposal of tree trimmings or stumps. 
(Code 1975, § 4-16-2; Code 1997, § 14-1062) 
Sec. 10-634. - Fee; performance bond. 
    Upon approval of the application for a license under this article, the applicant shall pay the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time as a license fee to the city and shall file a performance bond in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time with the city to guarantee that the licensee shall remove and dispose of tree trimmings, bush trimmings and stumps cut by such licensee from the premises whereat such services were performed. 
(Code 1975, § 4-16-3; Code 1997, § 14-1063) 
Sec. 10-635. - Display. 
    The applicant shall receive from the city clerk a license plate evidencing the fact that a license has been issued under the terms of this article. Such license plate shall be posted on the left side of any motor vehicle operated in connection with the applicant's business in a conspicuous location. If the applicant uses more than one motor vehicle, additional license plates will be furnished to the applicant at a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 4-16-4; Code 1997, § 14-1064) 
Chapter 12 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications right-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan broadband development authority act, MCL 484.3201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The city, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the city limits. 
(b)  The city council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public, and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 18-1; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-1, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Broadcast basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and educational and government access signals. 
    Cable television service means the total of the following: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service. 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable television system, system, cable communications system and cable system mean a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and which may include video programming, data transmission and other services which are provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations. 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses any public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming, data transmission and other services directly to subscribers. 
(4)  Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Channel and cable channel mean a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
    Cities means the cities of Harper Woods, Grosse Pointe Woods, Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms and Grosse Pointe Park. 
    Council means the city council. 
    Data transmission means any service that involves interactive communication of data and information between the grantee and subscriber. 
    Educational or government access facilities means the following: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for educational or governmental use. 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
    Franchise agreement means a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
    Franchise fee means the fee imposed by the grantor on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, pursuant to section 12-39. 
    Grantee means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter under a granting franchise agreement and the person's lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
    Grantor and city mean the city as represented by the council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
    Gross annual receipts means the annual gross receipts received by a grantee from all sources of operations of the cable television system within the city utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way for which a franchise is required in order to deliver such cable service, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or credits. Any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed on a grantee in addition to its franchise obligations and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government shall not be included. 
    Initial service area means the area of the city which will receive service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement. 
    Installation means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
    Service area and franchise area mean the entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
    Street means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or which are hereafter dedicated to the public authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets, roads, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
    Subscriber means any person who elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system and who pays the charges therefor. 
(Code 1997, § 18-2; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-2, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-3. - Uniform ordinance. 
    This chapter is based upon a uniform ordinance promulgated jointly by all five of the cities. It is intended that, to the greatest extent possible, the provisions of the separate ordinances enacted by each of the cities, based upon the uniform ordinance, be construed in a consistent and uniform manner. 
(Code 1997, § 18-3; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-40, 5-16-1994) 
Secs. 12-4-12-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-25. - Legislative requirement; purposes. 
    A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
(1)  To engage in the business of providing cable television service and such other services as may be permitted by applicable law, to subscribers within the designated service area. 
(2)  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain and retain cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances and other property in connection with the operation of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets within the designated service area. 
(3)  To maintain and operate such franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services and for data transmission and other services. 
(4)  To provide and maintain a permanently installed automatic start engine generator and transfer switch system at the head end, which generator system will be automatically exercised weekly to confirm readiness status and which generator will automatically provide power in the event of commercial power failure within the head end. 
(5)  To provide, upon request, a parental control device which allows parents to lock out both audio and video from pay television programming. 
(6)  To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-31; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-3, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-26. - Franchise required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city within any public street without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18-32; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-4, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-27. - Term of franchise; renewal. 
(a)  A franchise granted under this chapter shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. 
(b)  A franchise granted under this chapter may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 18-33; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-5, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-28. - Franchise territory. 
    Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the city and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1997, § 18-34; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-6, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-29. - Interpretation of chapter and applicability of other laws. 
(a)  This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. Whenever any duly authorized federal or state agency shall exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. 
(b)  If the state or federal government has discontinued or shall discontinue preemption in any area of cable communications over which it formerly exercised or currently exercises jurisdiction, in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal regulatory authority, the grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations in those areas to the extent permitted by law. No such rules and regulations or other rules and regulations of the grantor shall apply to any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter prior to their adoption to the extent precluded by the express terms of the franchise agreement. The grantor may regulate rates and charges as provided under applicable law. 
(c)  This chapter and, to the extent permitted in subsection (b) of this section, any rules or regulations as may be promulgated from time to time shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(d)  The city may amend this chapter, except that no amendment shall alter any provision of any franchise granted before the effective date of the amendment. 
(Code 1997, § 18-35; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-7, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-30. - Transferability. 
(a)  The grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the council. Consideration of any such transaction shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The definition of "any change in control of grantee" shall be set forth in the applicable franchise agreement. 
(c)  The grantee shall notify the grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of such franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by the grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place, and the provisions under this section governing the consent of the grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply. 
(d)  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a change or transfer, as authorized by this section, the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking the grantor's consent to any change of ownership, the grantee shall have the responsibility of ensuring that the transferee completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the grantor, which application shall include the information required under section 12-35(1)-(8). An application shall be submitted to the grantor not less than 60 days prior to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capabilities to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If, after considering the legal, financial character and technical qualifications of the applicant and determining that they are satisfactory, the grantor finds that such transfer is acceptable, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise. Consideration of any such transaction shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
(e)  Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, such financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within 30 days of assuming such control that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion, and during such period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
(f)  Upon transfer, the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for the grantor's reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a transfer of the franchise or of control of the franchise, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants, including technical and legal experts, notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses as provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1997, § 18-36; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-8, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-31. - Geographical coverage. 
(a)  The grantee shall be obligated to serve all residents of the city unless otherwise agreed upon between the grantor and grantee. The grantee shall extend service to new subscribers at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification where there are an average of 70 homes per each linear mile of new cable construction. 
(b)  If the requirements of subsection (a) of this section are not met, extensions of service shall be required only on a basis that is reasonable and compensatory. 
(c)  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within 30 days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such 30-day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
(Code 1997, § 18-37; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-9, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-32. - Nonexclusivity. 
    Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law; provided, however, that should a franchise be granted by the grantor on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than any other franchise granted under this chapter, the grantee of the more burdensome or less favorable franchise shall have the option to amend its franchise so that it conforms to those terms which are materially less burdensome or more favorable. 
(Code 1997, § 18-38; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-10, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-33. - Multiple franchises. 
    The grantor may grant one or more franchises for a service area. The grantor may limit the number of franchises granted based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, within the grantor's sole discretion. 
(Code 1997, § 18-39; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-11, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-34. - Applications-Generally. 
    Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee established by the city shall accompany the application or renewal application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant and consultants, including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts, notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. If such costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant shall pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
(Code 1997, § 18-40; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-12, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-35. - Same-Contents. 
    An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable: 
(1)  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area. 
(2)  Resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field. 
(3)  List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder, if a corporation. 
(4)  List of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person. 
(5)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant. 
(6)  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
(7)  Proposed construction and service schedule. 
(8)  Any reasonable additional information that the city deems applicable. 
(Code 1997, § 18-41; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-13, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-36. - Same-Consideration of; public hearing; grant or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the council. 
(b)  A public hearing shall be set prior to any franchise grant at a time and date approved by the council. Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise should be granted and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or it may decline to grant any franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-42; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-14, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-37. - Renewal. 
    Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 521 et seq., or other applicable law. The grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-43; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-15, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-38. - Consumer protection and service standards. 
    The grantee shall comply with the consumer protection and customer service standards as set forth in the applicable franchise agreement. 
(Code 1997, § 18-44; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-16, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-39. - Fees; financial statement; audit. 
(a)  The grantee shall, during each year of operation under this chapter, pay to the grantor a franchise fee in an amount specified in its franchise agreement. 
(b)  The grantor, on a semiannual basis, shall be furnished a statement within 60 days of the close of the six-month period, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross receipts and all payments and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon ten days' prior written notice, the grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the grantee's records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(d)  If any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in this chapter or the franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate of NBD Bank, N.A., plus one percent during the period for which payment was due. In addition, the grantee shall pay an additional amount of $250.00 per day as liquidated damages for each day the payment is past due; provided, however, that no liquidated damages shall accrue or be payable to the grantor when the grantee pays such past due amount within the five-day grace period permitted under section 12-51(1). 
(e)  All payments due from the grantee to grantor shall be made quarterly by April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31 for the preceding three-month period. 
(Code 1997, § 18-45; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-17, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-40. - Design and construction requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall construct its cable system using material of good and durable quality, and all work involved in the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the cable system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner. Any municipal property damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the grantee and restored to serviceable condition. 
(b)  The grantee's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the grantor may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property. 
(c)  In the event that the grantor shall annex further territory as authorized by law, then, subject to section 12-59, the grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the grantor so annexed within an acceptable time thereafter, unless additional time is granted by the city council upon request of the grantee for good cause shown. 
(d)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(e)  In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the grantor, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before such work was commenced. 
(f)  The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where such poles or fixtures will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curbline. Those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on such alley and then in such manner as not to interfere with the travel on such streets, alleys and public ways. 
(g)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(h)  The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. All trimming is to be done under the supervision and direction of the grantor and at the expense of the grantee. 
(i)  The grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, all nonpremium services to any municipal buildings owned and operated by the city and to any certified public, private and parochial educational facilities. This shall mean only an energized cable to such building. The cost of any internal wiring shall be borne by the institution. 
(j)  The grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from the grantor or other cognizant public agencies. 
(k)  In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
(l)  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and if the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at the grantee's cost. Certain of the grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed aboveground, may continue to remain in aboveground enclosures. 
(m)  In new residential developments, in which the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground easements: 
(1)  The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all grantees to ascertain which grantees desire to provide cable television service to that development. The developer may establish a reasonable deadline to receive each grantee's response. The final development map shall indicate the grantees that have agreed to serve the development. 
(2)  If one or two grantees wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory-shared basis. If fewer than two grantees indicate interest, the developer shall provide conduit to accommodate two sets of cable television cables and dedicate to the grantor any initially unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled to recover the cost of such initially unoccupied conduit if the grantor subsequently leases or sells the occupancy or use rights to any grantee. 
(3)  The developer shall provide at least ten working days' notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the grantees that have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, the grantees shall have two working days to begin the installation of their cables, and five working days after beginning installation to complete installation. 
(4)  The final development map shall not be approved until the developer submits evidence that: 
a.  It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches are to open as of an estimated date and that each grantee will be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and 
b.  It has received a written notification from each grantee that the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the specified terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the developer and grantee, or has received no reply from a grantee within ten days after its notification to such grantee, in which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench period. 
(5)  Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with state regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the participating operators. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the grantees, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law. 
(6)  Any grantee wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs. 
(7)  The grantor reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchise applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against the grantor if the pending franchise application is not granted. The grantor may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant's cost. The construction of such a separate trench, if provided, shall be coordinated with, and subject to, the developer's overall construction schedule. 
(Code 1997, § 18-46; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-18, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-41. - Technical standards. 
(a)  All facilities and equipment of the grantee shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the National Electrical Safety Code, FCC technical standards, and such applicable ordinances and regulations set forth by the grantor and/or any other local, state or federal agencies. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines. 
(b)  Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-47; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-19, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-42. - Program content restrictions. 
    The grantee may offer subscribers optional services on a per-program or per-channel basis (pay cable). The grantee shall not, however, program or in any way display obscene material such as X-rated motion pictures. 
(Code 1997, § 18-48; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-20, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-43. - Indemnification. 
    The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from all liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, for bodily injury and property damage arising from operations of the grantee, its officers, agents or employees under the franchise and arising from installation, maintenance and ownership of the cable system. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, upon demand of the grantor, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities against the grantor, its officers, agents or employees, and arising out of any conduct of the grantee, its agents or employees which is within the scope of this indemnity. The grantor shall also have the benefit of any other indemnification of any insurance provision contained in the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1997, § 18-49; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-21, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-44. - Insurance. 
(a)  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from companies authorized to transact business in the state. 
(b)  The policy of liability insurance required by this section shall: 
(1)  Be issued to the grantee and name the grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds; 
(2)  Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited for: 
a.  Negligent acts or omissions of the grantee and its agents, servants and employees committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and/or 
b.  Use of motor vehicles; 
(3)  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. Such insurance policy shall be subject to review and approval by the city manager subject to review by the council; and 
(4)  Be noncancellable without 30 days' prior written notice thereof directed to the grantor. 
(c)  The policy of workers' compensation insurance required by this section shall: 
(1)  Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the state insurance commissioner; 
(2)  Cover all employees of the grantee who in the course and scope of their employment are to conduct the franchise operations; 
(3)  Provide for every benefit and payment presently or to be conferred by the state labor code upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits. 
(d)  The policy of property insurance required by this section shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by the grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable the grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by such insurance. 
(e)  The grantee shall file with the grantor prior to commencement of franchise operations either certified copies of the insurance policies required by this section or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to such policy: 
(1)  The policy number; 
(2)  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
(3)  The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required by this chapter or the franchise agreement; 
(4)  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
(5)  The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance. 
(f)  Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until the grantee has complied with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  If the grantee fails to maintain any of the policies described in this section in full force and effect, the grantor shall, upon 48 hours' notice to the grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from the grantee. The grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that the grantee fails to maintain such policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in consumer prices, no more than once during any five-year period, the grantor shall have the right to order the grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance provided in the franchise agreement. The grantor may make such order after conducting a duly noticed public hearing. Increases in insurance coverage shall be no greater than any increase in the Detroit Metropolitan Area Consumer Price Index (all consumers) for the five-year period. 
(Code 1997, § 18-50; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-22, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-45. - Records required and grantor's right to inspect. 
(a)  The grantee shall at all times maintain: 
(1)  A record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call; provided further, that such record and the specific information contained therein shall be kept confidential by the grantee in compliance with the privacy provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 521 et seq. 
(2)  A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes. 
(3)  If requested by the grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within 30 days following its request in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor. 
(b)  The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of section 12-47(b), upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, the grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of the grantee, situated within or without the city, and all records relating to the franchise, provided such examination is necessary to enable the grantor to discharge its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. The grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. 
(Code 1997, § 18-51; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-23, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-46. - Annual reports. 
(a)  Upon request, the grantee shall submit a written end of the year report to the grantor, with respect to the preceding calendar year, containing the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year. 
(2)  A list of the grantee's officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of the grantee. 
(3)  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in the grantee. 
(4)  Information as to the number of the basic cable and pay subscribers. 
(b)  All annual reports required under this chapter shall be available for public inspection in the grantee's offices during normal business hours. 
(c)  All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1997, § 18-52; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-24, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-47. - Federal and state communications of grantee. 
(a)  The grantee, upon request, shall submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by the grantee to, as well as copies of all responses thereto by any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body, which are nonroutine in nature and which will materially affect its cable television operations within the franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor simultaneously with their submission to such court, agency and/or body, or within five days after their receipt from such court, agency and/or body. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by the grantee, which is submitted to the grantor, shall be retained in confidence by the grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to the grantor which contain trade secrets of the grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to the grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from the grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor. To the extent possible, the grantee will provide the grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on the grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted. 
(Code 1997, § 18-53; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-25, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-48. - Remedies for franchise violations. 
    If the grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted under this chapter, following notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of section 12-51 and the franchise, the grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
(1)  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in this chapter if such violation is not cured within 30 days after written notice to the grantee of the grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security fund. 
(2)  Assess against the grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violation. 
(3)  For repeated and verifiable violations of consumer service standards of this chapter or the franchise agreement which have materially degraded the quality of service, the grantor may request the grantee to issue rebates or credits to subscribers, in an amount to be determined by the grantee. Credits shall be reasonably related to the nature of the degradation in service and measured by the period of the degradation, to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the reduced quality of service resulting from the grantee's failure to perform. 
(4)  Initiate proceedings to revoke the franchise, in accordance with the provisions of section 12-50. 
(Code 1997, § 18-54; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-26, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-49. - Security fund. 
(a)  The grantor may require the grantee to deposit into an interest bearing account established by the grantor and the grantee a sum established in the franchise agreement as a security fund. This sum shall be held by a neutral party experienced in acting as an escrow agent, and shall be maintained on deposit for a term as provided in the franchise agreement, with any interest payable to the grantee. 
(b)  The security fund shall be available to the grantor as provided in section 12-48 to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due the grantor from the grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  The security fund requirements may be satisfied by conveyance of an irrevocable letter of credit to the grantor, or by provision of a corporate surety bond in a form approved by the grantor. 
(Code 1997, § 18-55; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-27, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-50. - Grantor's power to revoke. 
(a)  The grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by the grantee and a material breach under the franchise grant: 
(1)  If the grantee shall default in the performance of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and shall continue such default after receipt of due notice and opportunity to cure the default in accordance with the provisions of section 12-51. 
(2)  If the grantee shall violate any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by the grantee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith. 
(3)  If the grantee practices any fraud upon grantor, as determined by a court of law. 
(4)  If the grantee persistently fails to remedy defaults for which lesser penalties have previously been imposed. 
(5)  If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
(b)  The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of the grantor to pursue any remedy under this chapter, the franchise agreement or any provision of law. 
(Code 1997, § 18-56; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-28, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-51. - Procedure for remedying franchise violations. 
    Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against the grantee specified in this chapter, the grantor shall give the grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The grantor shall first notify the grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than five days, in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee's franchise and 30 days in all other cases. If the grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than 20 days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Such notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred. 
(2)  At the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
(3)  If the council finds that the grantee has corrected the violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from the grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
(4)  If the council finds that material violations exist and that the grantee has not corrected such violations in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced correction of such violations after notice thereof from the grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violations, the council may impose one or more of the remedies specified in this section as the council, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(5)  If the grantor elects to assess liquidated damages pursuant to the provisions of the franchise agreement, then such election shall constitute the grantor's exclusive remedy for a period of 30 days. Thereafter, if the grantee remains in noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter and/or the franchise agreement, the grantor may pursue any available remedy. 
(Code 1997, § 18-57; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-29, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-52. - Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform. 
    If the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted under this chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from any liability under section 12-48(3), pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of the grantee shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, power failure or loss of other utility services which are necessary for the operation of the system, sabotage, riots and civil disturbances, actions of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of the grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable communications system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Code 1997, § 18-58; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-30, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-53. - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
(a)  If the use of any property of the grantee within the franchise area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of 60 days, the grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. 
(b)  The grantor, upon such terms as the grantor may impose, may give the grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned aboveground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. The grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided in this chapter shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(c)  Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned. 
(d)  At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for in this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. 
(f)  Except for an event of force majeure, if the grantee fails to operate the system for 60 days without prior approval or subsequent excusal of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as a grantee or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall indemnify the grantor against any damages grantor may suffer as a result of such failure. 
(Code 1997, § 18-59; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-31, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-54. - Restoration work by grantor; reimbursement of costs. 
    In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any restoration work required in this chapter or in the franchise agreement, and if such work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of written notice thereof from the grantor or, if more than 30 days are reasonably required thereafter, if the grantee does not commence such work within such 30-day period and diligently complete the work thereafter (except in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare), the grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund provided by the grantee. 
(Code 1997, § 18-60; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-32, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-55. - Extended operation and continuity of services. 
    Upon either expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have discretion to permit the grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time not to exceed nine months from the date of such expiration or revocation, unless extended by mutual agreement of the grantor and grantee. The grantee shall continue to operate the system during such period under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-61; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-33, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-56. - Receivership and foreclosure. 
(a)  A franchise granted under this chapter shall, at the option of the grantor, cease and terminate 60 days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such 60-day period, or unless: 
(1)  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 60 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and the receivership or trustees within such 60-day period shall have remedied all the faults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and 
(2)  Such receivers or trustees shall, within such 60-day period, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted. 
(b)  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee under this chapter shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and 
(2)  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-62; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-34, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-57. - Rights reserved to grantor. 
(a)  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power that is required to be reserved by a provision of any law or under the franchise. 
(b)  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines that it is in the public interest to do so, and that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance, nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
(c)  The grantor shall have the right to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this chapter and existing applicable ordinances, such additional ordinances pertaining to the health, safety and welfare, and of general applicability, as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power. 
(d)  The city shall have the right, during the life of this chapter, to maintain upon the poles or in the underground conduits of the grantee within the city limits wires and fixtures necessary for a traffic signal control system and/or a police and fire alarm system. Such wires and fixtures shall be installed and maintained at the sole expense of the city and in such manner that there shall be a minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the grantee and wires and fixtures used by the city. 
(e)  In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the council or the council's designee, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. 
(f)  The grantor shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the grantee caused by employees of the grantor in the performance of their duties, except for damage caused to the grantee's facilities by the negligence of the grantor's employees. The grantor shall not be liable for the interruption of service by actions of the grantor's employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the grantor be held liable for the failure of the grantee to be able to perform normal services due to acts of God or other factors beyond the control of the grantor. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall grant to the grantee any right of property in the city-owned property, nor shall the city be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than or in any fashion other than in the city's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(h)  Except for emergencies, the grantee shall not open any street nor erect any permanent obstruction on any public right-of-way without obtaining all necessary permits required by local law. The grantor shall have the right to inspect any such construction and the grantee shall have the right to be present at any such inspection. 
(Code 1997, § 18-63; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-35, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-58. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)  The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
(b)  The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
(c)  The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled or the establishment of customized bulk and commercial billing arrangements. The grantee may, at its own discretion, waive, reduce or suspend connection fees for specific or indeterminate periods and/or monthly service fees for promotional purposes. 
(d)  The grantee must notify all subscribers 30 days prior to any rate change. 
(e)  The grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
(f)  The grantee shall comply with the privacy provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 521 et seq., and all other applicable laws. 
(g)  No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter or other piece of equipment owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee in the subscriber's premises without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon the subscriber's property shall be presumed. Where a property owner or such property owner's predecessor has granted an easement including a public utility easement or a servitude to another and the servitude by its terms contemplates a use such as the grantee's intended use, the grantee shall not be required to secure the written permission of the owner for the installation of cable television equipment. 
(h)  The grantee or its subcontractors will not interrupt the transmission of signals of the cable system except for necessary maintenance or emergencies. Unless otherwise authorized by the grantor, charges shall abate in the event that service to a subscriber is interrupted for more than 24 hours upon request of the subscriber. Interruption of service shall include system reception, except that degradation, due to natural phenomena, of basic service satellite signals shall not be considered an interruption of service for purposes of this section only. 
(i)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. 
(Code 1997, § 18-64; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-36, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-59. - Unauthorized connections, other violations; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any physical connection to any franchised cable television or cable communications system operating in the city that is not authorized by the operator of such system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, remove, obstruct or interfere with any part of any franchise cable television or cable communication system operating in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any modification to system equipment or to any system connected equipment so as to induce any uncompensated franchised cable television or cable communications system service or level of service for which the operator has established compensation rates. 
(d)  Violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of a continuing violation may be charged and punished as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1997, § 18-65; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-37, 5-16-1994) 
Sec. 12-60. - Advisory board. 
(a)  The grantee shall establish an advisory board, which shall consist of one member representing each community comprising part of its service area and the provider of local origination. Each member to the advisory board shall be appointed annually by the member's respective community or provider of local origination. 
(b)  The advisory board shall meet at least once each calendar quarter with the grantee to review the community's comments and complaints regarding the cable system. The grantee shall be responsive to those comments and complaints. 
(c)  The advisory board may make recommendations to a grantee concerning all aspects of the franchise, its operational standards, rules governing local access, content, programming, proposed new services and pricing structure. 
(d)  The grantee shall also submit a written annual report to the advisory board, including such topics as programming, finances, technical matters and future directions of the grantee. 
(e)  The advisory board may make recommendations to the communities concerning the grantee's performance and comment upon requests by the grantee of a renewal or extension of its franchise. 
(Code 1997, § 18-66; Ord. No. 658, § 4-18-38, 5-16-1994) 
Secs. 12-61-12-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CABLE RATES 

Sec. 12-79. - Adoption of federal regulations. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in 47 CFR 76.901-76.990, cable rate regulation, regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment. 
(Code 1975, § 4-24-1; Code 1997, § 18-91) 
Sec. 12-80. - Review. 
    After a cable operator has submitted for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the city clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Code 1975, § 4-24-2; Code 1997, § 18-92) 
Sec. 12-81. - Confidential information. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.938 regarding confidential business information submitted by a cable operator in a rate regulation proceeding. 
(Code 1975, § 4-24-3; Code 1997, § 18-93) 
Sec. 12-82. - Penalty for violation. 
    A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture not to exceed $25,000.00 for each violation or each day of a continuing violation, not to exceed $250,000.00, as determined by the city clerk following the procedures set forth in 47 USC 503(b)(2)(D), (3)(A) and (B), (4)(A), (B) and (C) which the city hereby adopts by reference. 
(Code 1975, § 4-24-4; Code 1997, § 18-94) 
Sec. 12-83. - Copies of adopted regulations available. 
    A copy of the rules and procedures adopted by reference in this article are available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Code 1975, § 4-24-5; Code 1997, § 18-95) 
Sec. 12-84. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and a cable television franchise, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Code 1975, § 4-24-6; Code 1997, § 18-96) 
Chapter 14 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solicit and solicitation mean the act of any person going house to house or business establishment to business establishment requesting money, credit, property, financial assistance or any other thing of value and, while so doing, offering to sell any article, tag, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription or other thing, whether of value or not, on a plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value or any part thereof will be used for a charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic purpose. This definition does not include the door-to-door distribution of any paper, letter, handbill or other literature, provided, however, that such person making such distribution shall not attempt to engage the residents of any house or the proprietor, customers or tenants of any business establishment in any conversation relating to such request contained in such paper, letter, handbill or other literature. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-1; Code 1997, § 22-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Prohibited where posted. 
    No person shall conduct a solicitation at a residence or other building within the city on which there is displayed a sign in public view reading "no solicitors." This sign shall not exceed three inches by 12 inches in size and shall have letters one inch or greater in size. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-8; Code 1997, § 22-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-9; Code 1997, § 22-3) 
Secs. 14-4-14-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 14-25. - Permit required. 
    No person shall solicit for any cause, except as provided in this chapter, unless such person or the charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic organization for which benefit such solicitation is made shall have first obtained a permit to solicit as required in this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to solicitations conducted exclusively within the membership of an organization by its officers and members. No solicitations shall be conducted on dates or at times not authorized by such permit. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-2; Code 1997, § 22-31) 
Sec. 14-26. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for a permit to solicit shall be filed with the city clerk on forms furnished for such purpose. Such permits, as are issued, shall restrict the hours of solicitation to 9:00 a.m. to dusk or 7:00 p.m., local time, whichever occurs first, only and shall not exceed 90 days' duration. 
(b)  The application for a permit to solicit shall contain the following information or a statement by the applicant as to why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and principal office location of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom and any commission or other remuneration paid to the solicitors. 
(3)  The name of the person by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed and the name and location of the custodian of such funds prior to the disbursement. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of conducting the solicitation. 
(5)  A description of the methods to be employed in conducting the solicitation. 
(6)  The dates and proposed times when such solicitations are to be made. 
(7)  A full descriptive statement of the character and extent of the charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic work being done by the applicant within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-3; Code 1997, § 22-32) 
Sec. 14-27. - Qualifications; use of proceeds; issuance. 
(a)  The city clerk shall review each application for a permit under this chapter and shall determine that: 
(1)  The applicant is a person or organization which is, in fact, engaged in charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic work or engaged in raising funds for distribution to such persons or organizations. 
(2)  The net proceeds derived from the solicitations authorized under the permit shall be used exclusively for charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic purposes. Commissions or other remuneration paid to the solicitors by the applicant shall require the applicant to obtain a vendor permit for such persons. 
(b)  Upon a finding that the qualifications for a permit under this chapter have been met, the city clerk shall issue a solicitation permit to the applicant. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-4; Code 1997, § 22-33) 
Sec. 14-28. - Nontransferable. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable to any person. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-5; Code 1997, § 22-34) 
Sec. 14-29. - Not an endorsement. 
    No person shall represent that the granting of a permit authorizing a solicitation under the provisions of this chapter is an endorsement by the city of the particular organization involved or its goals or aims. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-6; Code 1997, § 22-35) 
Sec. 14-30. - Filing false statements. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly file or furnish false information or statements to the city clerk for the purpose of attempting to or actually securing a permit under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17-7; Code 1997, § 22-36) 
Sec. 14-31. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the solicitation. 
(3)  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the solicitation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the permitee's last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing. 
Sec. 14-32. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the clerk or the director of public safety in the denial of a permit applied for under this article shall have the right of appeal to and a hearing before the council. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and a fee as established by council resolution from time to time. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in section 14-31(b) for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the council in such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
Chapter 16 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, MCL 600.9921 et seq. 

Sec. 16-19. - Salary of municipal judge. 
    The salary of the municipal judge is established by the local officers' compensation commission. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1-1; Code 1997, § 26-31) 
Sec. 16-20. - Court clerk and deputy court clerk-Offices created. 
    The offices of court clerk for the municipal court of the city, together with not more than three deputy court clerks, are hereby created. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1-2; Code 1997, § 26-32) 
Sec. 16-21. - Same-Appointment. 
    The city administrator shall have full power of appointment of the court clerk and deputy court clerks, and such appointees shall perform all other services as may be required by the city administrator in addition to any of the services required under this article. Appointees shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1-5; Code 1997, § 26-33) 
Sec. 16-22. - Same-Powers. 
    The court clerk and deputy court clerks shall have the power to administer oaths to persons making affidavits or complaints for warrants in Code violation cases, criminal cases and for writs and processes in civil cases. They shall also have power to issue processes and to attest such processes in the name of the presiding officer of the court. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1-3; Code 1997, § 26-34) 
Sec. 16-23. - Same-Duties. 
    The court clerk and deputy court clerks shall be required to collect all fees, fines, costs and other monies paid into or deposited with the court and shall keep a record book of such monies, and pay over such monies to the proper authorities of the city, county or other persons entitled to such monies, as directed by the Charter, by the proper authorities or by law. The court clerk and deputy court clerks shall perform such services as may be required by the court in the operation of the violations bureau of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1-4; Code 1997, § 26-35) 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq.; emergency medical services, MCL 333.20901 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 

Sec. 18-19. - Intent and purpose; coordinating agency. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an organization that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of the city's resources during periods of emergency. 
(b)  The office of emergency services of the city will be the coordinating agency responsible for citywide emergency preparedness. It will provide the means through which the city council may exercise authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in it by this article and by Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.). 
(c)  This article will not relieve any elected official or city department of the normal responsibilities or authority given to it by general law or ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in natural disasters. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-1; Code 1997, § 30-31) 
Sec. 18-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means the responsible head of the office of emergency services of the city appointed as prescribed in this article. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or manmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots or civil disorders. 
    Disaster relief forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and committees suitable for or adaptable to participation in emergency services activities as designated by the city administrator, with the approval of the council. In addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons and agencies. 
    Emergency proclamation means a proclamation issued by the governor that a state of emergency exists under the provisions of Public Act No. 302 of 1945 (MCL 10.31 et seq.). 
    Emergency services shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for and relief from the effects of natural and manmade disasters, as defined in this section, and to include emergency preparedness as defined in Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.). 
    Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    Emergency situation means any situation confronting the city requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined in this section, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, severe weather and buildup activities prior to an actual disaster. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-2; Code 1997, § 30-32) 
Sec. 18-21. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a)  Director designated. The mayor, as executive head of the city government, shall be the director of the disaster relief forces of the city and shall be responsible for its organization, administration and operation working through the city administrator as the coordinator. 
(b)  Organization erected; emergency services coordinator. The city administrator, with the approval of the council, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the city. The city administrator shall be the emergency services coordinator and shall be responsible for the office of emergency services. 
(c)  Composition. The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Established. An office of emergency services shall be established within city government. The office of emergency services shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the coordinator, office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2)  Resource designation. The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and committees suitable for or adaptable to emergency service activities may be designated as part of the total disaster relief force. Such designations shall be recommended by the city administrator with the approval of the council. 
(3)  Interagency cooperation. All officers and employees of departments, committees, boards, institutions and other agencies of the city government designated by the city administrator, with the approval of the council, as disaster relief forces shall cooperate with the emergency services coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan and they shall assist the coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-3; Code 1997, § 30-33) 
Sec. 18-22. - Assistant coordinators. 
(a)  Assistant coordinators appointed by the city administrator shall be designated to work with the coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant coordinators shall be appointed as need dictates. 
(b)  Assistant coordinators shall assume the duties of the coordinator whenever the coordinator is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-4; Code 1997, § 30-34) 
Sec. 18-23. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
    The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this article. Whenever a situation requires or is likely to require that the mayor invokes such power and authority, the mayor shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the council to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the council unless specifically provided in this article. 
(1)  Under the following circumstances, the mayor may direct the emergency services coordinator to assemble and utilize the disaster relief forces and may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use: 
a.  Whenever on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, the mayor feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation affecting the city is imminent. 
b.  During any period of disaster in the city, county or state and thereafter as long as the mayor shall deem it necessary. 
(2)  Whenever any condition in the city has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, the mayor may direct the emergency services coordinator to assemble and utilize disaster relief forces and may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use. The mayor, with the approval of the council, is hereby empowered to enter into mutual aid agreements with other public and private agencies for reciprocal aid and assistance during disasters which are beyond local capabilities and resources. The mayor may, when deemed in the public interest, send disaster relief forces of the city to the aid of other communities stricken by disaster as provided by mutual aid agreements, provided that after the council convenes, the future continuance of any such disaster relief and the period thereof shall be subject to the action of the council. 
(3)  The city administrator, with the approval of the council, may establish regulations permitting the assembly and utilization of the disaster relief forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(4)  When obtaining formal approvals would result in significant delay of relief activity, the mayor or city administrator may, until the council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and the expenditure of existing funds. The council is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(5)  The city administrator, with the approval of the council, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-5; Code 1997, § 30-35) 
Sec. 18-24. - Powers and duties of the coordinator. 
(a)  The emergency services coordinator shall be responsible for all emergency preparedness activities in the city. The coordinator shall maintain liaison with state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. 
(b)  The coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Development of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property, and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes. 
(3)  Through public information programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of disaster. 
(4)  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the city's regulations, procedures and operations. 
(5)  Coordinating the activities of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs. 
(6)  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)  Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
(8)  Establishing property accountability procedures for federal surplus property acquired by the city, federal excess property on loan to the city, or any other property or equipment loaned to the city for use in disaster or emergency situations. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-6; Code 1997, § 30-36) 
Sec. 18-25. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Subject to the approval of the coordinator, each department, committee, board or other agency of city government may appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such city department, committee, board or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, committee, board or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b)  The coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the city has no counterpart or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. The coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workers' compensation purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-7; Code 1997, § 30-37) 
Sec. 18-26. - Rights of city employees. 
    City employees assigned to duty as part of the disaster relief forces pursuant to the provisions of this article shall retain all of the rights, privileges and immunities of city employees and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-8; Code 1997, § 30-38) 
Sec. 18-27. - Governmental or private liability. 
(a)  Personnel of disaster relief forces, while on duty, are subject to all of the following provisions: 
(1)  If they are employees of this state, they have the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities of and receive the compensation incidental to their employment. 
(2)  If they are employees of a political subdivision of this state, regardless of where serving, they have the powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities and receive the compensation incidental to their employment. 
(3)  If they are not employees of this state or a political subdivision of this state, they are entitled to the same rights and immunities as provided by law for the employees of this state. All personnel of disaster relief forces shall, while on duty, be subject to the operational control of the authority in charge of disaster relief activities in the area in which they are serving, and shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses. 
(b)  This state, any political subdivision of this state, or the employees, agents or representatives of this state or any political subdivision of this state are not liable for personal injury or property damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a member of disaster relief forces. This article does not affect the right of a person to receive benefits or compensation to which he may otherwise be entitled to under the Worker's Disability Compensation Act of 1969, Public Act No. 317 of 1969 (MCL 418.101 et seq.), any pension law, or any act of congress. 
(c)  This state or a political subdivision of this state engaged in disaster relief activity is not liable for the death of or injury to a person or for damage to property as a result of that activity. The employees, agents or representatives of this state or a political subdivision of this state and nongovernmental disaster relief force workers or private or volunteer personnel engaged in disaster relief activity are immune from tort liability to the extent provided under section 7 of Public Act No. 170 of 1964 (MCL 691.1407). As used in this section, the term "disaster relief activity" includes training for or responding to an actual, impending, mock, or practice disaster or emergency. 
(d)  A person licensed to practice medicine or osteopathic medicine and surgery or a licensed hospital, whether licensed in this state, another state, by the federal government or a branch of the armed forces of the United States, or an individual listed in subsection (f) of this section, who renders services during a state of disaster declared by the governor and at the express or implied request of a state official or agency or county or local coordinator or executive body, is considered an authorized disaster relief worker or facility and is not liable for an injury sustained by a person by reason of those services, regardless of how, under what circumstances or by what cause those injuries are sustained. The immunity granted by this subsection does not apply in the event of an act or omission that is willful or gross negligence. If a civil action for malpractice is filed alleging an act or omission that is willful or gross negligence resulting in injuries, the services rendered that resulted in those injuries shall be judged according to the standards required of persons licensed in this state to perform those services. 
(e)  An individual listed in subsection (f) of this section, during a state of disaster declared by the governor, may practice, in addition to the authority granted by other statutes of this state, the administration of anesthetics; minor surgery; intravenous, subcutaneous or intramuscular procedure; or oral and topical medication; or a combination of these under the supervision of a member of the medical staff of a licensed hospital of this state, and may assist the staff member in other medical and surgical proceedings. 
(f)  Subsections (d) and (e) of this section apply to all of the following individuals: 
(1)  Any of the following, if licensed in this or another state or by the federal government or a branch of the armed forces of the United States: 
a.  A registered nurse. 
b.  A practical nurse. 
c.  A nursing student acting under the supervision of a licensed nurse. 
d.  A dentist. 
e.  A veterinarian. 
f.  A pharmacist. 
g.  A pharmacist intern acting under the supervision of a licensed pharmacist. 
h.  A paramedic. 
(2)  A medical resident undergoing training in a licensed hospital in this or another state. 
(g)  A person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to this state or a political subdivision of this state a license or privilege, or otherwise permits this state or a political subdivision of this state to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part of the real estate or other premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice disaster, together with his successors in interest, if any, is not civilly liable for negligently causing the death of or injury to any person on or about the real estate or premises under the license, privilege or permission or for loss or damage to the property of the person. 
(h)  A person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who has gratuitously granted the use of the real estate or other premises for the purposes stated in this section is legally obligated to make known to the licensee any hidden dangers or safety hazards that are known to the owner or occupant of the real estate or premises that might possibly result in the death or injury or loss of property to a person using the real estate or premises. 
(i)  As used in this section, the term "gross negligence" means conduct so reckless as to demonstrate a substantial lack of concern for whether an injury results. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-9; Code 1997, § 30-39) 
Sec. 18-28. - Federal surplus property. 
    The emergency services coordinator is hereby designated as the person responsible for accepting federal surplus property with the power and full authority to sign for such surplus property. The mayor shall provide a written statement to appropriate federal officials designating the current name of the coordinator as responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The coordinator is responsible for the accountability and will maintain the necessary records for all surplus property obtained for emergency purposes until relieved from accountability by state and federal authorities. 
(2)  The coordinator is further authorized to direct payment of service charges for surplus property to complete all transactions. 
(3)  Misappropriation or unauthorized private use of such public property while still accountable is subject to prosecution under federal and state statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13-10; Code 1997, § 30-40) 
Chapter 20 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural Resource and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Rubbish, trash and weeds. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. The presence of dirt, trash, rubbish or weeds on the sidewalks and street rights-of-way adjoining commercial business establishments is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant, or any firm or corporation having charge of any lot or parcel of land being used for commercial or business purposes of any nature within the city, to permit or allow an unsightly amount of dirt, trash, rubbish or weeds to accumulate upon the sidewalks and street rights-of-way adjoining such lot or parcel of land. 
(Code 1975, §§ 3-7-1, 3-7-2; Code 1997, §§ 14-1, 14-2) 
Secs. 20-2-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq. 

Sec. 20-21. - Creation or maintenance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause to be created or to permit the existence of a nuisance in or upon privately owned property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-1; Code 1997, § 34-31) 
Sec. 20-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means the creation of or the existence of any condition upon privately owned property that may result in or have a tendency to result in an unsanitary or unhealthy condition. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-2; Code 1997, § 34-32) 
Sec. 20-23. - Excavations below grade. 
    It shall be unlawful to excavate upon or remove the earth from any premises so as to create any hole or depression in or upon the premises where water may accumulate, or by removal of earth from such premises, which may reduce or lower the grade of such premises below that established upon adjoining public thoroughfares. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-3; Code 1997, § 34-33) 
Sec. 20-24. - Open drains. 
    It shall be unlawful to establish an open drain in and upon private property without first having obtained a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of section 20-29(a). 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-4; Code 1997, § 34-34) 
Sec. 20-25. - Standing water. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit private property to exist in a condition that shall be of a grade below that of the grade of adjacent public thoroughfares. It shall be the duty of the owner of private property to cause any property existing in such condition to either provide adequate fill therefor or to provide adequate surface drainage, so as to eliminate the accumulation of surface water upon such premises. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-5; Code 1997, § 34-35) 
Sec. 20-26. - Accumulation of waste. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any rubbish, garbage or offal, paper, twigs, water deposit, glass, manure, filth, grass, shrubs or other similar or like offensive materials to accumulate upon private property that may create an unsanitary or unhealthful condition upon such property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-6; Code 1997, § 34-36) 
Sec. 20-27. - Deposit of waste material. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or scatter rubbish, garbage or offal, broken concrete, bricks, paper, twigs, manure, filth, grass, shrubs or other similar or like offensive materials upon private property; provided that, if any such substance or materials may be required to make a fill, a permit therefor shall be first obtained as required in this article. If such permit shall be granted, after the fill has been completed, the entire surface where such fill has been made shall be covered with at least six inches of dirt spread evenly over such fill. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-7; Code 1997, § 34-37) 
Sec. 20-28. - Property owner's consent required for excavation or filling. 
    It shall be unlawful to remove earth from or deposit materials specified in section 20-27 upon the property of another without first having obtained such property owner's written consent, which written consent shall be filed with the clerk. Such operation shall be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this article and all other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-8; Code 1997, § 34-38) 
Sec. 20-29. - Permit for excavation, filling or installation of open drain. 
(a)  Application; bond; issuance. It shall be unlawful to undertake any excavation work or dirt removal work, any property filling, or installation of any open drain or ditch upon private property without first having obtained a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be made to the city clerk and shall specify the nature of the work to be engaged in, the location of such work, the name and address of the owner of the property involved and the name and address of the applicant. If, because of the nature of the work to be engaged in, the clerk shall determine that, in order to safeguard the public health, a performance bond shall be required before any such permit shall be issued, such application shall be referred to the council for determination of the amount and nature of the bond to be required. The council may impose further conditions in the issuance of any such permit to safeguard the public interests, and upon determination of the nature and amount of the bond to be furnished and the conditions to be imposed, no permit shall issue until full compliance with the directions of the council shall have been made. 
(b)  Fee. The applicant, for any permit required under subsection (a) of this section, shall pay to the clerk a permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-7-9, 8-7-10; Code 1997, §§ 34-39, 34-40) 
Sec. 20-30. - Exception for work covered by building permit. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to any construction work undertaken by reason of the issuance of a building permit under provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7-11; Code 1997, § 34-41) 
Sec. 20-31. - Costs. 
    Costs incurred by the city to enforce this article may be assessed as a single lot assessment. 
Secs. 20-32-20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTSIDE STORAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 20-51-20-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONLICENSED OR INOPERABLE AUTOMOBILES, PANEL TRUCKS AND PICKUP TRUCKS 

Sec. 20-74. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inoperable automobile, panel truck or pickup truck means any motor vehicle which is temporarily or permanently incapable of being moved under its own power and has not been moved for a period of 14 consecutive days, excepting those vehicles parked at the city car pound. Upon written application to the director of public safety or the director's designated representative by the owner of the inoperable vehicle or by the owner of the property where such vehicle is parked, the director of public safety or the director's designated representative may grant up to an additional 30 days' parking time for such vehicle upon a showing of necessity by such owner. 
    Nonlicensed automobile, panel truck or pickup truck means any motor vehicle, whether the vehicle is capable of operation or movement under its own power or not, which does not have attached thereto current and valid license plates registered for such vehicle and has not been moved for a period of 14 consecutive days, excepting those vehicles parked at the city car pound. 
(Code 1975, § 6-11-1; Code 1997, § 34-91; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 3-7-1994) 
Sec. 20-75. - Outside storage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of any nonlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle, panel truck or pickup truck or for any owner or tenant of any real property located within the city to allow or permit the outside storage of any nonlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle, panel truck or pickup truck upon such real property. 
(Code 1975, § 6-11-2; Code 1997, § 34-92) 
Sec. 20-76. - Costs. 
    Costs incurred by the city to enforce this article may be assessed as a single lot assessment. 
Secs. 20-77-20-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOTOR VEHICLES AT GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS 

Sec. 20-94. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is designed to be self-propelled, whether the vehicle is operational or not. 
    Rental car means any four-wheel passenger motor vehicle held primarily for hire, lease or rental. 
    Service station bay means that area of the service station building designed for housing a motor vehicle within the service station. 
    Service station operator means that person who owns and operates the service station or who has the authority of the owner of the service station to operate and control the service station. In the case of copartnerships or corporations, the copartners and the officers of the corporation shall be deemed to be the service station operator. 
    Service station parking area means that land upon which the service station is located that is paved. 
(Code 1975, § 6-14-1; Code 1997, § 34-141) 
Sec. 20-95. - Compliance. 
    No service station operator shall permit the storage of any motor vehicle upon service station property except as provided in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 6-14-2; Code 1997, § 34-142) 
Sec. 20-96. - Permitted storage; maximum number of vehicles. 
(a)  Tow trucks. A vehicle designed for the towing of other motor vehicles, which is owned or leased by the owner or operator of the service station, may be parked upon the premises subject to the limitations of this division, provided that the number of such vehicles parked shall not exceed one per service bay. 
(b)  Disabled vehicles and vehicles awaiting repair. No other motor vehicle may be parked or stored upon service station property unless the vehicle is under repair, is awaiting delivery of parts or is disabled and awaiting removal by the owner of such vehicle. 
(1)  A vehicle under repair may be parked or stored upon the premises, provided that the vehicle is under repair pursuant to a contract for such repair made between the service station operator and the owner or lessee of such vehicle. Vehicles parked pursuant to this subsection may be kept upon the premises for no longer than 48 hours. Vehicles which must be parked for longer than 48 hours shall not remain unless the service station operator notifies, in writing, the director of public safety, or the director's representative, of the intention to retain such vehicle and the reason for such retention, together with a description of the vehicle. Upon such notification, the director shall approve an extension of time for parking for an additional five days only. 
(2)  The total number of vehicles parked upon service station premises shall not exceed the number set forth for that location as prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Parking space designation. No service station shall have parked upon its premises more than the number of vehicles allowed for that location as provided by the building official. 
(1)  The building official shall designate the maximum number of parking spaces allowed for each location based upon the number of square feet of available space, being the total area of the station less existing buildings and islands, with allowances for traffic lanes. The number of spaces shall be determined and the station notified promptly upon such determination. Should the operator of the service station disagree with the determination of the building official, review may be had to the city council, which may revise the determination upward, but not downward. Notice of the right to appeal shall be provided the operator of the facility when the designation of spaces is made. 
(2)  The building official shall determine the number of parking spaces available for vehicles under repair, awaiting parts or awaiting removal by the owner of such vehicle. Such parking space shall be at least ten feet by 20 feet in area. The building official shall first designate a parking space for each employee of the service station who is on the premises at the time of maximum shift, plus one parking space for the owner or manager of the station, plus two parking spaces for each service station bay. After designation of the required parking spaces for employees, for the owner or manager, and for the service station bays, any remaining parking spaces shall be designated for the parking or storage of motor vehicles under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 6-14-3; Code 1997, § 34-143) 
Sec. 20-97. - Prohibited storage; rental of parking spaces. 
    No owner or operator of a service station may rent, lease or otherwise permit the parking of a motor vehicle upon service station premises when the vehicle is not under repair, or owned or leased by an employee of the station. A violation of this section shall be presumed when a vehicle is parked continuously for five consecutive days between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and permission for such parking has not been granted by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1975, § 6-14-4; Code 1997, § 34-144) 
Sec. 20-98. - Storage of rental cars. 
    Rental cars may be stored upon service station premises; provided, however, that such vehicles shall be parked in officially designated parking spaces and in compliance with subsection 20-96(b)(1). 
(Code 1975, § 6-14-5; Code 1997, § 34-145) 
Secs. 20-99-20-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 857, adopted Aug. 5, 2013, repealed art. IV, §§ 20-125-20-130, entitled "Erosion and Sedimentation Control", which derived from Code 1975, §§ 4-14-1-4-14-7; and Code 1997, §§ 34-171-34-177; and Ord. No. 844, adopted Feb. 27, 2012. 

Secs. 20-125-20-160. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 22-19. - Adoption. 
    The International Fire Code 2006 and any accumulative supplements, and all codes, standards, and recommended practices adopted by the National Fire Protection Association and the state fire protection code as it may be amended from time to time, as well as any administrative rules and policies promulgated in relation thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein. In the event of conflict among the above-adopted codes, standards and recommended practices, the most restrictive regulations shall apply and shall be enforced by the authority with jurisdiction. 
(Code 1997, § 38-31; Ord. No. 782, 1-6-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 22-20. - Authority to enforce fire related provisions of building code. 
(a)  The fire code shall be enforced by the director of public safety. In addition, in recognition of the fact that the state-approved building codes generally contain fire safety related regulations, thereby creating overlapping jurisdiction of the building official and the director of public safety, the director of public safety is hereby given authority to enforce the fire safety regulations set forth within the state approved building code. 
(b)  Whenever the terms "code official" and "department of fire prevention" are used in the fire code adopted by this article, they shall be held to mean the director of public safety and such personnel as may be designated by the director of public safety for the enforcement of the fire code. 
(Code 1997, § 38-32; Ord. No. 782, 1-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-21. - Revisions to code. 
    The following sections of the 2006 edition of the International Fire Code are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 109.3 Violation penalties. The following penalties apply: 
(a)  First offense. Persons who violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, or who erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of approved construction documents or directive of a code official, or of a permit or certificate used under this code, shall be responsible for a civil infraction, as defined by MCL 257.6a and MCL 257.6b, and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.00 plus court costs. 
(b)  Second offense. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, or who erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate used under this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus court costs, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Abatement of violation. (See Section 109.3.1.) 
Section 111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a separate offense subject to the violation penalties found in Section 109.3. 
(Code 1997, § 38-34; Ord. No. 782, 1-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-22. - Indemnification of enforcing official. 
    No fire department official enforcing these regulations or a designee shall be liable for the cost of damages incurred as a result of enforcement of any provision of this code or enforcement of measures necessary to insure the safety of this city and its populace. Such costs shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or operator of the property, equipment, vehicle or vessel causing or contributing to dangerous or hazardous conditions including pollution and potential pollution of the environment. 
(Code 1997, § 38-35; Ord. No. 782, 1-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-23. - Open burning. 
    The provisions found in section 307 (Open Burning) and section 308 (Open Flames) are hereby adopted with the following modifications: 
(1)  The use of portable outdoor fire pits and chiminea is allowed as an approved container provided: 
a.  The approved container is at least 15 feet from any structure, including a deck, garage or storage building. For purposes of this subsection, a deck is defined as a structure constructed of wood or other flammable material and does not include a deck constructed of cement, flagstone, bluestone or other impervious nonflammable material. 
b.  The fire must be constantly attended by at least one adult until the fire is completely extinguished. 
c.  At least one fire extinguisher or other equipment such as sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck shall be available for immediate utilization. 
d.  The use of these approved containers remains subject to section 307.2.2 prohibiting offensive or objectionable smoke, spark, or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous as determined by the public safety department. 
e.  The approved container must rest on an impervious, nonflammable base. 
f.  Burning of construction material, demolition waste, furniture, appliances, tires, hazardous materials, treated or painted wood and plastic is prohibited. 
(2)  The use of dug out or below grade fire pits and bonfires used for any purpose as defined by section 307.3.1, is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1997, § 38-36; Ord. No. 782, 1-6-2003) 
State Law reference- Open burning of leaves and grass clippings, MCL 324.11522. 
Secs. 22-24-22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CONTROL 

Sec. 22-50. - Authority of officials of department of public safety at fires and other emergencies. 
    The department of public safety official, or duly authorized representative, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations, or to take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The department of public safety official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the department of public safety. The department of public safety official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the department of public safety official. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-1; Code 1997, § 38-61) 
State Law reference- Obstructing, endangering or disobeying firefighters, MCL 750.241. 
Sec. 22-51. - Boarding or tampering with emergency vehicles or equipment. 
    A person shall not, without proper authorization from the department of public safety official in charge of such department of public safety emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any department of public safety emergency vehicle, whether the vehicle is in motion or at rest. He shall not sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes or pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of any department of public safety emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-8; Code 1997, § 38-68) 
State Law reference- Destruction of fire department property, MCL 750.377b. 
Sec. 22-52. - Damaging emergency vehicle; injuring personnel of department of public safety. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface or attempt or conspire to damage or deface any department of public safety emergency vehicle at any time. It is also unlawful to injure, attempt to injure or conspire to injure department of public safety personnel while they are performing departmental duties. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-9; Code 1997, § 38-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.241, 750.377b. 
Sec. 22-53. - Blocking fire hydrant or fire connection. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, or deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any department of public safety fire connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and department of public safety fire connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)  Removal of obstructions by city. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the department of public safety official shall proceed to remove the obstruction or encroachment. Costs incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the city treasury on certificate of the department of public safety official and with the approval of the department of public safety chief administrative official. The legal authority of the city shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-11; Code 1997, § 38-71) 
State Law reference- Parking near fire hydrant, MCL 257.6741)(d). 
Sec. 22-54. - Permit required for use of fire hydrants. 
    A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the department of public safety for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the department of public safety official and the water company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by city employees. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-12; Code 1997, § 38-72) 
Sec. 22-55. - Obstructing, removing or tampering with fire suppression equipment; maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
    A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire code, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs or when permitted by the department of public safety official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted under this section, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the department of public safety official. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-13; Code 1997, § 38-73) 
State Law reference- Destruction of fire department property, MCL 750.377b. 
Sec. 22-56. - Sale of defective fire extinguishers; exemption. 
(a)  Prohibited. A person shall not sell, trade, load or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which: 
(1)  Is not approved by the department of public safety official; 
(2)  Is not in proper working order; or 
(3)  The contents of which do not meet the requirements of the department of public safety official. 
(b)  Exemption. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when the units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-14; Code 1997, § 38-74) 
Sec. 22-57. - Street obstructions. 
    No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the city. The term "street," as used in this section, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including but not limited to private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the city. Temporary barricades may be erected with permission of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4-15; Code 1997, § 38-75) 
Chapter 24 - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MICHIGAN CONSOLIDATED GAS COMPANY 

Sec. 24-19. - Grant of a nonexclusive gas franchise; consent. 
    Subject to all the terms and conditions mentioned in this chapter, consent is hereby given to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the state (the "company"), and to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate and use natural gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes and other necessary equipment (facilities) in the dedicated public highways, streets, alleys, (public rights-of-way) in the city. A nonexclusive franchise is hereby granted to the company, its successors and assigns, to transact a local business in said city for the purpose of conveying natural gas into and through and supplying and selling natural gas in the city and all other matters incidental thereto. The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall maintain the company's facilities in reasonable and safe condition. Any easements over or under private property necessary for the construction or operation of MichCon's system shall be arranged and paid for by the company. Any easements required for property owned by the city other than public rights-of-way shall be separately negotiated with the city. The city shall be under no obligation to grant such easements. 
(Code 1997, § 39-41; Ord. No. 726, § 87-1, 7-6-1998) 
Sec. 24-20. - Gas service and extension of system. 
    If the provisions and conditions herein contained are accepted by the company, as provided in section 24-24, then the company shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable law, rules and regulations; and provided further that such initial installation and any extensions shall be subject to the main extension provisions, the area expansion program provisions (if and where applicable), and other applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the company's rules and regulations for gas service as filed with the state public service commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction. 
(Code 1997, § 39-42; Ord. No. 726, § 87-2, 7-6-1998) 
Sec. 24-21. - Use of streets and other rights-of-way. 
(a)  Obstruction of public rights-of-way; maintenance and repair after excavation; liability. The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public rights-of-way. The company, its successors and assigns, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any streets or other public rights-of-way within the city and shall at its sole cost and expense within ten working days or such additional time as specified by the director of public service, in accordance with this Code and standards established by the city's engineer, after making an opening or excavation, repair the same and leave it in as good as or better condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall use due care at all times in exercising the privileges herein contained. In the event that the company and its contractors and subcontractors fail to make such repair within the time specified by the city, the city shall be entitled to complete the repair and the company shall pay the costs to the city for such repair. The company shall hold harmless, defend and indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees from and against all charges, costs, claims, damages, losses, liabilities, obligations, expenses, judgments, penalties and proceedings of whatever nature (including, without limitation, actual fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses, and consultants), arising from the company's exercise of its rights pursuant to this article, whether by the company or by the company's contractors and subcontractors. 
(b)  Emergency repairs; issuance of permit. Except in emergencies, no streets or other public rights-of-way shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains, except upon application to the city and other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the route. Where emergency repairs become necessary, the company agrees to notify the city's public safety department of such repairs as soon as practical. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the city and, such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the company to do the work proposed if such work meets with the standards and codes of the city. 
(1)  Relocation of facilities. The company, its contractors and subcontractors shall, at the company's own cost and expense, protect, support, disconnect, relocate in or remove from the public rights-of-way and facilities when required to do so by the city due to street or other public excavation, construction, repair grading, regrading or traffic conditions, the installation of sewers, drains, water pipes or municipally-owned facilities of any kind; the vacation, construction or relocation of streets; or other public improvements by a unit of government. 
(2)  Vacation. Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, if a public right-of-way is vacated, eliminated, discontinued or closed, the city's consent to any such vacation, elimination or discontinuance shall be conditioned upon the reservation of an easement in such public way for the benefit of the company. The city and the company may agree in writing to a different resolution in any particular case. 
(3)  High pressure lines. In the event that the city or its contractors and subcontractors are working within the public rights-of-way in the vicinity of a gas line having pressure of 250 pounds per square inch or more, the company shall, at its sole expense, furnish at least one company representative who shall remain at the work site or remain on call during the work and who shall identify for the city or its contractors the location of such high pressure gas line and how to avoid damage to or interference with such high pressure gas line. 
(4)  Traffic control. For all work which may disturb the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the franchisee shall employ roadway closure or partial closure practices as delineated in the state manual of uniform traffic control devices and the standards established by the director of public safety and/or public service. 
(5)  As builts. The company shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and records of its facilities. The company shall furnish the city with access to its "as-built" maps and records through electronic (e.g. MARS) or other means as the parties may mutually agree. If the access is through electronic means, the company shall furnish, at no cost to the city, such connecting hardware and computer software which will enable the city to access the company's records in a timely manner. The company shall participate in and be a member of the "MISS DIG" utility notification program provided by MCL 460.701-460.718 or subsequent state statute. 
(6)  Compliance with law. The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall be subject to all applicable laws, ordinances or regulations in the course of constructing, installing, operating or maintaining the facilities in the city. Without limitation, the company shall comply with the latest edition of the following if applicable to the company of its facilities: 
a.  The state gas safety code. 
b.  The American National Standards Institute ANSI B-109.1, Standard for Gas Displacement Meters. 
c.  The American National Standards Institute Z223.1, National Fuel Gas Code. 
d.  The National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 59, LP Gases and Utility Plants. 
e.  The National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 58, Storage and Handling, Liquefied Petroleum Gases. 
f.  The National Fire Association Standard No. 59A, Production, Storage and Handling, Liquefied Natural Gas. 
g.  General Rules of the Construction Code Commission. 
h.  The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall comply with all city zoning and land use restrictions as may exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(7)  Preconstruction meetings. A company representative shall attend all preconstruction meetings conducted by the city in connection with any public improvement projects in the public rights-of-way in the city. The company representative shall notify the city and its contractors of any conditions of the company's facilities which may affect the project and the company shall make provisions necessary to prevent the company's facilities (or their condition) from delaying or otherwise interfering with the project. 
(8)  Pavement cut coordination/additional fees. 
a.  The company shall coordinate its construction program and all other work in the public rights-of-way with the city's program for street construction, rebuilding, resurfacing and repair (collectively "street resurfacing"), which is planned several years in advance. The company shall meet with the city at least twice per year to this end. The goals of such coordination shall be to require the company to conduct all known work in the public rights-of-way in conjunction with or immediately prior to any construction, rebuilding, resurfacing or repair planned by the city, and to prevent the public rights-of-way from being disturbed by the company for a period of years after they have been constructed, rebuilt, resurfaced or repaired. 
b.  In addition to any other fees or payments required by this article, except in the case of emergencies, or if requested by the city, the company shall pay to the city the sum of $1,250.00 for each 50 feet, or portion thereof, cut into or excavation of any public rights-of-way which was constructed, rebuilt, resurfaced or repaired within 24 months prior to such cut or excavation. This fee is in addition to and not in lieu of the obligation to restore the public rights-of-way as set forth hereinabove. The company shall, in addition, pay all fees as established by council resolution as adopted from time to time as well as any fees required by other ordinances of the city. 
(9)  Removal of facilities upon revocation or expiration. Within 90 days after the franchise expires or is revoked, surrendered or otherwise terminated and is not reestablished, the company will elect, and will notify the city in writing of its election to: 
a.  Remove its personal property, and equipment from the streets, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, public highways and other public places in the city, at its own expense; 
b.  Sell or otherwise dispose of such personal property; 
c.  Abandon such property in place, consistent with the state gas safety code or other applicable gas safety standards; or 
d.  In the event the company elects removal, within 24 months after receiving all required permits and other approvals, remove all such personal property in accordance with such permits and approvals, and restore such streets, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, public highways and other public places so as to conform as nearly as practicable with the then current condition of same at the date of such restoration. In the event the company elects sale or disposal, it shall use all diligent and reasonable means to locate a purchaser and consummate the transaction on commercially acceptable terms and conditions; provided that any such purchaser shall, prior to operation of any gas utility business, obtain a franchise from the city to conduct same. 
(Code 1997, § 39-43; Ord. No. 726, § 87-3, 7-6-1998) 
Sec. 24-22. - Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations and rates. 
    The company is now under the jurisdiction of the state public service commission to the extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged for gas, and the standards and conditions of service and operation hereunder, shall be the same as set forth in the company's schedule of rules, regulations and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages and townships in which the company is now rendering gas service, or as shall hereafter be validly prescribed for the city under the orders, rules, and regulations of the state public service commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises. 
(Code 1997, § 39-44; Ord. No. 726, § 87-4, 7-6-1998) 
Sec. 24-23. - Franchise assignment, sale, change of control. 
(a)  Transfer. The company shall not assign or transfer any of its rights under this agreement in whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily or by operation of law, including by merger or consolidation, substantial change in the ownership or control of company's business, or by other means, without the prior written consent of the city. The city will not unreasonably withhold its consent. 
(b)  City expenses. The company shall pay and/or reimburse the city for any actual costs incurred by the city due to any proposed transfer, including whether such transfer is approved with conditions, or denied. 
(Code 1997, § 39-45; Ord. No. 726, § 87-5, 7-6-1998) 
Sec. 24-24. - Effective date; term of franchise ordinance; acceptance by company. 
    The provisions of this article took effect ten days following the date of publication of the ordinance from which this article was derived, and shall continue in effect for a period of ten years thereafter, subject to revocation at the will of the city at any time during said ten-year period; provided, however, that when this article shall become effective the city clerk shall deliver to the company a certified copy of the ordinance from which this article was derived accompanied by written evidence of publication and recording thereof as required by law, and the company shall, 60 days after receiving the above mentioned documents, file with the city clerk its written acceptance of the conditions and provisions hereof. 
(Code 1997, § 39-46; Ord. No. 726, § 87-6, 7-6-1998) 
Sec. 24-25. - City Charter. 
    The franchise granted by this article is subject to all terms, conditions and limitations as set forth in the city Charter and city ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 39-47; Ord. No. 726, § 87-7, 7-6-1998) 
Chapter 26 - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Legal basis. 
    This article should be read in conjunction with the subdivisions chapter (chapter 40), zoning chapter (chapter 50), buildings and building regulations chapter (chapter 8), environment chapter (chapter 20), streets, sidewalks and other public places chapter (chapter 38), traffic and vehicles chapter (chapter 42), and utilities chapter (chapter 44). 
(Code 1997, § 48-1; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the person appointed by the council as city administrator. 
    Building inspector means the person appointed by the city administrator to enforce the building codes of the city. 
    Building service sewer (drainage water) means any drainage water pipe extension from a building foundation drain outlet (located five feet outside of a building or dwelling unit) to a public stormwater drain or combined sewer. 
    Building service sewer (wastewater) means the sewer extension from a building drain outlet point (located five feet outside of a building or a dwelling unit) to a point of connection with a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer. 
    City engineer means the staff registered professional engineer or the consulting engineer representing the city in this position. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer, together with appurtenances, that intentionally carries both wastewater and stormwater. 
    Director of public services means the person appointed by the city administrator to manage the department of public works. 
    Ditch and drainage swale mean an open channel used to transport water, groundwater, surface water runoff, or drainage water from any source. 
    Drainage facilities and drainage water facilities mean any storm sewers, combined sewers, lakes, ponds, streams, rivers or storm drains, including facilities designated as county drains, that receive water from lands owned by more than one owner. 
    Foundation drain service pipe means a conveyance pipe that receives only foundation drain groundwater seepage, exclusive of directly and intentionally introduced surface water runoff. 
    Natural outlet means any drainage water outlet, including storm drains and sewers into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Open drain means an open channel used to transport water, groundwater, surface water runoff or drainage water from any source. 
    Private wastewater disposal system means a septic tank with subsurface soil absorption facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, or similar methods of wastewater disposal that may be approvable by the county health department and/or the state department of environmental quality (DEQ). 
    Public sanitary sewer means a sanitary sewer intended to be located in public easements or public rights-of-way that collects (or is intended to collect) wastewater from more than one user or premises and that is required to receive the approval and issuance of a construction permit from the municipal wastewater control section of the DEQ. 
    Public sewer and public drain mean a common sewer or drain that collects drainage water from more than one user or premises and is controlled by the city public works department or another governmental agency. 
    Sanitary sewer and wastewater sewer mean a sewer, together with appurtenances, that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water runoff that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Sewage force main and force main mean a wastewater conveyance pipe which carries wastewater under pressure. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater and/or drainage water. 
    Stormwater detention, unless otherwise stated, means an underground stormwater storage facility which is designed to detain stormwater and shall not include wastewater or combined sewage. 
    Stormwater drain, storm drain and storm sewer mean a watercourse or a sewer intended for the conveyance of water, groundwater, surface water runoff, drainage water or other water from any source exclusive of intentionally admitted wastewater. 
    Stormwater inlet and catchbasin structure mean a structure designed and constructed to intentionally admit surface water runoff, drainage water or other water from any source exclusive of intentionally admitted wastewater. 
    Surface water runoff and stormwater mean that part of rainfall or melting snowfall that reaches the sewer as runoff from natural land surfaces, building roofs or pavements. 
    Underdrain pipe means a geotextile-wrapped perforated pipe installed underground for the specific purpose of lowering a high groundwater condition or draining a granular subbase by receiving groundwater seepage and conveying it to a stormwater drain. Farm drain tile is not underdrain pipe. 
    Unpolluted water and drainage water mean water of a quality equal to, or better than, the effluent criteria currently in effect (as specified by the DEQ), or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards. 
    Wastewater and sewage mean the spent water of a community, including liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water runoff that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Wastewater treatment works and sewage treatment plant mean facilities for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial open channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1997, § 48-2; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-3. - Site grading and drainage water collection and disposal systems. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to change the drainage pattern of any land by excavating, grading or filling without first obtaining a permit for construction from the city. Each site shall be graded for the purpose of directing surface water runoff to appropriate drainage water collection and disposal systems as is necessary, and same shall be done in a manner which will not cause drainage water from the site to flow onto adjacent land nor obstruct the flow of existing drainage from adjacent properties. Drainage water collection and disposal systems shall be provided to collect surface water runoff and/or building foundation drain groundwater seepage. The drainage water collection system shall consist of enclosed storm sewers throughout the project. An extension of the storm sewer system shall be provided to furnish an outlet for foundation drain service pipes for each building. The collected drainage water shall be conveyed to a point of disposal that shall be a public stormwater drain. 
(b)  When, in the opinion of the city engineer and/or the county public works commissioner, there is inadequate drainage water outlet capacity, and an adequate drainage water outlet cannot be reasonably engineered and constructed, the developer shall install an adequate underground stormwater detention basin with controlled outlet facilities to limit the rate of flow of drainage water from the site. Final approval of any plans, which include an underground stormwater detention basin, shall be conditioned upon an operation and maintenance special assessment district agreement with the city. The following shall apply: 
(1)  Underground stormwater detention basins on private developments, where ownership will remain consolidated over an extended period of time, such as industrial sites, shopping centers, apartment complexes, etc., shall remain in private ownership, subject to city review as to size, design and proper operation. Maintenance and liability shall remain with the property owner. 
(2)  Underground stormwater detention basins serving predominantly single-family areas or platted subdivision may be dedicated to the city for ownership and maintenance, subject to the criteria established herein and subject to case-by-case review and approval by the planning commission and the city council. Such development shall be required to file a standing stormwater facility operation and maintenance special assessment district agreement prior to final approval. 
(3)  Underground stormwater detention basins shall not be required for improvements to existing single-family residential establishments or for existing subdivision lots where the proposed house does not substantially increase the volume of stormwater runoff. 
(4)  Locations for underground stormwater detention basins shall be shown on the site plan, the engineering plan, the preliminary plat, and the final plats, as applicable. 
(Code 1997, § 48-3; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-4. - Wastewater collection and disposal system. 
(a)  All developments shall be serviced by a separate wastewater collection and disposal system acceptable to the city. A site plan or a preliminary subdivision plat submitted to the city shall be accompanied by data describing the type of wastewater collection and disposal system that is to be provided for the development. 
(b)  For all developments, the developer shall provide sanitary sewers to service each proposed building site and shall connect same to a public wastewater disposal system. Individual existing single-family residential and duplex family residential sites without access to public sanitary sewer shall locate the public combined sewer and connect thereto. All wastewater disposal systems shall be designed in a manner acceptable to the city engineer, the county department of public services, and the state department of environmental quality. 
(Code 1997, § 48-4; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-5. - Residential plot plan and site plan submittals. 
(a)  Topographical survey requirements. For all plot plans and acreage/nonplatted parcels, a full topographic survey is required. Surveys require location and description of all underground utilities; rims and inverts of all manholes, catchbasins and stop boxes; north arrow; property corners, irons, monuments and fences; a 50-foot grid of existing elevations to 100 feet offsite (including lot corners); existing structures with finished grade and finished floor elevations of all structures on adjacent lots; all vegetation and trees on adjacent lots and lot to be developed; and the public drainage course to which the proposed lot will drain. Elevations must be corrected to conform to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)/city datum with a minimum of two benchmarks being depicted on the plans. This list is not intended to be all inclusive. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. 
(1)  Plan. A grading plan is required with all plot plan submittals and must include the following information: 
a.  Proposed elevations at all lot corners, along side lot lines immediately adjacent to existing and/or proposed structures, in swales and ditches at regular intervals not to exceed 50 feet, and at all proposed building corners. 
b.  The plan must contain sufficient information to detail the drainage of the lot. All site drainage must be directed to a public drain. If no public drain is immediately available or adjacent to the site, it will be the responsibility of the site developer to extend drainage to the site from an approved outlet. When insufficient depth exists to service a site, it may be necessary for the developer to deepen the existing drain to service the site. 
(2)  Elevation. Existing elevations at property lines shall be met by new construction. In no case shall on-site drainage be directed to an adjacent site or shall existing offsite drainage patterns be interrupted. 
(3)  Slopes. Slopes of swales on site shall be 0.50 percent or greater. 
(4)  Storm drainage. Storm drains shall be designed to conform to section 26-3, Site grading and drainage water collection and disposal. On site storm sewers, when servicing only the parcel being developed, are to be a minimum of eight-inch diameter and are to be constructed of minimum schedule 40 PVC or SDR 23.5 ABS, or equal. 
(5)  Pipes. Minimum pipe slopes shall be sufficient to provide a velocity of 2.5 fps or greater. When servicing more than one parcel, the pipe shall be a minimum eight-inch diameter and be constructed in a 12-foot wide easement dedicated to the city. A larger pipe or easement may be necessary as determined by the city engineer. 
(6)  System compliance. All the components of the stormwater system, including rims and grates shall be in accordance with the current city storm sewer detail sheets. 
(c)  Utilities. 
(1)  Sanitary sewer. A six-inch diameter sanitary sewer lead shall be provided for each residence leading to a sanitary sewer. The lead shall have a minimum slope of one percent and shall be constructed of a minimum schedule 40 PVC or SDR 23.5 ABS. No more than one single-family residence shall utilize an individual lead. 
(2)  Storm sewer. A sump pump lead shall be provided for each residential structure so equipped. The lead shall be a minimum three-inch diameter and be constructed of a minimum schedule 40 PVC or SDR 23.5 ABS. The lead must outlet to an approved public drain. 
(Code 1997, § 48-5; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-6. - General plan. 
(a)  Sewers in easements shall be located at least three feet away from parcel or lot boundary lines. A variation to this requirement can be granted by the city engineer upon presentation of data indicating another location is best suited. 
(b)  Superimposed on a general plan of the site shall be a topographic survey and contour lines of the project area, including the area at least 100 feet outside of the project area. Where the contour of the land is such that contour lines do not provide enough information to evaluate a proposed grading and drainage scheme, spot elevations taken on a 50-foot grid shall be shown instead. Contour lines shall be shown at intervals as follows: 
(1)  Where the general slope of the land is one percent or less, the interval shall be one foot. 
(2)  Where the general slope of the land is more than one percent, but less than five percent, the interval shall be two feet. 
(3)  Where the general slope of the land is five percent or greater, the interval shall be five feet. 
(c)  All sewers and those water mains having a diameter of 16 inches or greater shall be indicated in profiles. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to ascertain that the depth of the storm sewer (or storm drain) does not interfere with the building service sewers crossing the storm sewer. Profiles shall indicate the size of pipe, class of pipe, slope of the utility, and control elevations of the utility. The existing and proposed grade lines shall be shown along the profile view of each utility. The profile shall show all points where utilities cross one another with elevations for each utility calculated and shown. The designer shall maintain a one-foot vertical clearance between underground utilities. Water mains shall have 18-inch vertical clearance from other underground utilities. All engineering information shall be presented in a clear and concise manner as determined by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 48-6; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-7. - State civil engineer approval. 
    All plans shall be signed and sealed by a civil engineer registered to practice in the state. 
(Code 1997, § 48-7; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Secs. 26-8-26-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM 

Sec. 26-33. - Plan requirements. 
    All sets of plans which include plans for storm sewers shall include the current city storm sewer detail sheets which shall be considered an inseparable part of the plans when said plans are approved. 
(Code 1997, § 48-31; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-34. - Site grading. 
    A site grading and stormwater collection and disposal plan is required for all developments. If the building site is in a subdivision or other project for which a general site grading plan has been submitted and approved, no separate grading plan or permit will be required. An enclosed storm drainage system shall be designed for all land development projects. If there are any upstream watershed drainage areas which need to be drained through the site under design consideration, sufficient capacity shall be provided to take fully developed upstream watershed drainage areas. Surface water runoff from the proposed improved site shall not be drained on adjacent property. 
(1)  Each development shall have an overall grading plan showing grades for side yards, rear yards, sidewalks, and catchbasins. Storm sewers, building finish floor grades, brick ledge (ground) grades and direction of surface drainage flow shall be shown. 
(2)  Rear yard storm sewers shall be required in all subdivisions and residential condominium developments. Catchbasins (two-inch minimum diameter) shall be placed at every other lot corner so that every dwelling directly abuts a catchbasin in at least one corner. All catchbasin outlet sewers shall extend in side lot easements to the public storm sewer in the road right-of-way. 
(3)  Any required rear yard and side yard drain easements shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide. The city engineer shall require additional easement width when sewer size depth, soils or other conditions warrant a wider easement. 
(4)  Site grading for all building sites shall be reviewed to determine that proposed and/or actual site grading is proper and that drainage from land lying upstream is not obstructed and that downstream properties will not be diversely effected by runoff from the property under design consideration. 
(5)  Before a certificate of occupancy for any building is issued, the building inspector shall approve the final site grading and drainage for each building; and/or the building inspector shall require that a survey, drawing, and certificate done by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor be furnished by the developer indicating that the work has been done in conformity to the approved site grading and drainage plan. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, modify or obstruct the flow of drainage water across any property in any manner different from the approved plan. 
(7)  During periods of the year when weather conditions make site grading work unfeasible, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued, subject to the furnishing of a satisfactory bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in an amount determined by the city engineer or building inspector and approved by the city administrator, guaranteeing the completion of the work when weather conditions permit. 
(8)  Any property owner claiming to be aggrieved by any site grading work, or decision of the administrator relative to site grading of a parcel of property, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the administrator to the city council. Such an appeal must be requested in writing, stating fully and clearly the reasons for the request and including any supplemental information and data that may aid in the analysis of the proposed request. Written notice of the date and time of the hearing shall be delivered to the owner of the property on which the grading work has, is or will be performed. In conjunction with a determination on the appeal, the council has express authority to assess actual costs against the owner of the property on which the grading work has, is or will be performed. The amount of the filing fee will be reimbursed to the applicant in the case of a successful appeal. 
(Code 1997, § 48-32; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-35. - Slope requirements. 
(a)  The fall of the land away from any building shall be a minimum of six inches in the first 25 feet. From this elevation, the land shall slope to a drainage water collection swale at a minimum slope of one foot in 100 feet (one percent). 
(b)  The maximum slope of the land for the site shall not exceed one foot in four feet as provided in chapter 50, zoning. Sodded swale or ditch slopes shall be a maximum slope of one foot vertically and four feet horizontally. 
(Code 1997, § 48-33; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-36. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
    Adequate soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be specified on the plans (and followed during construction) to conform to the requirements of the soil erosion and sedimentation control laws, Part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.). A soil erosion permit shall be acquired by the developer from the building inspector prior to issuance of a construction permit. 
(Code 1997, § 48-34; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-37. - Basement and foundation requirements. 
    All buildings having foundation drains shall direct the flow of drainage water from such foundation drains into a storm sewer or a storm drain by means of an underground enclosed conveyance pipe four-inch diameter (minimum). No building permit shall be issued for any building having a basement without a building service sewer (drainage water) with drainage to a storm sewer or storm drain. A sump and pump shall be required in basements that do not have an adequate storm sewer outlet. Pump size shall be adequate to carry intercepted groundwater. 
(Code 1997, § 48-35; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-38. - Building runoff. 
    Drainage water runoff from building roofs shall be piped to a point five feet away from the outside walls of any building. Drainage water from building roofs shall not be directly connected to the storm sewer system. No drainage water runoff shall be allowed on adjacent property. Drainage water, sump pump water and/or groundwater shall not be discharged directly to the combined sewer system without written approval by the city engineer and concurrence of city administrator. 
(Code 1997, § 48-36; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-39. - Drainage swales. 
    The longitudinal grade of any drainage swale shall not be less than 0.5 foot per 100 feet (0.5 percent). The maximum distance drainage water shall travel in a drainage swale without an intercepting yard catchbasin shall be 300 feet. Not more than 100 feet of drainage water travel shall be upstream of an angle point (deflection angle 45 degrees or greater) in the drainage swale. Planned final grade elevations shall be indicated on the plans at a maximum spacing of 50 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 48-37; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-40. - Drainage swale construction. 
    Where required by the city engineer, a six-inch diameter geotextile-wrapped perforated drainage pipe shall be provided for drainage with said pipe trench being backfilled entirely with pea gravel up to within four inches of the grade line of the swale. 
(Code 1997, § 48-38; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-41. - Drainage system design. 
(a)  Stormwater runoff drainage systems shall be designed for a ten-year storm by means of the rational method formula: Q=CIA; where Q is the peak rate of runoff in cubic feet per second, A is the area in acres, C is the coefficient of runoff for the drainage area and I is the average rainfall intensity in inches per hour. The rainfall intensity shall be determined by the formula: I=175/(T+25); where T is the time of concentration equal to the time required for a drop of water to run from the most remote point of the watershed to the point for which runoff is being estimated. In most instances, an initial T equal to 15 min. for residential areas can be used. Use T=10 min. in other land use areas. The developer's engineer shall use judgment in arriving at proper imperviousness factors, but, in general, the following factors are acceptable minimums: 
Lawn areas 0.20 Pavement and roof areas 0.90 Overall area of single-family subdivision 0.35 Overall area of multiple housing development 0.55 Overall area of commercial development 0.90 Overall area of industrial development 0.90  
(b)  The city engineer reserves the right to assign lower times of concentration and higher "C" factors if the perviousness of the proposed project warrants. 
(c)  Where possible, provide a minimum of three feet of cover from the top of finish road or earth grade to the top of pipe of any storm sewer. It will be acceptable to allow the hydraulic gradient to be above the top of the sewer pipe, but in no case shall the hydraulic gradient exceed one foot below the rim elevation. The design elevation of the hydraulic gradient profile shall be indicated on the sewer profile view. Nonsubmerged drain systems shall be designed to operate with the water surface elevation at or below the 0.8 rise level. 
(Code 1997, § 48-39; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-42. - Manhole and catchbasin requirements. 
(a)  Access manholes (four-foot minimum diameter) shall be provided along the storm sewer at every change of pipe size, change of grade or change of direction. However, the maximum spacing for storm sewer manholes shall be as follows: 
Diameter of Sewer 
(in inches) Absolute Maximum Manhole Spacing 
(in feet) 12 to 30  350 36 to 42  400 48  450 54 and 60  500 66 and larger  600  
Note: Height (rise) of arch and elliptical pipe shall be used as the criteria for manhole spacing. 
(b)  Manholes and catchbasins shall be constructed utilizing precast concrete segments or class A concrete block and mortar. 
(c)  Catchbasins shall not be constructed over a main sewer line to replace manholes. If a normal manhole location (outside of streets) coincides with a stormwater inlet structure location a catchbasin of adequate diameter may be used as a stormwater inlet structure in lieu of the manhole. 
(Code 1997, § 48-40; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-43. - Placement of catchbasins. 
(a)  An end section with prefabricated bar screen shall be installed on the end of all storm sewers 12 inches in diameter and larger which outlet into an open drain. Openings of the bar screen shall be no more than six inches on centers. 
(b)  In general, pavement type catchbasins shall be located as follows: 
(1)  At or near the radius return of street intersections (not in the path of sidewalks). 
(2)  At all low points in streets. 
(3)  At intermediate points along the street such that there is a maximum pavement drainage area per structure as follows: 
a.  Intercepting catchbasins: 10,000 S.F./C.B. 
b.  Low point catchbasins: 12,000 S.F./C.B. 
(c)  Yard type catchbasins shall be provided at all low points in drainage swales. Provide intercepting yard type catchbasins such that not more than 300 feet of swale drainage runs into any one catchbasin other than a low point catchbasin where 600 feet of drainage is allowed. 
(Code 1997, § 48-41; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-44. - Storm sewer extensions. 
    An extension of the storm sewer system shall be provided to furnish an outlet for foundation drain service pipe for any buildings not otherwise serviced; such extensions shall have a minimum diameter of six inches. 
(Code 1997, § 48-42; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-45. - Infiltration testing. 
    For every storm sewer project, there shall be indicated on the profile view a manhole with a 12-inch deep manhole sump to be used for testing for infiltration. This manhole generally shall be the first manhole upstream from the point of connection to the existing combined or storm sewer system. No storm sewer section having an infiltration rate, or an exfiltration rate, of more than 100 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per 24-hour period shall be approved for connection to the city combined sewer system. A low pressure air test or televising may be required in lieu of an infiltration test as determined by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 48-43; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Secs. 26-46-26-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER DETENTION SYSTEM 

Sec. 26-64. - Appropriation of detention basin and requirements. 
    The city engineer (based on existing sewer capacity, existing off-site sewer hydraulics, the increase of impervious surfaces, and surrounding site conditions) shall make a determination as to the adequacy of the existing storm sewer or combined sewer system. In the event it is determined the existing sewer system has inadequate capacity, the developer shall make necessary downstream drainage improvements or be required to install underground detention basins or reservoirs. If detention is deemed appropriate, the storage capacity of such detention basin shall be rated in acre-feet and shall contain a capacity as determined by the engineer, but in no case shall be less than two inches of water over the entire watershed area that drains into the detention basin. Discharge from the detention basin shall be at a controlled rate. Discharge rate shall not exceed 0.2 cubic feet per second (cfs) per acre without written approval by the city engineer. A discharge rate less than 0.2 cfs per acre may be required. The developer shall provide the field data as required by the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 48-71; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-65. - Additional detention basin requirements. 
(a)  All stormwater detention must be below ground. Design storage in a parking lot is not acceptable. 
(b)  The design elevation for storage in the detention basin shall be below the rim of the lowest catchbasin draining into the detention basin. 
(c)  The bottom of the basin shall have a minimum grade of one percent. 
(d)  An overflow system shall be provided. The overflow system shall consist of additional storage volume in the parking lot, if applicable, and weir flow into the street. Depth of water in the parking lot shall not exceed six inches and all curbs must remain visible. 
(e)  Detention basins shall be designed to drain completely within 36 hours after a rain. 
(f)  Orifice restrictions shall be designed in accordance with the current city storm sewer detail sheets. 
(g)  In general, orifice restrictions should be designed with a four-inch diameter (or greater). In no case shall orifices be designed smaller than three inches in diameter. 
(h)  For basins with pumped outlets, a silt trap and bar screen shall be installed on the inlet pipe to the pump station. The screen clear opening shall be a maximum of two inches. 
(i)  Pumping stations for dewatering of the detention basins shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(j)  In general, detention basins shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the detention basin. 
(k)  The manhole where the orifice restriction and/or pump is located shall be designated as an inspection manhole to ensure that the orifice and/or pump is maintained to design specifications. This manhole shall be installed in a public utility easement by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(l)  A signed maintenance agreement and approved plans for detention facilities and storm drainage facilities (which will not be owned and operated by the city), shall be in effect prior to city approval. The maintenance agreement requirements shall include an annual operating permit obtained from the city which will provide for annual inspections. The maintenance agreement requirement can be waived by the city administrator. 
(m)  For subdivision detention basins that will be owned and operated by the city, the developer and/or builder shall ensure adequate funds by creating a special assessment district to cover maintenance, operation and insurance liability costs for the basin. 
(Code 1997, § 48-72; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Secs. 26-66-26-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM 

Sec. 26-89. - Plan requirements. 
    All sets of plans which include plans for sanitary sewers shall include the current city sanitary sewer detail sheets which shall be considered an inseparable part of the plans when said plans are approved. 
(Code 1997, § 48-91; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-90. - Infiltration testing. 
    For every sanitary sewer project, there shall be indicated on the profile view a manhole with a 12-inch deep manhole sump to be used for testing for infiltration. This manhole generally shall be the first manhole upstream from the point of connection to the existing sanitary sewer system. No sanitary sewer section having an infiltration rate, or an exfiltration rate, of more than 100 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per 24-hour period shall be approved for connection to the city sanitary sewer system. A low pressure air test or televising may be required in lieu of an infiltration test. 
(Code 1997, § 48-92; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-91. - Sewer size. 
    The minimum allowable size for public sanitary sewers shall be eight-inch diameter. The minimum size of building service sewers (wastewater) shall be six-inch diameter. Each condominium unit shall have a separate sanitary lead. Each unit in commercial, industrial, or office multiunit developments shall have a separate sanitary lead. Sanitary leads shall be constructed such that they do not cross the building envelope of another unit. An approved cleanout will be installed at the sewer right-of-way or easement line when the lead is extended to the premises. 
(Code 1997, § 48-93; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-92. - Gravity sewer slopes. 
(a)  The following table of acceptable slopes for sanitary sewers shall be adhered to: 
Sewer Size 
(in inches) Minimum Slope 
(percent) Maximum Slope 
(percent) 6 1.00 6.5 8 0.40 5.0 10 0.28 4.0 12 0.22 3.0 15 0.15 2.0 18 0.12 1.5 21 0.10 1.3 24 0.08 1.2  
(b)  Gravity sewers shall be designed for a minimum velocity of two feet per second and a maximum of eight feet per second. Where sufficient depth is available, the extreme upstream run of sewer without the potential for future extension shall have the minimum slope increased to develop a design velocity of three feet per second. 
(Code 1997, § 48-94; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-93. - Sewage force mains. 
    Sanitary sewage force mains shall be designed for a minimum velocity of two feet per second and a maximum velocity of ten feet per second, unless otherwise approved. Force mains shall be shown in a profile view with grades and elevations indicated thereon. An air relief and cleanout assembly manhole shall be provided at high points. Access (cleanout assembly) manholes shall be provided along the force main at least every 600 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 48-95; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-94. - Building service sewers. 
    A building service sewer shall be indicated on the plans for each building in the project. Where sanitary sewers are planned along roadways, the building service sewers shall be extended across the roadways (to the right-of-way line) prior to paving. 
(Code 1997, § 48-96; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-95. - Manhole locations. 
    Manholes (four-foot minimum diameter) shall be provided along all sanitary sewers at: 
(1)  Points of horizontal deflection; 
(2)  Points where the size of sewer is changed; 
(3)  Points where the slope of the sewer is changed; 
(4)  At junctions with other sewer lines; 
(5)  At the upstream terminus of a sewer run; 
(6)  Along the sanitary sewer at other locations such that the maximum spacing between manholes shall not exceed 350 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 48-97; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-96. - Elevation adjustments. 
    At manholes, where size of sewers change, match 0.8 diameter elevation points of inlet and outlet sewer. At horizontal deflections in the sanitary sewer greater than 45 degrees, a minimum of 0.10 foot additional adjustment in grade elevation shall be provided to allow for loss of head. However, additional elevation adjustments may be made when conditions allow same; provided that, when the invert of any inlet sewer is more than 18 inches above the outlet sewer, an internal drop assembly shall be provided. External drop connections will not be permitted without written approval of the superintendent. 
(Code 1997, § 48-98; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-97. - Sewer location. 
    Sanitary sewers shall be located within a public street right-of-way or public easements adjacent to street right-of-way. Sanitary sewers shall not be located within rear lot easements, except in extremely unusual circumstances as determined by the city engineer. Where public sanitary sewers are located outside of public streets, they shall be placed in a recorded public utility easement that provides for unlimited access to the sanitary sewer for repairs, connections, and maintenance. The minimum acceptable width of easements for public sanitary sewers shall be 20 feet wide; except that, if adjacent and parallel to the public street, it may be reduced to 12 feet wide. 
(Code 1997, § 48-99; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-98. - Sewer depth. 
    The sanitary sewer trunk line shall be designed to have a minimum depth from finish grade elevation to top of sewer of 81/2 feet at local control points or nine feet at locations where the sewer grade is parallel to the road grade. All sewer mains shall be constructed at the maximum practicable depth to facilitate future extensions of the main. In no case shall collector sewers be built with less than five feet of cover. 
(Code 1997, § 48-100; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-99. - Infiltration plugs. 
    Each wye or terminus of building service sewer shall be plugged with an infiltration proof plug in accordance with current city standards. 
(Code 1997, § 48-101; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-100. - Pipes and joints. 
    The type of pipe and joints for sanitary sewers shall be in accordance with current city standards. 
(Code 1997, § 48-102; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-101. - Hazardous waste regulation. 
    The owner of commercial or industrial property serviced by a building sewer carrying hazardous or toxic wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city engineer. The manhole shall be installed in a public sewer or utility easement by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The effluent shall meet the City of Detroit and MDEQ requirements. 
(Code 1997, § 48-103; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
State Law reference- Hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq. 
Sec. 26-102. - Exterior oil interceptors. 
    Exterior grease/oil interceptors shall be required for all proposed restaurants, food service establishments, gas stations, auto service areas or repair facilities, and on all other businesses as determined by the director of public services or city engineer. This requirement can be waived by the city administrator when a viable alternate is proposed. 
(Code 1997, § 48-104; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-103. - Plan requirements. 
    Sanitary sewer plans shall include size, quantity, and location tables, and show calculations for the sanitary sewer basis of design. 
(Code 1997, § 48-105; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Sec. 26-104. - MDEQ permit requirement. 
    The developer's engineer shall complete and submit MDEQ Part 41 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.4101 et seq.) (formerly Act 98) permit applications. 
(Code 1997, § 48-106; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Secs. 26-105-26-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 26-122. - Plan requirements. 
    In those areas serviced by a combined sewer, the storm sewer and the sanitary sewer will be constructed separate. The separate sewers will be connected to the receiving combined sewer at different locations. Where possible, the storm sewers will be constructed with the outlet elevation as near the surface as allowed by the standards to facilitate sewer separation at some later date. Where required, an internal drop manhole will be constructed according to the city's standard details. 
(Code 1997, § 48-131; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-19-1999) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - "Person" defined. 
    When the term "person" is used in this chapter to designate the party whose property may be the subject of any offense, such term shall be construed to include the United States, the state or any other municipal, public or private corporation which may lawfully own any property within the city, as well as individuals. When the term "person" is used in this chapter to designate a party whose actions violate a provision of this chapter, such term shall include the officers of any corporation, or, in the case of a nonincorporated association, those persons under whose direction or control such act was committed. 
(Code 1975, § 8-2-2; Code 1997, § 54-2) 
Sec. 28-2. - Aiding or abetting violation. 
    Every person who shall willfully conceal, advise, assist, aid or abet any other person in the commission of any of the offenses named in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in the same manner as the principal offender would have been punished upon conviction. 
(Code 1975, § 8-2-3; Code 1997, § 54-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Sec. 28-3. - Attempt to commit offense-Punishment. 
    Every person who shall attempt to commit any offense prohibited by this chapter, and in such attempt shall do any act toward the commission of such an offense but shall fail in the perpetration thereof, or shall be prevented or intercepted in executing the offense, upon conviction thereof, shall, in case where no provision is made by ordinance for the punishment of such attempt, be punished in the same manner as for the commission of the offense so attempted. 
(Code 1975, § 8-2-4; Code 1997, § 54-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.92. 
Sec. 28-4. - Concealing knowledge of violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission of any offense or to conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-18; Code 1997, § 54-135) 
Sec. 28-5. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or person having the charge or custody of any animal to cruelly whip, beat, neglect, drive or work the animal when unfit for labor, or to carry or cause to be carried on or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, any living animal having the feet or legs tied together or in any other cruel and inhumane manner to carry or cause to be carried any living animal in or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, without providing suitable racks, carts, crates or cages in which such animal may stand or lie down during transportation and while awaiting slaughter, or to abandon any diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, infirm or disabled animal in any place within the city, or to willfully or negligently permit and allow any aged, diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick or disabled animal to suffer unnecessary torture or pain. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-4; Code 1997, § 54-7) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50. 
Sec. 28-6. - Injuring birds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, by use of a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or otherwise, any bird, or to take the eggs or young of any bird. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-3; Code 1997, § 54-8) 
State Law reference- Enforcement of laws for protection of wild birds, wild animals, and fish, MCL 324.1601 et seq.; protection and preservation of fish, game, and birds, MCL 324.41101 et seq. 
Sec. 28-7. - Misdemeanors under state law prohibited. 
    Every act prohibited by state law as a misdemeanor is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-44; Code 1997, § 54-11) 
State Law reference- Michigan penal code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 
Sec. 28-8. - Offenses under state law generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such laws are applicable to municipal government. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-34; Code 1997, § 54-12) 
Secs. 28-9-28-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 28-35. - Aiding prisoners to escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist, by any means whatever, any prisoner, committed to any jail or place of confinement in the city, in any case, civil or criminal, to escape therefrom, whether such escape be effected or not, or to aid or assist any prisoner in escaping or attempting to escape from the custody of any officer, or an officer's deputy or lawful assistant, who shall have the lawful charge of such prisoner. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-1; Code 1997, § 54-41) 
State Law reference- Facilitating escape of or assisting prisoners, MCL 750.183; aiding escape from officer, MCL 750.184. 
Sec. 28-36. - Assaulting public officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assault, strike, beat or wound any public officer, or an officer's deputy or lawful assistant, while in the discharge of any official duty. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-2; Code 1997, § 54-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 28-37. - Crowds following officer having prisoner in custody. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to gather as a crowd and to follow public safety officers when having persons under control or arrest, or while taking any person under arrest to the municipal building of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-3; Code 1997, § 54-43) 
Sec. 28-38. - Escape from custody. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-4; Code 1997, § 54-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.193 et seq. 
Sec. 28-39. - False alarm of fire or need for police or ambulance assistance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or need for police or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-5; Code 1997, § 54-45) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; requesting assistance of ambulance service or advanced mobile emergency care service with intent not to use assistance, MCL 750.411d. 
Sec. 28-40. - False report of crime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or file with the public safety department of the city any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-6; Code 1997, § 54-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 28-41. - False representation as city officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an officer of the city or to attempt to impersonate any such officer, or to, without authority, perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-7; Code 1997, § 54-47) 
State Law reference- False personation, MCL 750.215 et seq. 
Sec. 28-42. - Resisting or interfering with person with police authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with any police officer, fire officer or member of the department of public safety, or any person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of such person's official duties, or in any way interfere with or hinder such person in the discharge of such person's duty, or to willfully disobey any reasonable rule, regulation or order as may be set forth in the discharge of such person's duties. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-8; Code 1997, § 54-48) 
State Law reference- Resisting or obstructing officer in discharge of duty, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 28-43. - Resisting or interfering with city officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere willfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the city in the exercise of such officer's official duties. The term "officer," as used in this section, shall include any employee of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-10; Code 1997, § 54-50) 
State Law reference- Resisting or obstructing officer in discharge of duty, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 28-44. - Furnishing weapons, drugs or other articles to prisoners. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined, or, in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, alcoholic liquors, controlled substances or other articles without the consent of the officer in charge. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6-11; Code 1997, § 54-51) 
State Law reference- Alcoholic liquor, controlled substances, and weapons in jails, MCL 801.261 et seq. 
Sec. 28-45. - Disturbing grade stakes, property line markers or similar markers. 
    It shall be unlawful to remove, break, disturb or in any manner injure any grade stake, stone or other mark or monument set by or under the authority of the city engineer to designate grades, corners, property lines or benchmarks, or in any manner erase or deface any letters or figures thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-53; Code 1997, § 54-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.383. 
Sec. 28-46. - Obedience to public safety officers; violation as misdemeanor. 
    A person shall not refuse to comply with a lawful order or direction of a public safety officer when that officer, for public interest and safety, is guiding, directing, controlling or regulating traffic in this city. 
(Code 1997, § 54-53; Ord. No. 746, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.479a. 
Secs. 28-47-28-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 28-66. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, peep into or be found loitering around or within view of any window not on such person's own property with the intent of watching or looking through the window, or to enter upon any private property with the intent to commit such act in such a way as to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-58; Code 1997, § 54-10) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 28-67. - Harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to: 
(1)  Follow a person in or about a public place; or 
(2)  Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-13; Code 1997, § 54-173) 
Sec. 28-68. - Stalking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Course of conduct means a pattern of conduct composed of a series of two or more separate noncontinuous acts, evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
    Emotional distress means significant mental suffering or distress that may, but does not necessarily require, medical or other professional treatment or counseling. 
    Harassment means conduct directed toward a victim that includes, but is not limited to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact, that would cause a reasonable individual to suffer emotional distress and that actually causes the victim to suffer emotional distress. The term "harassment" does not include constitutionally protected activity or conduct that serves a legitimate purpose. 
    Stalking means a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment of another individual that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed or molested, and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed or molested. 
    Unconsented contact means any contact with another individual that is initiated or continued without that individual's consent, or in disregard of that individual's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued. The term "unconsented contact" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Following or appearing within the sight of that individual. 
(2)  Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or on private property. 
(3)  Appearing at the workplace or residence of that individual. 
(4)  Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased or occupied by that individual. 
(5)  Contacting that individual by telephone. 
(6)  Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual. 
(7)  Placing an object on, or delivering an object to, property owned, leased or occupied by that individual. 
    Victim means an individual who is the target of a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in stalking. 
(c)  Probation and orders of court for persons convicted of stalking. The court may place an individual convicted of violating subsection (b) of this section on probation for a term of not more than two years. If a term of probation is ordered, the court may, in addition to any other lawful condition of probation, order the defendant to do any of the following: 
(1)  Refrain from stalking any individual during the term of probation. 
(2)  Refrain from having contact with the victim of the offense. 
(3)  Be evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric, psychological or social counseling, and if determined appropriate by the court, to receive psychiatric, psychological or social counseling at the person's own expense. 
(d)  Presumption. In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence that the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct involving repeated unconsented contact with the victim after having been requested by the victim to discontinue the same or a different form of unconsented contact with the victim shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation of the course of conduct caused the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed or molested. 
(e)  Penalty. A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense arising from the same conduct or for any contempt of court arising from the same conduct. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-61; Code 1997, § 54-81) 
Sec. 28-69. - Malicious acts involving communication devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any communications device or service, including but not limited to telephone, internet and wireless providers, with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person. Malicious acts include, but are not limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a communication. 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by a telecommunication device that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been a victim of a crime or of an accident. 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between communication devices, thereby interfering with any communications service. 
(4)  Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a communication. 
(5)  Repeatedly initiating a communication and, without speaking, deliberately breaking the communication connection as or after the communication is received. 
(6)  Deliberately using a communication device in a repetitive manner which causes interruption in communication transmission or prevents the person from utilizing his communication service. 
(7)  Other acts determined by the court to violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(b)  An offense is committed under this section if the communication either originates or terminates or both originates and terminates in this city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-36; Code 1997, § 54-82; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 3-4-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Sec. 28-70. - Cruelty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly or inhumanely whip, injure, beat or mistreat their wife or husband, child, stepchild or other child under such person's care. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-19; Code 1997, § 54-84) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 28-71. - Battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits battery if the person intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-11; Code 1997, § 54-85) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 28-72. - Assault. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, strike, wound or inflict violence upon another person, or to threaten to do or attempt to do such acts, except in defense of their person or property, and then only to the extent necessary to provide such defense. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-7; Code 1997, § 54-86) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 28-73. - Domestic assault and/or battery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to assault or assault and batter his spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he has had a child in common or a resident or former resident of his household. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit a parent or guardian, or other person permitted by law or authorized by the parent or guardian, from taking steps to reasonably discipline a child, including the use of reasonable force. 
(c)  A judge or other magistrate shall not refuse to issue an arrest warrant or dismiss a complaint under this section on the grounds that the complaint is signed upon information and belief by an individual other than the victim of the alleged act or acts of domestic assault and/or battery. 
(d)  A person arrested, with or without a warrant, and charged with a violation of this section shall not be released on an interim bond or on his own recognizance, but shall be held until he can be brought before a magistrate for arraignment. If a magistrate is not available or immediate trial cannot be held within 24 hours, the person shall be held for 20 hours, after which the person may be released on an interim bond or released on his own recognizance. 
(e)  Upon a plea of guilty or a conviction of a person for violating this section, the court may consider the options of deferral of proceedings and probation, as and to the extent permitted by MCL 769.4a, and pursuant to the provisions of said section. 
(Code 1997, § 54-87; Ord. No. 716, § 1, 5-19-1997) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Secs. 28-74-28-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-105. - Expectorating on sidewalk, in public buildings or in public carriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor, wall, seat or equipment of any public building or room used for public assemblies or on the floor, seat, equipment or interior of any public carrier. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-21; Code 1997, § 54-14) 
Secs. 28-106-28-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 

Sec. 28-124. - Public property damaging or tampering. 
    No person shall under any circumstances damage, destroy, deface or in any manner mar or tamper with any publicly owned building, school building, public structure, fence, utility installation, fire hydrant, tree equipment, mechanical equipment, or any other real or personal public property. 
(Code 1975, § 2-8-1; Code 1997, § 54-111) 
Sec. 28-125. - Removing public property. 
    No person shall remove, transport, transplant, store or in any manner interfere with any real or personal public property without authorization from the city administrator or the official custodian of the property. 
(Code 1975, § 2-8-2; Code 1997, § 54-112) 
Sec. 28-126. - Damaging or destroying property-Personal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the personal property of another person and the amount of the destruction or injury is less than $200.00. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-43; Code 1997, § 54-124; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a. 
Sec. 28-127. - Same-House, barn or building of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure another person's house, barn, or other building or its appurtenances and the amount of the damage or injury is less than $200.00. 
(Code 1997, § 54-124.1; Ord. No. 756, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.380. 
Sec. 28-128. - Same-Trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, cut down, destroy or injure any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil of another that is standing, growing or located on the land of another and the value of trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil cut down, destroyed or injured is less than $200.00. 
(Code 1997, § 54-124.2; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.382. 
Sec. 28-129. - Posting notices or placards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten in any way any showcard, poster or other advertising device upon public or private property in the city unless legally authorized to do so. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-49; Code 1997, § 54-121) 
Secs. 28-130-28-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRESPASS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq. 

Sec. 28-157. - Trespass on property after being notified to leave premises. 
    Any person being upon the lands or premises of the city, church, school, library or other public or private institution, who, being notified to depart therefrom orally or by a sign posted on the premises by the owner, occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person having authority with respect to the presence of others upon such premises, neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be deemed guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-56; Code 1997, § 54-115) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 28-158. - Trespass on property where entry prohibited. 
    Any person who shall willfully and without lawful authority enter upon the lands or premises of the city or any church, school, library or other public or private institution after having been forbidden so to do, orally or by a sign posted on the premises by the owner, occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person having authority with respect to the presence of others upon such premises, shall be deemed guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-55; Code 1997, § 54-116) 
Sec. 28-159. - Prowling about on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful to prowl about on the private premises of any other person in the nighttime without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-51; Code 1997, § 54-118) 
Secs. 28-160-28-186. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - THEFT OR FRAUD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, MCL 750.356 et seq. 

Sec. 28-187. - Swindling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, by color, aid of any trick or sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or device, win for such person or for another any money or property, or a representative of either. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-54; Code 1997, § 54-117) 
State Law reference- Gross frauds and cheats at common law, MCL 750.280. 
Sec. 28-188. - Larceny. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of larceny by stealing the property of another having a value of less than $200.00. The term "property," as used in this section, includes: 
(1)  Money, goods or chattals. 
(2)  A banknote, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate. 
(3)  A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, to become due or to be delivered. 
(4)  A deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or other valuable contract in force. 
(5)  A receipt, release or defeasance. 
(6)  A writ, process or public record. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-47; Code 1997, § 54-122; Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356. 
Sec. 28-189. - Receiving or concealing stolen property. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods, or property having a value of less than $200.00 knowing the money, goods or property is stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(b)  Presumption on dealer's failure to make reasonable inquiry. A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector of merchandise or personal property who fails to reasonably inquire whether the person selling or delivering the stolen, embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal right to do so or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled or converted property that has a registration, serial number or other identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the property, is presumed to have bought or received the property to knowing the property is stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption is rebuttable. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-48; Code 1997, § 54-123; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.535. 
Sec. 28-190. - Fraud generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable things, or to aid or abet such act, or in any manner to be concerned therein. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-33; Code 1997, § 54-128) 
State Law reference- Gross fraud and cheats, MCL 750.280. 
Sec. 28-191. - Obtaining food or merchandise under false pretenses; failure to pay for food or merchandise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for such articles, or depart without paying for such articles or satisfying the person from whom the food, goods, wares or merchandise were received. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-22; Code 1997, § 54-129) 
State Law reference- Defrauding hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, cafe, MCL 750.292. 
Sec. 28-192. - Checks without sufficient funds-Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud and knowing at the time of the making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker or drawer does not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository to pay the check, draft, or order in full upon its presentation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud if the person does not have sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft, or order when presentation for payment is made to the drawee. This subsection does not apply if the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause and that fact was not known to the person when the person made, drew, uttered, or delivered the check, draft, or order. 
(c)  If the amount of the check, draft, or order is less than $100.00, a person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor or punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days, a fine of not more than $500.00, or both imprisonment and fine. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-13; Code 1997, § 54-130; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131. 
Sec. 28-193. - Same-Evidence of intent to defraud. 
    As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository; provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-14; Code 1997, § 54-131) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.132. 
Sec. 28-194. - Same-Notice of protest. 
    Where a check, draft or order is protested on the grounds of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-15; Code 1997, § 54-132) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.133. 
Sec. 28-195. - Same-"Credit" defined. 
    The term "credit," as used in sections 28-192 through 28-194, shall be construed to mean any arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon presentation thereof for payment. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-16; Code 1997, § 54-133) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.134. 
Sec. 28-196. - Possession or use of financial transaction device belonging to other person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession or to use or attempt to use any financial transaction device belonging to any other person without such person's permission. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-17; Code 1997, § 54-134) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.157n. 
Sec. 28-197. - Breaking and entering coin box. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously and willfully, by and with the aid and use of any key, instrument, device or explosive, blow or attempt to blow, or force or attempt to force an entrance into any coin box, depository box, newspaper coin box or other receptacle established and maintained for the convenience of the public, or for any person to extract or obtain or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom any such money or thing of value so deposited or contained therein. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-12; Code 1997, § 54-136) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.113. 
Sec. 28-198. - Fraudulently avoiding payment of admission fees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-1; Code 1997, § 54-137) 
Secs. 28-199-28-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-220. - Encouraging delinquency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child or juvenile to commit any criminal act so as to cause such child or juvenile to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-1; Code 1997, § 54-161) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.145. 
Sec. 28-221. - Sale of drugs or devices used for purpose of procuring abortion. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or keep for sale any drug, medicine, instrument or apparatus used or recommended to be used for the purpose of procuring abortion or miscarriage, except duly licensed practicing physicians and licensed pharmacists. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-2; Code 1997, § 54-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.15. 
Secs. 28-222-28-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Gambling generally, MCL 750.301 et seq. 

Sec. 28-251. - Engaging in gambling; frequenting gambling establishment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deal in, play or engage in gaming such as faro, roulette, dice, cards or other devices or games of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise, for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable things, or to attend or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-3; Code 1997, § 54-163) 
State Law reference- Frequenting or attending gaming places, MCL 750.309. 
Sec. 28-252. - Keeping gaming room or gaming table. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain for hire, gain or reward a gaming room or gaming table, or any game of skill or chance, or partly of skill and partly of chance, used for gaming, or to knowingly suffer a gaming room or gaming table or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by such person, or for any person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming room, gaming table or game within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-4; Code 1997, § 54-164) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.303. 
Sec. 28-253. - Keeping or occupying building for purpose of gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or such person's agent or employee, to directly or indirectly keep, occupy, or assist in keeping or occupying, any common gambling house, any building or room therein, or place within the city where gaming is permitted or suffered, or to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him any apparatus used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-5; Code 1997, § 54-165) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.302. 
Sec. 28-254. - Conducting or promoting lottery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, establish, conduct, operate or manage, superintend, or to aid or to assist in making, establishing, promoting, conducting, operating, managing or superintending, any lottery, gift enterprise, policy, scheme or drawing in the nature of a lottery in the city, or to knowingly advertise or to make public in any manner any lottery, gift enterprise, policy or scheme in the nature of a lottery, whether the lottery is being or is to be conducted, held or drawn within or without the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-6; Code 1997, § 54-166) 
State Law reference- Pool tickets, MCL 750.306. 
Sec. 28-255. - Keeping betting room; buying or selling pools. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or such person's agent or employee, to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room, or any part thereof, or any place with apparatus, books or any device for registering bets, or buying or selling pools upon the result of a trial or contest of skill, speed or endurance, or upon the result of a game, competition, political competition, appointment or election, or any purported event of like character, or to register bets, or buy or sell pools, or to be concerned in buying or selling pools, or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-7; Code 1997, § 54-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.304. 
Sec. 28-256. - Possession of policy tickets or other gambling materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda of any combination, or other bet, manifold or other policy, or pool books or sheets, or any of such articles, or any other implements, apparatus or materials of any other form of gaming. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-8; Code 1997, § 54-168) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.306. 
Secs. 28-257-28-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION OR SEXUAL MISCONDUCT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 

Sec. 28-276. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner such person's vocation as a prostitute or for any person to advertise the profession of a prostitute, or solicit for a prostitute. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-18; Code 1997, § 54-175) 
Sec. 28-277. - Maintaining house of ill fame. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate, or aid and abet in keeping, maintaining or operating a house of ill fame, bawdy house or any house or place resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-9; Code 1997, § 54-169) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.452. 
Sec. 28-278. - Leasing premises for unlawful purpose. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lease to another any house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any unlawful purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-10; Code 1997, § 54-170) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.454. 
Sec. 28-279. - Frequenting house of ill fame. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation, or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-11; Code 1997, § 54-171) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(i), (j). 
Sec. 28-280. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-12; Code 1997, § 54-172) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a(1). 
Sec. 28-281. - Public nudity. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "public nudity" means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. 
(b)  Public nudity does not include any of the following: 
(1)  A woman's breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding. 
(2)  Material as defined in section 2 of Public Act No. 343 of 1984 (MCL 752.362). 
(3)  Sexually explicit visual material as defined in section 3 of Public Act No. 33 of 1978 (MCL 722.673). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display public nudity in the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.4i(e). 
Sec. 28-282. - Obscene language and abusive conduct. 
    No person within the city shall, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if the conduct of such person is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, willfully use abusive or obscene language or make an obscene or abusive gesture to any other person when such words, by their very utterance, or such act, by its very performance, inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Code 1997, § 54-174) 
State Law reference- Indecent or obscene conduct, MCL 750.167(1)(f), 750.337. 
Sec. 28-283. - Entering restroom designated for opposite sex. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any restroom designated for use by a person who is of a sex other than that designated for use thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not be deemed to apply when such entry is made for maintenance or cleaning thereof, or for use by small children when accompanied by their parent or other adult. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5-19; Code 1997, § 54-176) 
Secs. 28-284-28-314. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND OTHER DRUGS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 

Sec. 28-315. - Narcotics and dangerous drugs generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell or offer for sale, distribute, administer, dispense, prescribe or give away opium or its common derivatives, heroin, codeine or morphine; or coca leaves or their common derivative, cocaine; or cannabis, commonly called marijuana; or barbituric acid or any of its salts; or d-lysergic acid diethylamide, peyote, mescaline and its salts, dimethyltryptamine, silocyn or psilocybin; or amphetamine and methamphetamine and their salts and derivatives; or any other derivative, salt, compound, preparation or mixture of the narcotic drugs described in this section, except as provided in this section, or listed in the current publication of the federal register as a narcotic or dangerous drug. 
(b)  An apothecary, medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian, pharmacist, chiropodist, hospital or officer of the department of public safety in the official performance of such person's duties may purchase, receive, possess, sell, distribute, prescribe, administer or dispense the narcotic drugs enumerated and described in subsection (a) of this section; provided the person shall have complied with all provisions as required by the United States Internal Revenue Code, as it now exists or may be hereafter amended, and article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), as such acts have been or shall hereafter be amended. Further, all narcotic drugs obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be kept in the original package or container in which they were received; provided that this requirement shall not apply to any duly licensed medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian or chiropodist, or to any authorized person acting directly under their supervision or control, or to officers of the department of public safety in the official performance of their duties. 
(c)  No person shall at any time have or possess a hypodermic syringe or needle or any other instrument or implement adapted for the use of narcotic drugs by subcutaneous injection, intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction and which is possessed for that purpose, unless such possession is authorized by the certificate of a licensed medical doctor or osteopathic physician issued within the period of one year; provided that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians and pharmacists in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, or to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, supply or give away any empty gelatin capsules or hypodermic syringe or needle or other instrument or implement adapted for use of narcotic drugs by subcutaneous injection, intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction to any person known to be a nonmedical habitual user of narcotic drugs. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nonmedical habitual user of narcotic drugs" shall mean any person who uses narcotic drugs merely to satisfy a craving for such drugs and who does not have a legitimate medical need for narcotic drugs. 
(e)  Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge or concealment of a material fact, or the use of a false name or the giving of a false address, for the purpose of obtaining any narcotic drug or barbituric acid or any derivative, compound, preparation or mixture thereof or hypodermic syringe or needle or other instrument or implement or empty gelatin capsules, or a false statement on any prescription blank, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any narcotic drugs, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments or implements adapted for the use of such drugs or empty gelatin capsules shall use such instruments or implements or permit or authorize their use for any purpose other than that specifically authorized in the prescription or order by means of which such possession was obtained. 
(f)  No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, store, automobile, boat, boathouse or other place of any description whatsoever where narcotic drugs, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments or implements or empty gelatin capsules are sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept illegally. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-45; Code 1997, § 54-177) 
Sec. 28-316. - Marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell or offer for sale, distribute, administer, dispense, prescribe or give away cannabis, commonly called marijuana, or any mixture thereof, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  An officer of the department of public safety may, in the performance of such officer's official duties, purchase, receive, possess, sell, distribute, prescribe, administer or dispense cannabis. 
(c)  Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge or concealment of a material fact, or the use of a false name or the giving of a false address, for the purpose of obtaining any cannabis or mixture thereof shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any cannabis or mixture thereof shall use such cannabis or mixture thereof or permit or authorize its use for any purpose. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, store, automobile, boat, boathouse or other place of any description whatsoever where cannabis or a mixture thereof is sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept illegally. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-46; Code 1997, § 54-178) 
Sec. 28-317. - Sniffing glue or similar substances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deliberately smell or inhale such excessive quantities of any narcotics, drugs or any other noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons, or any other substances containing solvents releasing toxic vapors, as cause conditions of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefaction or dulling of the brain or nervous system. For the purpose of this section, any such condition shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. This section applies with particularity to fingernail polish, model airplane glue, or any other substance or chemical which has the effect described in this section upon the brain or nervous system when smelled or inhaled; provided that nothing in this section shall be interpreted as applying to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-35; Code 1997, § 54-179) 
State Law reference- Inhalation of chemical agents, MCL 752.272. 
Secs. 28-318-28-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 28-338. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering on private property includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking aimlessly, and shall also include knowingly or willingly entering upon the property of another, without the consent of the owner, lessee or other person rightfully in charge or possession thereof, if either of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The premises is fenced or enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders; or 
(2)  Notice against trespass is given by posting the premises in a conspicuous manner. 
(b)  Certain types of loitering prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to: 
a.  Create, or cause to be created, any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
b.  Create, or cause to be created, a danger of breach of the peace; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(2)  This subsection (b) shall include the making of any unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose hearing such remarks are made. 
(c)  Request to leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the owner, lessee or person rightfully in charge or possession thereof or any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-13; Code 1997, § 54-113) 
Sec. 28-339. - Unnecessary noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or create unnecessary and excessive noises, upon either public or private property within the city, by the unnecessary blowing or tooting of horns or signal devices, the playing or using of radios, phonographs, television equipment, musical instruments or record playing devices, the use of loudspeakers or amplifiers, yelling or shouting, steam whistles, the use of mechanical equipment, building operations, or sound trucks, except where permitted by other ordinances of the city, and then only within the time and in the manner so permitted. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-24; Code 1997, § 54-201) 
Sec. 28-340. - Prohibited conduct on restaurant premises. 
(a)  Possession of open container of alcoholic liquors. It shall be unlawful for any patron or other person on the premises of a restaurant, other than in a licensed area, whether in or out of an automobile, to drink any alcoholic liquor, or to have in their possession any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  Loitering upon premises. It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to congregate for any time whatsoever at any location on the premises of a restaurant other than in the restaurant building. Any persons so congregating shall be deemed guilty of loitering after having been told to move on by either the restaurant management or a police officer. 
(c)  Cruising through parking area. No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto the premises of a restaurant and then exit from the premises without parking such motor vehicle and seeking service, unless there is no unoccupied parking space available on the premises. 
(d)  Littering. No person shall put, deposit or throw any food, beverage, paper cup, napkin, dish, bottle, container, straw, scrap paper, handbills, shavings, dirt, trash, hulls, shells, stalks or other kinds of refuse or waste materials in or upon any driveway, sidewalk, street, alley, parking lot or parking area on the premises or in the vicinity of any restaurant in such manner and extent as to thereby render such premises unclean, unsightly or unsafe. 
(e)  Noise; causing nuisance or disturbance. It shall be unlawful for any patron of a restaurant or for any other person while parking on or adjacent to the premises thereof to race the motor of any vehicle, to suddenly start or stop any vehicle, to blow any horn, or to make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the peace, good order or sanitation of the premises, or of the neighborhood, is disturbed or annoyed. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-20; Code 1997, § 54-202) 
Sec. 28-341. - Stench bombs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have on their person or to throw, cast, place, deposit or discharge upon the person or property of another any liquid, gaseous or solid substance which is injurious to persons or property or which is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the senses with intent to wrongfully injure, molest, discomfort, discommode or coerce another in the use, management, conduct or control of their person or property. It shall also be unlawful for any person to aid, abet or assist in the attempt or commission of any of these prohibited acts. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-21; Code 1997, § 54-203) 
Sec. 28-342. - Fighting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fight, wrestle or engage in fisticuffs with another person on public or private property within the city, except where boxing or wrestling exhibitions are duly authorized and licensed by law. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-23; Code 1997, § 54-83) 
Sec. 28-343. - Offensive conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-22; Code 1997, § 54-204) 
Sec. 28-344. - Unlawful acts at polls. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent or turbulent manner at or near the public polls on election day, or to engage in, aid or encourage the doing or causing to be done of anything calculated to disturb the due and orderly proceedings of any election board or the counting of the votes at any public election held in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-23; Code 1997, § 54-205) 
Sec. 28-345. - Picnics and open air dances disturbing public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any yard, ground, grave or other real estate within the city for public picnics or open-air dances to be conducted in such manner as to be an annoyance or injury to the public. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-17; Code 1997, § 54-206) 
Sec. 28-346. - Inciting riot. 
    Every person who, in the city, shall incite a riot, or who by sign, gesture, sound, words or otherwise shall provoke or attempt to provoke any person, crowd or gathering of persons to commit any disorderly or riotous act or breach of the peace, or who shall cause a gathering of crowds of excited persons on the streets, avenues, alleys, public grounds, buildings or places within the city to the alarm of the inhabitants of the city, or threat to the peace and good order of the city, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-18; Code 1997, § 54-207) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.542. 
Sec. 28-347. - Refusal to disperse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer when two or more persons are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-19; Code 1997, § 54-208) 
Sec. 28-348. - Noise from televisions, radios, musical instruments and similar devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any television or radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person so playing, using or operating such instrument or device and such persons who are voluntary listeners thereto, or in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-15; Code 1997, § 54-210) 
Sec. 28-349. - Maximum noise levels. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambient noise means all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources. 
    Decibel means a unit or level of sound energy which denotes the ratio between two sound qualities which are proportional to power, as measured by a sound level meter. 
    Person means any individual, firm, copartnership or corporation. In the case of corporations, the directors and officers shall be the responsible parties under the terms of this section. 
(b)  Prohibited noise. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any premises within the city to cause or permit any noise to be emitted from any equipment, including radios, phonographs, musical instruments, television sets, electric motors, gasoline engines or other mechanical equipment owned by such person, under the control of such person or located upon the premises owned or under the control of such person, which noise exceeds a sound level of 85 decibels in combination with and including ambient noise measured on a sound meter set out on the fast setting of the "A" scale. 
(c)  Measurement of noise levels. Noise levels shall be measured at a distance of a minimum of 20 feet from the noise source located within any public right-of-way. If the noise source is located on private property or public property other than the public right-of-way, then the measurement shall be made at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the property line of the property on which the noise source is located. 
(d)  Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle or to those activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the city, including but not limited to parades and fireworks displays. 
(e)  Applicability of other ordinances. Any ordinances concerning the emission of sound or the regulation of sound equipment not specifically in conflict with the terms of this section are hereby saved and retained. 
(f)  Temporary hardship permit. Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this section on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the director of public safety or the director's designated representative. Any permit granted by the director of public safety shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted and shall specify the time for which such permit is granted. The director of public safety or the director's designated representative may grant such a permit if the director or the director's representative finds that: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the applicant's activity or operations to comply with this section; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that will comply with the noise emission levels permitted by this section; and 
(3)  No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
The director of public safety or the director's designated representative shall prescribe any conditions or requirements the director or the director's representative deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. Any temporary permit issued by the director of public safety shall be issued without any fee being charged therefor. 
(g)  Commercial, restricted office and parking zoning districts. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any premises located in a commercial, restricted office or P-1 parking zoning district of the city to cause or permit any noise to be emitted from any equipment, including radios, phonographs, musical instruments, television sets, electric motors, gasoline engines or other mechanical equipment owned by such person, under the control of such person or located upon the premises owned or under control of such person, which noise exceeds a sound level of 70 decibels in combination with and including ambient noise measured on a sound meter set on the fast setting of the "A" scale, between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., local time. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the terms of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-11; Code 1997, § 54-211) 
Sec. 28-350. - Sound trucks. 
    It shall be unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle, unless such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the director of public safety to operate any such vehicle so equipped. The director of public safety shall establish the hours during which such equipment may be operated. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-12; Code 1997, § 54-212) 
Sec. 28-351. - Disturbance of religious worship. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise, by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near to the place of worship so as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-6; Code 1997, § 54-213) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.525. 
Sec. 28-352. - Disturbance of public or private meetings or gatherings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disquiet or disturb any public or private meetings or gatherings by making noise, by improper behavior, or by loud, boisterous or profane discourse within the meeting place, or so near so as to disturb the orderly and proper conduct of the meeting. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-7; Code 1997, § 54-214) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 28-353. - Squealing tires of motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of an automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle to operate such vehicle in such a manner so as to cause any wheel of the vehicle to spin upon the pavement thereby creating a squealing or screeching noise. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-2; Code 1997, § 54-215) 
Sec. 28-354. - Unlawful assembly. 
    It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together within the city with the intent to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the person or property of another, or to do any unlawful act against the peace, or being lawfully assembled together to agree with each other to do any such unlawful act or to make any movement or participation therefor, or to be armed or equipped with rocks, brickbats, clubs, stones, chains, knuckles, knives, rods or any other similar or like object capable of inflicting damage or injury to persons or property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-1; Code 1997, § 54-216) 
State Law reference- Unlawful assembly, MCL 752.543. 
Sec. 28-355. - Noisy or boisterous parties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, guest, tenant or person in apparent possession of any premises within the city to permit any party or gathering of two or more persons within such premises to become so loud, noisy or boisterous so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding area. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-37; Code 1997, § 54-217) 
Sec. 28-356. - Disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be a disorderly person. A person who is in a public place or in a motor vehicle and who is either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance shall be deemed disorderly. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-20; Code 1997, § 54-218) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 28-357. - Prohibited conduct relating to ticket sales. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the term "ticket sales" means the offering for sale of tickets for shows, plays and other types of entertainment. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for persons to form a line or to loiter about an establishment for the purpose of purchasing tickets from such establishment when such establishment is not open for ticket sales or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., local time. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-24-1, 8-24-2; Code 1997, § 54-219) 
Sec. 28-358. - Lawn equipment operation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lawn equipment means any gasoline or electrical powered lawn mower, edging tool, grass clippers, weed cutters or grass or leaf blower. 
(b)  Hours of operation. No person shall use or operate lawn equipment within 100 feet of a residence (dwelling) in the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., local time, on weekdays and Saturday or before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on Sundays or legal holidays. Operation of lawn equipment between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day is allowed 100 feet from any residence. 
(Code 1997, § 54-220; Ord. No. 690, § 1, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 5-3-1999) 
Secs. 28-359-28-389. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-390. - Deposit or storage of injurious material on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any private property any material, chemical, medicine or substance injurious to persons or property, other than that properly stored and confined within any building on the premises. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-39; Code 1997, § 54-126) 
State Law reference- Exposing poisonous substances where liable to be eaten by beasts, MCL 750.437. 
Sec. 28-391. - Deposit of injurious material on street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public thoroughfare any material or liquid or solid substance potentially or presently injurious to persons or property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-38; Code 1997, § 54-127) 
State Law reference- Placing or throwing glass or other debris on beach or public highway, MCL 750.493a. 
Sec. 28-392. - Windowsills to be kept clear. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk, any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless such article is securely fastened or protected by screens. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-59; Code 1997, § 54-9) 
Sec. 28-393. - Throwing stones or other missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any stone, snowball, substance or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property or upon or at any person in or upon any public or private property or place, or throw or propel any stone, snowball or any other missile or object from a moving vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-57; Code 1997, § 54-114) 
Sec. 28-394. - Riding roller skates, skateboards or scooters. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Roller skates means shoes having attached thereto wheels, either permanently or temporarily affixed to the shoes. 
    Scooter means a two-wheeled device designed to be ridden by a person standing thereon. 
    Skate blades means shoes with a row of wheels attached thereto, either permanently or temporarily affixed to the shoes. 
    Skateboard means a board or flat piece of material consisting of metal, fiberglass, plastic or other material which has affixed thereto wheels and is designed to be ridden by a person standing thereon. 
(b)  Use on posted property prohibited. Any person using a skateboard or scooter or using roller skates or skate blades upon lands or premises within the city posted with a sign notifying the public that skating, skateboards and scooters are prohibited on such property shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
(c)  Riding skateboard or scooter on sidewalk. No person shall use or ride a skateboard or scooter upon any city sidewalk in a manner that unreasonably interferes with or tends to interfere with pedestrians lawfully using such sidewalk. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-20-1-8-20-3; Code 1997, § 54-256) 
Sec. 28-395. - Skateboard ramps. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Skateboard means any board or similar device equipped with or having wheels affixed thereto and designed or used by a person standing upon such board and propelling the board by foot power or gravity. 
Skateboard ramp means any structure constructed of wood, plastic or other materials designed to be used for or actually used for a platform or ramp for riding skateboards. 
(b)  Permitted hours of use in residential districts. The city council hereby determines that the noise created by and associated with the use of skateboard ramps is detrimental to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of this community. The use of any skateboard ramp in any residential district within the city by any person riding upon a skateboard shall be confined to that time between 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m., local time. 
(c)  Violations. It shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code for any person to ride a skateboard upon a skateboard ramp within the city and it shall be deemed a violation of this Code for any owner of real property or tenant occupying real property within the city to permit or allow the use of any skateboard ramp located upon such property other than between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m., local time. Any noise associated with the use of a skateboard ramp shall not exceed the limits for noise emissions contained in section 28-349. 
(d)  Location of ramps. No skateboard ramp shall be installed or maintained within ten feet of any side or rear lot line, nor shall any skateboard ramp be installed or maintained in the front yard area of any residential property. 
(Code 1975, §§ 6-23-1-6-23-4; Code 1997, § 54-257) 
Sec. 28-396. - Go-carts, minibikes and other unlicensed motorized vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private property accessible to the general public means any privately owned, leased or rented property that is not enclosed within a fence and whereon the owner, lessor or tenant permits the gathering of persons who are present upon such property without the specific permission of such owner, lessor or tenant. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. The operation of unlicensed motorized vehicles, includes, but is not limited to, go-carts, minibikes and scooters, upon the sidewalks, alleyways, paved and unpaved parking lots, school playgrounds and other public and private property that is accessible to the general public, other than the streets and roadways, within the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, as being injurious to the public safety. 
(c)  Operation in certain places prohibited. The operation of such unlicensed motorized vehicles, including but not limited to, go-carts, minibikes and scooters, upon the sidewalks, alleyways, paved and unpaved parking lots, school playgrounds and other public and private property that is accessible to the general public, other than the streets and roadways, within the city is hereby prohibited. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section shall not be applicable to motor-powered lawnmowers, tractors, sweepers, snowplows when used for their designed purposes, or farm implements. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-7-12-8-7-15; Code 1997, § 34-42) 
Sec. 28-397. - Motorized model airplanes. 
(a)  Declaration of nuisance. The operation of internal combustion model airplane engines within the city limits is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Operation prohibited. The operation of such internal combustion model airplane engines within the city limits is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-7-16, 8-7-17; Code 1997, § 34-43) 
Sec. 28-398. - Regulation of consumer fireworks. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. This Ordinance No. 854 repeals the existing ordinance codified in this section and adopts this amended section to regulate fireworks as allowed under the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible efforts by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Production Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standards 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standards 87-1, 4.1. 
Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
National holidays means: 
(1)  New Years' Day, January 1; 
(2)  Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January; 
(3)  Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February; 
(4)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; 
(5)  Independence Day, July 4; 
(6)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September; 
(7)  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October; 
(8)  Veteran's Day, November 11; 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; 
(10)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
Novelties means that term as defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in paragraph (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in diameter. 
Person means any individual, corporation, LLC, firm, association or similar entity. In the case of those entities, the officers, directors, shareholders, members, or managers are responsible under this section. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the city, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday consistent with MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
(2)  No person under 18 years of age shall possess consumer fireworks. 
(3)  No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance, or a combination of both. 
(4)  No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or on private property without the owner's express permission. 
(5)  No person shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks within the city on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday, between the hours of midnight and 8:00 a.m., except that on New Years Day, this prohibition applies between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(d)  Violations, fines and penalties. A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Violations may be issued to either the actual person violating this section, or the person having control of a residence, if that person knew or reasonably should have known that the prohibited conduct occurred. The city council may amend the amount of the fine by resolution. 
(e)  Amendment. If the definitions or hours in this section are amended by state law, the council may amend the definitions or hours by resolution. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-4-9, 8-4-10; Code 1997, §§ 54-241, 54-242; Ord. No. 848, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 854, 7-1-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.243a. 
Sec. 28-399. - Playing ball on street or alley. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, kick or knock any baseball, indoor baseball, football, soccer ball, volleyball or the like, or in any manner engage in a game or activity wherein such equipment is used upon any street, highway or alley in this city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-10; Code 1997, § 54-253) 
Sec. 28-400. - Barbed wire and electric fences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire, razor wire or concertina wire or to use such wires as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, or entrance to a building or parcel of land, except as authorized in writing by the director of public safety as being essential for the protection and safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-9; Code 1997, § 54-254; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 3-7-1994) 
Sec. 28-401. - Arson. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously burn any personal or real property, or both, having a value of less than $200.00, owned by himself or another person. The term "burn," as used in this section, shall mean setting fire to, or doing any act which results in the starting of a fire, or aiding, counseling, inducing, persuading or procuring another to do such act. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-8; Code 1997, § 54-255; Ord. No. 754, § 1, 6-19-2000) 
Secs. 28-402-28-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq. 

Sec. 28-431. - Carrying dangerous weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an officer or deputy officer of the law to carry on their person or in a concealed manner any, knife with a blade in excess of three inches in length, dirk, slingshot, knucks, mace or tear gas, unless such is authorized by a permit issued by the department of public safety of the state or a political subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-5; Code 1997, § 54-244; Ord. No. 858, 6-16-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.224. 
Sec. 28-432. - Aiming firearm or other weapon at person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except public safety officers, to intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or bow and arrow at or toward any other person. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-24; Code 1997, § 54-245) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.233. 
Sec. 28-433. - Discharging firearm or other weapon while aiming at person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except public safety officers, to discharge without injury to another person any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or bow and arrow while intentionally, without malice, aiming at or toward any person. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-25; Code 1997, § 54-246) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.234. 
Sec. 28-434. - Discharge of firearm or other weapon prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, or bow and arrow in the city except when lawfully acting in the defense of persons or property, or the enforcement of law, or at a derby or contest at an established range, the operation of which has been approved by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-26; Code 1997, § 54-247) 
State Law reference- Authority to prevent discharge of firearms, MCL 123.1104; discharge of weapons, MCL 750.234 et seq. 
Sec. 28-435. - Injuring person by discharge of firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maim or injure any other person by the discharge of any firearm pointed or aimed unintentionally, without malice, at any such person. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-27; Code 1997, § 54-248) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.235. 
Sec. 28-436. - Possession of firearm or other weapon while intoxicated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or any exhilarating or stupefying drug, to carry, have in possession or control, use in any manner, or discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, or bow and arrow. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-28; Code 1997, § 54-249) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.237. 
Sec. 28-437. - Purchase or transport of firearms by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to purchase any firearm. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to transport a firearm on any public street or in any public place unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian and such transportation is to or from a duly constituted target range, or location for hunting if such person has in their possession a valid hunting license issued by state authority. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-29; Code 1997, § 54-250) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.234f. 
Sec. 28-438. - Transporting firearms generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person shall not transport or possess in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle designed for land travel a firearm, other than a pistol, unless the firearm is unloaded and is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Taken down. 
(2)  Enclosed in a case. 
(3)  Carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
(4)  Inaccessible from the interior of the vehicle. 
(b)  Public safety officers, peace officers and persons in police and military service in pursuit of official duty, and persons duly authorized by federal or state law to carry firearms are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-30; Code 1997, § 54-251) 
Sec. 28-439. - Hunting and use of firearms generally. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means any rifle, shotgun, revolver or cannon, or any other similar or like instrument used to shoot bullets, cartridges, shells or any other similar or like explosives. 
    Hunting means the carrying of firearms or weapons commonly used for hunting purposes, provided that the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to unloaded firearms or weapons carried in transit through the city. 
(b)  Hunting prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt animals or birds in the city. 
(c)  Scope of restrictions. For the purpose of this section, the term "trap shooting, skeet shooting, target shooting or practice shooting" shall be deemed to embrace all use of firearms, except where permitted in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Use of firearms restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any firearms in connection with or in engaging in trap shooting, skeet shooting, target shooting or practice shooting; provided, however, this shall not preclude the operation of and participation in supervised gun clubs where various target shooting is practiced within enclosed ranges, the operation of which has previously been approved by the council. 
(e)  Possession of firearm or other weapon used for hunting. 
(1)  No person shall have in their possession with intent to use any rifle, air pistol, air gun, BB gun or similar gun, or any slingshot. 
(2)  The possession of any firearm or weapon commonly used for hunting purposes by any person upon public highways or upon the private property of another, except where such firearm or weapon is carried unloaded in transit through the city, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of the intent to hunt in the city in violation of the provisions of this section; provided, however, the use of firearms and weapons at any hunting club in the city wherein objects other than live animals and birds are used as targets shall be expressly excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of firearms by police officers, peace officers or members of the state militia or of the armed forces of the state, or to police officers engaged in target practice under directions of the chief of police. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-12-1-8-12-6; Code 1997, § 54-258) 
State Law reference- Hunting area control, MCL 324.41902. 
Sec. 28-440. - Trapping wild animals. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall set, place or maintain any trap for the purpose of or capable of catching, holding or killing any wild animal without first having obtained a permit for such trap from the city clerk. The term "wild animal," as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as ascribed to such terms by MCL 324.43508. 
(b)  Application for permit. Persons desiring to place or set a trap for wild animals shall file a written request with the city clerk for a permit to maintain such trap. The applicant shall indicate the kind of trap to be used, the location where such trap shall be set, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and the type of animal for which the trap is intended. 
(c)  State approval required; issuance of permit; duration of permit. No permit shall be issued by the city clerk unless the city clerk is satisfied that the applicant for a permit has obtained the permission of the state department of natural resources for the proposed trapping of the animals. Upon the city clerk being satisfied that the state department of natural resources has approved the proposed trapping, the city clerk may issue a permit for the trap, which permit shall not exceed 30 days. 
(d)  Maintenance of traps. The person to whom the trapping permit is issued shall cause the trap to be checked at least once each eight hours that the trap is set, and any trapped animal shall be removed immediately. Any animal shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the animal control officer of the city. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person setting or placing a trap without having first obtained a permit therefor as required by this section, or any person, having obtained a permit for a trap, who fails to abide by the provisions of this section, shall, upon being found guilty of such violation, be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-18-1-8-18-5; Code 1997, § 54-259) 
Secs. 28-441-28-463. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 28-464. - Open house parties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
    Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence, other than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family members. 
    Residence means a home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit. 
(b)  Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors or controlled substances by persons under 21 years of age. No person having control of any residence shall allow an open house party to take place at the residence if any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance is possessed or consumed at the residence by any person under 21 years of age: 
(1)  Where the person having control of the residence failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor or controlled substance at the residence; or 
(2)  Where the person having control of the residence knew or reasonably should have known that the alcoholic liquor or controlled substance was in the possession of or being consumed by a person under 21 years of age at the residence. 
(c)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-19-1-8-19-4; Code 1997, § 54-281) 
Sec. 28-465. - Curfew; minors in theaters or other places of amusement. 
(a)  Minors under age ten years in place of amusement. It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator, manager, employee, parent or guardian to permit any child of the age of ten years or under, unaccompanied by a parent or guardian or an adult or a responsible individual of the age of 18 years or over in whose care or custody the parent or guardian has placed such child, to remain in any theater, moving picture show or other place of amusement after the hour of 7:00 p.m., local time. 
(b)  Curfew for minors under age 12 years. No minor under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(c)  Curfew for minors under age 17 years. A minor under the age of 17 years shall not loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or an adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor. 
(d)  Minors under age 16 years in place of amusement. It shall be unlawful for any bowling alley, billiard or pool room or theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator, manager, employee, parent or guardian to permit any child under the age of 16 years to attend the amusement or recreation or attend the showing of any theatrical production or movie in any theater or moving picture show or engage in the amusement or recreation of a bowling alley, billiard room or pool room after the hour of 10:30 p.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or an adult in whose care or custody the parent or guardian has placed the child. 
(e)  Minors under age 18 years in place of amusement. It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator, manager or employee to permit any minor under the age of 18 years to be admitted to or be permitted to remain in any theater, moving picture show or other place of amusement between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and it shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to apply for admission or to remain in any theater, moving picture show or any other place of amusement between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(f)  Restrictions during school hours. It shall be unlawful for any bowling alley, billiard or pool room or theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator, manager, employee, parent or guardian to permit any child under the age of 16 years to attend any of the amusements or recreation provided or attend any showing of a theatrical production or movie showing in any theater, or moving picture show, or engage in the amusement or recreation of a bowling alley, billiard or pool room or place of public amusement, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. local time, except during school vacation periods and school vacation days. 
(g)  Posting of notice. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be placed or posted in a conspicuous place in the lobby of each theater, bowling alley or other place of amusement and recreation. 
(h)  Duty of business operators to determine age; false representation of age. It is hereby made the duty of all proprietors, owners and managers or anyone connected with a business enumerated in this section to ascertain the age of persons referred to in this section; and it shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely represent himself, by any means or methods, to be of a different age than such minor's natural age for the purpose of gaining admittance to or remaining in any of the places of amusement or recreation mentioned in this section. 
(i)  Employment of minors under age 17 years by theaters. No theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator, manager or employee, by himself or another, shall employ, engage or otherwise permit employment or engagement of or use any minor under the age of 17 years as an employee, entertainer or in any other capacity in or about the premises; provided, however, that so-called traveling road shows may engage or employ a minor under the age of 17 years, provided such employment or engagement is approved by the state department of labor and economic growth, and provided that minors under 17 years of age pursuing apprenticeship courses as part of their training may be employed when such employment has the approval of the state department of labor and economic growth and a permit has been issued by the board of education covering such employment in the city. 
(j)  Assisting minor to gain admission in violation of section. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase an admission ticket or assist in any way whatsoever any child to gain admittance into any theater or other place of amusement where such admittance would be unlawful under the terms and provisions of this section. 
(k)  Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the curfew requirements of this section where the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent as the caretaker for the minor; 
(2)  On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of his parent, guardian or caretaker; 
(3)  In a vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a certain employment activity, or going to or from employment, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the next door neighbor's residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police; 
(7)  In attendance at an official school, religious or other recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or from such an activity, without any detour or stop, and supervised by adults; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights, including free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-14-1-8-14-10; Code 1997, § 54-282) 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, MCL 722.751 et seq. 
Sec. 28-466. - Violations relating to tobacco products. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chewing tobacco means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. 
    School district means a school district, local art school district or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the revised school code, Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq.); a joint high school district formed under Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.701); or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these. 
    School property means a building, facility or structure and other real estate owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a school district and posted as school property. 
    Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed or placed in a person's mouth. 
    Tobacco snuff means shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco that may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums. 
    Use of a tobacco product means any of the following: 
(1)  The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. 
(2)  The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product. 
(3)  The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth. 
(b)  Selling or furnishing to person under 18 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff or tobacco in any other form to a person under 18 years of age. 
(c)  Possession or use in public by person under 18 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars, or to possess or chew, suck or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff, or to possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. 
(d)  Use on school property. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a tobacco product on school property. 
(e)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas, including, but not limited to, an open air stadium, during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  Saturdays, Sundays and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
(2)  After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours. 
(f)  Penalty. A person who violates this section is guilty of a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, §§ 8-23-1-8-23-6; Code 1997, § 54-283) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 722.641 et seq., 750.473. 
Sec. 28-467. - Pellet guns and similar devices-Definition. 
    For the purpose of section 28-468, the term "firearm" shall mean any weapon or device which is designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling any missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet or other mass not exceeding 0.177 caliber by means of compressed air or gas or by means of springs, levers or some other mechanical device. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-25; Code 1997, § 54-284) 
Sec. 28-468. - Same-Use or possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to use or possess any firearm outside the curtilage of such person's domicile unless the person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-26; Code 1997, § 54-285) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.891. 
Sec. 28-469. - Selling or furnishing explosives to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give gunpowder or other explosives to minors under 18 years of age without the consent of the parents of such minors having been first obtained. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4-8; Code 1997, § 54-243) 
Sec. 28-470. - Selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to underage person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or furnish any alcoholic liquor to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-3; Code 1997, § 54-287) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1701(1). 
Sec. 28-471. - Purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by underage person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume alcoholic liquor in a licensed premises or possess alcoholic liquor. A person less than 21 years of age who violates this section is liable for the following civil fines: 
(1)  For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100.00, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense. 
(2)  For a violation of this subsection following a prior conviction or juvenile adjudication for a violation of this subsection, section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this subsection or section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days but only if such person has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense. 
(3)  For a violation of this subsection following two or more prior convictions or juvenile adjudications for a violation of this subsection, section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this subsection or section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, by imprisonment for not more than 60 days but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense. 
This section shall not be construed to prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment if employed by a person licensed by the state liquor control commission, by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of the state liquor control commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for the person's personal consumption. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-4; Code 1997, § 54-288) 
Sec. 28-472. - Furnishing or using fraudulent identification for purpose of purchasing alcoholic liquor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish fraudulent identification to a person less than 21 years of age or for a person less than 21 years of age to use fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor. The court shall order the secretary of state to suspend, for a period of 90 days, the operator's or chauffeur's license of a person who is convicted of using fraudulent identification in violation of this section, and the operator's or chauffeur's license of that person shall be surrendered to the court. The court shall immediately forward the surrendered license and a certificate of conviction to the secretary of state. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-5; Code 1997, § 54-289) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703(2), (5). 
Sec. 28-473. - Possession of knives. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under 18 years of age to have in such person's possession or control, except within such person's own domicile, or carry or use in any manner, any knife, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged or pointed instrument or weapon; provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this section if such person's possession of such knife, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged or pointed instrument is necessary for such person's employment, trade or occupation, or if the person is engaged in or is proceeding to or returning from a place of hunting, trapping or fishing and, whenever required, is also carrying a currently valid license issued to such person by the state department of natural resources, or if such person is a duly enrolled member of the Boy Scouts of America or a similar organization or society and such possession is necessary to participate in the activities of such organization or society, or if the knife, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged or pointed instrument is required under circumstances that tend to establish that its possession is for a lawful purpose, not, however, to include self-defense or amusement. Knives having a blade three inches in length or less are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3-42; Code 1997, § 54-291) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation areas and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amplified sound means music or speech projected or transmitted by artificial means, including, but not limited to, amplifiers, loudspeakers or any similar devices. 
    City-owned park means any park, recreation or playground area, or building or facility thereon, within the city, owned or controlled by the city. 
    Director means the director of public services, or his designated representative, of the city. 
    Law enforcement officer means any member of the public safety department authorized to enforce all criminal and traffic laws and ordinances within the city. 
    Park guard means any employee of the city under the supervision of the director and authorized to enforce all park rules and regulations. 
    Park owner means the city council. 
    Parking area means any designated parking lot or any private park road, drive or special area contiguous thereto that is set apart for the standing or stationing of vehicles and is marked accordingly. 
    Permit means the written permission that must be obtained from the director or the director's designated agent to carry out a given activity in a city park. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of park waters, including changes in the temperature, taste, color, turbidity or odor of the water, or such discharge of any liquid, gas, solid, radioactive or other substance into any park waters that will or is likely to create a public nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, recreational or other beneficial uses, or to wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Vehicle includes any device or conveyance, whether propelled by motor, animal or human power. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any kind, size or description. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-1; Code 1997, § 58-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Direction of traffic. 
    All law enforcement officers and park guards shall direct traffic whenever needed on highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent to a city park in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-2; Code 1997, § 58-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Operation of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall trespass with a vehicle in a city park except upon designated paved or improved park roads or driveways, or in and upon designated areas or trails set aside for use by such vehicles, unless directed by a law enforcement officer or park guard to do so, or by official signs or markings. 
(b)  Where a public road, street or highway crosses a city park, such road, street or highway shall be open to all through traffic normally permitted on any road, street or highway, but such traffic shall conform to park traffic regulations, and vehicles not otherwise permitted to operate within a city park shall not stop along such road, street or highway except in an emergency. 
(c)  No person shall operate a vehicle in a city park in such a way that traffic is obstructed. If a vehicle must be stopped or parked along a city park road or driveway because of an emergency for more than 15 minutes, the operator shall notify a law enforcement officer or park guard of the location of the vehicle and of its description. 
(d)  No person shall operate a vehicle within a city park in excess of ten miles per hour except upon those roads or driveways where official signs or markings designate a different speed limit. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-3; Code 1997, § 58-3) 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-4. - Bicycles, tricycles, motorcycles, scooters and minibikes. 
(a)  The director may, in his reasonable discretion, set aside or designate areas, paths, trails or roads in a city park where operating bicycles, tricycles, motorcycles, scooters and minibikes shall be allowed. 
(b)  Bicycles and tricycles shall be operated on the right-hand side of a roadway, as close to the edge of the paving as conditions permit. When two or more such vehicles are operated in a group, they shall keep in a single file. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-4; Code 1997, § 58-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Parking. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle on city park property other than in areas designated for parking that type of vehicle, unless there is an emergency or unless directed to do otherwise by a law enforcement officer or a park guard. Parking shall conform to officially posted signs or markings unless other instructions are given by a law enforcement officer or a park guard. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be left parked on city park property after park closing hours without obtaining a permit from the director. 
(c)  There shall be no loitering within a parked car for any purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-5; Code 1997, § 58-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Damaging or removing park property; erecting building or other structure. 
    No person shall, in any city park, do or cause to be done any of the following without first obtaining a permit from the director: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface or injure in any manner, or displace, remove or tamper with, any park building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving materials, water line or other public utility or parts thereof, park sign or marking whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other structure or equipment, facility, or other park property of any kind. 
(2)  Willfully dig, cut, move or remove from any park or park area any sand, wood, turf, grass, gravel, shrub or other material, or make any excavation by hand, tool, equipment, blasting or any other means. 
(3)  Construct or erect any building or structure of any kind, whether permanently or temporarily, or run or string any public utility into, upon or across a park. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-6; Code 1997, § 58-6) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 30-7. - Protection of trees, shrubbery and lawns, fences, monuments and other structures. 
    No person shall, in any city park, do or cause to be done any of the following without first obtaining a permit from the director: 
(1)  Willfully pick, saw, chop, cut, carve, remove or injure any flowers, seeds, blooms, bark, branches, twigs or leaves of any tree, plant, shrub, vine, bush or other vegetation. 
(2)  Willfully drive any nail or staple into or attach or fasten any wire, rope or other device to any tree or plant, or tie or hitch any animal to any tree or plant. 
(3)  Willfully dig in or disturb any grass areas, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area. 
(4)  Willfully climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon any monument, vase, fountain, railing, fence or any other park property not designated or normally used for such purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-7; Code 1997, § 58-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Protection of wild animals and birds. 
    No person shall, in any city park, do or cause to be done any of the following without first obtaining a permit from the director: 
(1)  Willfully capture, attempt to capture, hunt, molest, injure, trap or administer or set out any bait or harmful substance for any wild or domestic animal, reptile or bird, or remove or have in their possession the young, eggs or nest of any animal, reptile or bird. Exception is made to this subsection in that any person may kill on sight a reptile known to be deadly poisonous. 
(2)  Willfully give or offer, or attempt to give or offer, to any wild or domestic animal, reptile, bird or fish any tobacco, alcohol or other potentially harmful substance. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-8; Code 1997, § 58-8) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50; wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq. 
Sec. 30-9. - Sanitation; disposal of refuse. 
    No person shall, in any city park, do or cause to be done any of the following without first obtaining a permit from the director: 
(1)  Willfully throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(2)  Willfully have brought in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash. Such materials shall be placed in the proper receptacles when these are provided. When receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-9; Code 1997, § 58-9) 
State Law reference- Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq.; littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 30-10. - Firearms and other dangerous instruments. 
(a)  No person, except an authorized park employee, park guard or law enforcement officer, shall bring into the city park property or have in their possession on city park property any explosive, dynamite cap, fireworks, airgun, pellet gun, spring gun, slingshot, cross bow, bow and arrow, any device by means of which a projectile can be propelled, any trapping device, any incendiary bomb or material, any smoke or stink bomb, any tear gas or other disabling chemical or agent, any acid or caustic substance, or any inflammable liquid except fuel contained in a fuel tank of a motor vehicle or camp stove, or fuel contained in cans properly marked, or charcoal lighter fluid. 
(b)  No person shall discharge any of the weapons or instruments listed in subsection (a) of this section into any city park from outside the park. 
(c)  The director may designate areas within a city park where bows and arrows can be used. In such cases, the director shall promulgate regulations for the safe use of such devices, and no person shall fail to abide by such regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-10; Code 1997, § 58-10; Ord. No. 859, 6-16-2014) 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq. 
Sec. 30-11. - Use of picnic areas. 
(a)  The director shall designate and post those areas of a city park where picnicking is permitted. No person shall picnic other than in a designated area. 
(b)  Picnickers shall not leave a picnic area before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in a disposal receptacle, where provided. If no trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-11; Code 1997, § 58-11) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 30-12. - Fires. 
(a)  No person shall start or maintain, in any city park, any outdoor fire except in designated picnic areas. Fires shall be limited to cooking fires. 
(b)  Cooking fires shall be started and maintained only in a stove, fireplace or barbecue pit maintained by the park owner, or in a portable camp stove. Fuels used in cooking fires shall not produce any noxious fumes or smoke. 
(c)  No person starting or maintaining any fire in a city park shall leave the area where the fire is located without first completely extinguishing the fire or placing hot coals in a receptacle provided and designated for that sole purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-12; Code 1997, § 58-12) 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes relating to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 
Sec. 30-13. - Domestic animals and pets. 
(a)  No domestic animals or pets shall be permitted in a city park unless special permission is granted by the city administrator. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "handicapper" means a person who is audibly impaired, blind, deaf or otherwise physically limited as those terms are defined in MCL 750.502c. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a handicapper being led or accompanied by a guide, hearing or service dog if the guide dog is wearing a harness or if the hearing or service dog is wearing a blaze orange leash and collar, and if the handicapper being led or accompanied has in their possession a picture identification card certifying that the dog was trained by a qualified organization or trainer. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to dogs or cats at the Lakefront Park if taken and kept on boats at the park marina. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-13; Code 1997, § 58-13; Ord. No. 729, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 30-14. - Games. 
    No person in a city park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, kites, rockets or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of organized games, such as football, baseball and the like, is prohibited except on fields, courts or areas designated for such use. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-14; Code 1997, § 58-14) 
Sec. 30-15. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    No person shall possess, consume or sell alcoholic beverages in a city-owned park except as authorized by the city administrator. However, reasonable consumption and possession of alcohol is allowed at Lake Front Park except in the following areas: pool and pool deck, bathhouse, activities center, and motor vehicles. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-15; Code 1997, § 58-15; Ord. No. 863, 5-18-2015) 
State Law reference- Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 
Sec. 30-16. - Intoxicated persons. 
    No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any city park. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-16; Code 1997, § 58-16) 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 30-17. - Soliciting contributions. 
    No person shall solicit contributions in a city park for any purpose without the express consent of the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-17; Code 1997, § 58-17) 
Sec. 30-18. - Use of restrooms and dressing rooms. 
    No person over the age of eight years shall enter or use restroom or dressing room facilities designated for the use of the opposite sex. No person shall loiter in or around any restroom or dressing room for the purpose of soliciting another to engage in deviate sexual behavior. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-18; Code 1997, § 58-18) 
State Law reference- Soliciting or accosting, MCL 750.448. 
Sec. 30-19. - Noise. 
    No person having the control of any device producing amplified sound, except automobile radios and portable radios, shall operate or permit such device to be operated in any city park without written permission from the director. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-19; Code 1997, § 58-19) 
Sec. 30-20. - Exhibition of permits. 
    No person in a city park shall refuse or fail to produce and exhibit any permit the person claims to have upon the request of any law enforcement officer, park guard or other authorized park employee who wishes to inspect the permit for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-20; Code 1997, § 58-20) 
Sec. 30-21. - Merchandising, advertising and signs. 
    No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Expose or offer for sale or hire any article, thing or service, or station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article, thing or service, unless a permit has been obtained from the director. 
(2)  Announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to any article, thing or service for sale or hire, unless done pursuant to regulations promulgated by the director. 
(3)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise place any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription in a city park, or erect or cause to be erected any sign on any public lands, highways or roads adjacent to a city park, unless done pursuant to regulations promulgated by the director. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-21; Code 1997, § 58-21) 
Sec. 30-22. - Obscene language and abusive conduct. 
    No person within a city park shall, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if such person's conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, willfully use abusive or obscene language or make an obscene or abusive gesture to any other person when such words, by their very utterance, or such act, by its very performance, inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-22; Code 1997, § 58-22) 
Sec. 30-23. - Exhibits, performances and group events. 
    In addition to any other provision of this chapter that requires the obtaining of a permit prior to engaging in a given activity, no person in a city park shall conduct, operate, present, manage or take part in any of the following activities unless a permit is obtained prior to the start of the activity: 
(1)  Any contest, exhibit, dramatic performance, play, motion picture, radio or television broadcast, fair, circus, musical event or any similar event. 
(2)  Any public parade, drills, maneuvers or ceremonies to which the public has been invited by prior advertisements. 
(3)  Any use of any city park facility by a certain person or group of persons to the exclusion of others. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-23; Code 1997, § 58-23) 
Sec. 30-24. - Remaining in park after closing hours. 
    No person shall enter or remain in any city park after park closing hours unless a permit has been obtained. Park closing hours shall be posted at park entrances and within adjoining parking lots. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-24; Code 1997, § 58-24) 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 30-25. - Closing of areas to public use. 
    Any section or part of any city park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-25; Code 1997, § 58-25) 
Sec. 30-26. - Entrance to parks. 
    No person shall enter upon a city park without first complying with the requirements for entry as may be established from time to time by the director. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-26; Code 1997, § 58-26) 
Sec. 30-27. - Ejection from park. 
    Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be either arrested or ejected from the park and have their permit confiscated and park privileges suspended for a period to be determined by the director. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12-27; Code 1997, § 58-27) 
Secs. 30-28-30-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKE FRONT PARK 

Sec. 30-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lake Front Park means that real property owned by the city and located within the city limits of the City of St. Clair Shores, Macomb County, Michigan, and devoted to recreational uses by the city. 
    Nonresident taxpayer means those persons whose domicile is not within the boundaries of the city but who pay taxes to the city for its use and benefit on property located within the boundaries of the city. 
    Resident means those persons having their domicile within the territorial limits of the city. For the purposes of this definition, any residence through which the boundary lines of the city passes shall be considered within the territorial limits of the city if a minimum of 51 percent of the residence is within the boundary of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-1; Code 1997, § 58-51) 
Sec. 30-59. - Entrance to park and use of facilities. 
    In accordance with the deed restrictions contained in the deed of acquisition of Lake Front Park and in order to provide for the continued use and enjoyment for the greatest number of residents of the city, entrance to Lake Front Park and the use of the facilities contained therein, excluding the boat docking facilities, shall be limited and restricted to the following persons: 
(1)  A resident of the city. 
(2)  Any guest of any resident of the city when such guest is accompanied by such resident, subject to the limitation on the maximum number of guests permitted as shall be provided by resolution of the city council as may be adopted or amended from time to time. 
(3)  a.  Any nonresident taxpayer and members of the immediate family of such nonresident taxpayer residing in such nonresident taxpayer's household, provided that such nonresident taxpayer shall have paid a minimum of $250.00 in real property taxes to the city for taxes levied by the city for the preceding tax year prior to the filing of the application for entrance permits to Lake Front Park. Any nonresident taxpayer who shall not have paid a minimum of $250.00 in city property taxes for the preceding year and who desires a permit for entrance to Lake Front Park shall be entitled thereto upon the payment to the city of the difference between the amount of city taxes paid and the sum of $250.00. The minimum sum necessary to be eligible for park passes under the provisions of this section may be adjusted by resolution of the city council from time to time adopted. 
b.  This section shall not apply to a nonresident taxpayer whose property is leased or rented to a tenant. Such nonresident taxpayer shall not be entitled to park passes by reason of the property leased or rented to a tenant. 
(4)  Persons temporarily residing within the territorial limits of the city. Applications for such permits shall be made in writing, and shall be verified by the bona fide resident of the city with whom the permittee is temporarily residing. Such application shall be presented, in person, by the applicant at the municipal building. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name, home address and age of the permittee and the facts justifying the issuance of such permit. If the application complies with the controlling ordinances of the city and with the rules and regulations relating to the use and operation of Lake Front Park and states facts justifying the issuance of such permit, a special permit shall be issued in the name of the permittee, which permit shall be issued for a period of not more than six weeks in any calendar year. Not more than three special permits shall be issued in any calendar year for persons temporarily residing at the residence of the applicant. Applications may contain a request for not more than five persons for special permits. Such special permits shall be without guest privileges. 
(5)  Members of groups. Group permits may be issued for the city's civic, social, school, church and club groups and the like, 50 percent or more of the membership of which consists of persons referred to in subsection (1) of this section. Such groups may be permitted access to Lake Front Park by having prior written approval of both the director of public services and the city administrator, but only for a specific function and day and after submitting a written request for such permit, which request shall list the names and addresses of the members of the group planning to attend such outing. Group requests containing membership of less than 50 percent of persons referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall be approved only by prior specific action of the city council. Requests for group park permits submitted to the city council shall contain a list of the names and addresses of those members of the group planning to attend the outing, when feasible. No group permits shall be issued for use of Lake Front Park or its facilities on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday. 
(6)  Persons to whom a special permit has been issued. Special permits may be authorized by the city council to visiting dignitaries, officers of other governmental agencies or city employees, and in such other special instances where, in the judgment of the council, the issuance of a special permit will serve the public benefit and welfare; provided that the city council annually in January shall provide rules and regulations and authority for the issuance of special permits. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-2; Code 1997, § 58-52; Ord. No. 722, § 1, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 30-60. - Supervision. 
    The city administrator may appoint a director of public services, who shall have general supervision of the park, including the harbor, bathing facilities, parking areas and recreational grounds. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-3; Code 1997, § 58-53) 
Sec. 30-61. - Application for use permit. 
(a)  Persons entitled to and desiring a permit to use and enjoy the privileges of Lake Front Park, exclusive of harbor facilities, shall annually make application to the city administrator for such permit. An application may be made by the head of the household. Such application shall be in writing and shall state the name, address and age of such applicant and of each member of the household listed thereon, and such additional information as the rules and regulations adopted by the city council may require. 
(b)  As to nonresident applicants who are taxpayers to the extent of $250.00 on property within the territorial limits of the city, the application must be accompanied by the receipted tax bill for such property indicating payment of the last preceding city tax levied immediately prior to the filing of the application. Nonresident taxpayers of the city shall be limited in the use and enjoyment of the park to members of the immediate family of such nonresident taxpayers who reside with and are members of such taxpayer's household. Such park passes issued under the provision of this section shall contain guest privileges. The minimum sum necessary to be eligible for park passes under the provisions of this section may be adjusted by resolution of the city council as adopted from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-4; Code 1997, § 58-54; Ord. No. 724, § 1, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 30-62. - Issuance of use permit. 
    When an application for a permit as required by this article has been made and filed with the city administrator, the city administrator shall issue, in writing, without charge, a permit as requested by the applicant if the city administrator finds that such applicant and the other persons listed thereon are entitled to a permit. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-5; Code 1997, § 58-55) 
Sec. 30-63. - Use of harbor; boat mooring. 
    The use of the harbor and mooring privileges in Lake Front Park may be permitted in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-6; Code 1997, § 58-56) 
Sec. 30-64. - Nonliability of city; liability of permit holders and guests. 
    The city, in the issuance of any permit under this article, shall not be charged with any responsibility and shall not be liable for any loss, injury or damage suffered by a permit holder or any guest of a permit holder, or any other person, while using or enjoying any of the facilities covered by the permit, or to the personal property of any such persons. The applicant or holder of a permit under this article shall be liable to the city and to all others lawfully using such facilities for any loss, injury or damages resulting from negligence or maliciousness by either the permit holder or the permit holder's guests. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-7; Code 1997, § 58-57) 
Sec. 30-65. - Revocation of use permit. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to refuse, suspend, revoke or cancel the permit provided for in this article for nonobservance or violations of any of the provisions of this article or any rules and regulations adopted by the city council, or as promulgated by the director. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-8; Code 1997, § 58-58; Ord. No. 863, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 30-66. - Appeal. 
(a)  Should any person be denied a permit or have a permit revoked or canceled under the provisions of this article and desire to appeal such action, such claim of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the denial, revocation or cancellation and the matter shall be reviewed by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to impose reasonable conditions or restrictions upon any permit issued under the authority of this section, which conditions or restrictions shall be applicable to the original permit and any renewal thereof. 
(c)  The city council shall hold a public hearing upon such request. 
Sec. 30-67. - Display of use permit. 
    The permit issued by the city administrator under this article must be displayed to the city officers, attendants or guards by the holder thereof to gain admittance to Lake Front Park and its facilities and grounds, or whenever requested by such officers, attendants or guards. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-9; Code 1997, § 58-59) 
Sec. 30-68. - Additional rules and regulations. 
    The city council may from time to time adopt, revise and amend rules or regulations not in conflict with this article to be observed by all persons using or enjoying the property, facilities and grounds referred to in this article, which rules or regulations, amendments and revisions thereof shall be printed and posted in a conspicuous place on or near such harbor, grounds or facilities. Rules and regulations existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby preserved. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-10; Code 1997, § 58-60) 
Sec. 30-69. - Duplicate use permits. 
    The city administrator may issue a duplicate permit to replace a previously issued permit that has been lost, stolen or mislaid under the same requirements as for the issuance of original permits. For each duplicate permit so issued, the applicant shall pay a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each permit. Not more than one duplicate permit shall be issued to any person in any one calendar year unless approval therefor is obtained from the city council. Duplicate permits issued shall not contain guest privileges unless prior approval for guest privileges is first obtained from the city council. This fee may be modified by a resolution of the city council as adopted from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10-11; Code 1997, § 58-61; Ord. No. 699, § 1, 7-15-1996) 
Chapter 32 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Highway Advertising Act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Purpose and objectives. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signage in the city to facilitate communication between people and their environment and to avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to community appearance, traffic and pedestrian safety, property values and business opportunities. To achieve this purpose, this chapter has the following objectives: 
(1)  Protect the aesthetic quality of the city. 
(2)  Promote the appearance of an early American colonial motif within the commercial business district of the city. 
(3)  Protect the general public from damage and injury caused by the distractions, hazards and obstructions caused by excessive signage. 
(4)  Preserve the value of property by ensuring the compatibility of signage with surrounding land uses. 
(5)  Keep signs within a reasonable scale with respect to the buildings to which they relate. 
(6)  Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with business, residential and public land uses. 
(7)  Prevent the placement of signs in a manner, which will conceal or obscure other signs or adjacent businesses. 
(8)  Keep the number of signs and sign messages at the level reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products. 
(9)  Prevent hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment of signage. 
(10)  Provide signage that will harmonize with the building upon which it is placed and the adjoining properties. 
(Code 1997, § 62-1; Ord. No. 803, § 62-1, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-2. - Scope of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or alter any sign in the city without complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any sign already established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and which is rendered nonconforming by the provisions in this chapter, and any sign which is rendered nonconforming as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter, shall be subject to the regulations concerning nonconforming structures and uses set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 62-2; Ord. No. 803, § 62-2, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means any sign which, by reason of neglect, damage or deterioration, requires repair and the owner thereof fails, neglects or refuses to initiate refurbishment or repair to the sign within ten days after having received written notice so to do from the city or fails to complete such repair or refurbishment within 60 days from the receipt of such notice from the city. 
    Animated sign means a sign depicting the actual or apparent movement of any portion of a sign, and shall include replicas or statues of persons, animals and cartoon style characters, whether such statues contain or appear to contain moving parts or not. 
    Application means the paperwork necessary for the processing of the applicant's request, including all requested information, photographs, drawings or renderings as detailed on the application form requested by the city and as amended by the city from time to time. 
    Area means the entire area within a rectangle, circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing or pictorial representation, emblem or any figure of similar character together with any frame or other material or other color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces or graphics, the area of all faces or graphics shall be included in determining the area of the sign. 
    Awning means a structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted to a position against the building or retracted so as to be within a container or device for storage. 
    Back-to-back means any sign containing two or more surfaces containing words, numbers, figures, devices, designs or trademarks visible to the general public and designed to inform or attract the attention of persons, which signs are constructed or installed with the back of each sign facing the back of the second sign so that such messages as contained on the sign face are visible to persons viewing such signs from two or more directions. 
    Balloon means any device capable of being inflated with air, helium or other gas and mounted, tied or tethered in such a manner as to hold such balloon from being carried away by the wind. 
    Banner sign means any sign produced on cloth, paper, fabric or any other combustible material, either with or without a supporting framework. 
    Billboard means any display sign that contains a message unrelated to or not advertising a business transacted or goods sold or produced on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Building line means the term as defined in chapter 50. 
    Building official means the person designated as the director of the division of safety inspection for the city. 
    Canopy means a structure or frame covered with canvas, cloth or other soft material usually extending from the wall of a building and designed to provide shelter from sunlight and the elements. 
    Changeable copy sign means any sign designed or constructed so that the lettering or message contained thereon is capable of being changed by rearranging or installing new letters or messages without removing and replacing or resurfacing the face of such sign. 
    Closed-face sign means a sign having a projected area exposed to wind loads consisting of 70 percent or more of the gross area as determined by the overall dimensions. 
    Combination sign means any sign that combines the characteristics of two or more signs. 
    Curbline means the line at the face of the curb nearest the street or roadway. In the absence of a curb, the curbline shall be established by the city engineer. 
    Dilapidated sign means any sign, which, by reason of damage, exposure to the elements or other causes, has deteriorated so that the intended message is no longer clearly discernible. 
    Directory sign means any sign not exceeding eight square feet listing the name and address of the occupant, the address of the premises, and/or locations of various businesses or activities within a building or multitenant building that are not for the purpose of bringing same to the attention of vehicular traffic. Directory signs cannot exceed eight square feet. 
    Display surface means the area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying an advertising message. 
    Double-faced sign means any sign containing two or more surfaces containing display areas. 
    Electrical sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, faces, logos, backgrounds or outlines illuminated by incandescent or fluorescent lamps or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper, such light sources being either external or internal. 
    Existing sign means any sign that is displayed on and before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Festoon sign means a sign consisting of a wreath or garland of flowers, leaves, paper or other materials hanging in a loop or curve. 
    Gasoline price sign means any sign that is used to advertise the price of gasoline or other fuels. If brand identification material is used on or is a part of the sign advertising price, such shall be considered the gasoline price sign. 
    Ground sign means a sign supported by one or more poles, columns, uprights or braces or a solid base in or upon the ground, which are not part of a building. 
    Mansard facade means that portion of a building as described in diagram 62-3A (the triangle portion). 
    Marquee sign means a sign that is attached to a marquee. 
    Message units means a word, an abbreviation, a number containing up to ten digits, a symbol, a geometric shape or a person's or firm's initials containing up to 11 letters. Punctuation marks are not counted in computing the number of message units. 
    Michigan Building Code means the Michigan Building Code as published by the state as adopted and amended from time to time. 
    Moving message board means an electrical sign designed to exhibit a pattern of letters or numbers delivered in such fashion so as to appear to be moving lines or words of type. 
    Multi-tenant building means a building with multiple tenants or businesses, which share a common entrance. 
    Noncombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit during an exposure of five minutes and which will not continue to burn or glow at such temperature. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign existing on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which sign does not comply with one or more of the requirements for signs as contained in this chapter. 
    Open-face sign means a sign having a projected area exposed to wind loads consisting of less than 70 percent of the gross area of the sign as determined by the overall dimensions. 
    Parapet and parapet wall mean the part of any wall entirely above the roof. 
    Parapet panel sign means a closed-face sign mounted upon the parapet wall of a building. 
    Parapet skeleton sign means an open-face sign composed of individual letters, which are mounted upon the parapet wall of a building. 
    Plastic materials means those materials made wholly or principally from standardized plastics. 
    Pole sign means any sign placed on a pole (whether round, square or rectangular); which pole is placed into the ground. 
    Political sign means a sign announcing the candidacy of a person running for public office or issues to be voted upon at an election. 
    Portable sign means any sign or display board, searchlights, lighting panel or similar device mounted upon a trailer or upon its own frame and wheels and not being a ground sign as defined in this chapter. 
    Projecting encroaching sign means a projecting sign that projects beyond a private property line into and over public property. 
    Projecting sign means a sign, other than a wall sign, suspended from or supported by a building or structure, or masonry or wooden posts or steel columns, and projecting therefrom. 
    Pylon sign means any sign placed on a stake or mast-like pole. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected over or on the roof of any building and wholly or partially dependent upon the roof of the building for support, or attached to the roof in any way. 
    Rotating sign means any sign or advertising device that rotates or gives the appearance or optical effect of rotating. 
    Sign means any device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others that is located on or attached to any premises, real property or structure on real property, or upon any vehicle. 
    Sign structure means a supporting structure erected, used or intended for the purpose of identification or attracting attention, with or without a sign thereon, situated upon or attached to the premises, upon which any sign may be fastened, affixed, displayed or applied; provided, however, this definition shall not include a building, fence, wall or earthen berm. 
    Temporary sign means a sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, intended for a limited period of display including decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations. 
    Time and temperature sign means any sign with numbers expressing the time and temperature and designed to reflect changes in such information. 
    Trailer sign means a sign with a display surface supported on a mobile chassis, other than a motor vehicle. 
    Valance means a loose nonstructural edging located around the bottom of an awning not exceeding 12 inches in height. This provision shall only apply to valances to which sign copy is applied. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is attached to, affixed to, placed upon or painted upon any exterior wall or surface of any building, building structure or part thereof, provided that no part of any such sign extends more than eight inches from the face of the exterior wall. 
    Window area means that portion of a transparent material (glass or other see-through material) on each elevation of a building. Window area includes doors of glass or see-through doors. 
    Window signage means any sign or message, including lighted signs, plastic, paper, cardboard or cloth signs or signs of similar material placed or installed on any window surface. Advertising messages visible through a window display the objective of which is to communicate with pedestrian or vehicular traffic will be considered a window sign for purposes of this chapter. The term "window signage" includes, but is not limited to, hours of operation, directory signs, community signs and temporary signs. 
    Yard sale sign, basement sale sign, garage sale sign and rummage sale sign mean posters, signs and notices advertising a sale of personal property by private individuals conducted at residential premises. 
(Code 1997, § 62-3; Ord. No. 803, § 62-3, 2-28-2005; Ord. No. 839, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 32-4. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. Subject to applicable provisions of law and consistent with the delegation of power found in the Charter and applicable ordinances, the building official or the building official's duly authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or the building official's duly authorized representative may at reasonable times enter any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon such person by this chapter. 
(c)  Interpretation. Subject to applicable provisions of law and consistent with the delegation of power found in the Charter and applicable ordinances, the building official and the planning commission, to the extent a matter is brought before the planning commission pursuant to this chapter, is hereby authorized to interpret the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Establishment of permit fees. Fees for permits required by this chapter shall be established by resolution of council. 
(e)  Permit generally; alteration or relocation of signs. 
(1)  Permit required; issuance. No person shall erect, construct, alter, relocate or refurbish, or cause or permit to be erected, constructed, altered, relocated or refurbished, any sign in the city without first obtaining a permit from the division of safety inspection. A separate permit shall be required for each sign. Electrical signs shall also require an electrical permit. If an application for a sign permit indicates that the proposed sign conforms in all respects to the provisions of this Code, a permit shall be issued by the building official. The building official must act either to approve or deny an application within 90 days of presentation of a complete application to the building official, unless the building official and the applicant agree in writing to extend this time period. 
(2)  Enlargement, alteration or relocation of signs. No person shall enlarge or relocate a sign except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter relating to new signs. The changing of movable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the repainting with approved colors or reposting of display matter, shall not be deemed an alteration, provided that the conditions of the original approval and the requirements of this chapter are not violated. 
(3)  Exceptions to permit requirement. No permit shall be required for the following signs and outdoor display structures. Such exceptions, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the following signs from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner: 
a.  Temporary signs which advertise either the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are maintained and do not exceed ten square feet of display surface. 
b.  Not more than one construction sign, engineer's and architect's sign and other similar signs which may be authorized by the building official in connection with construction operations, not to exceed 32 square feet. 
c.  Political signs. 
d.  Garage and yard sale signs. 
e.  Real estate signs. 
f.  Directory signs except for multitenant buildings, which are included in section 32-34. 
g.  Window signage. 
(f)  Permit and inspection fees. 
(1)  All fees under this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be set by resolution of council and paid in advance. Copies of the resolution setting the sign permit fees shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  The permit fees for all signs shall be in addition to any fees required for electrical inspections when electric lighting is used. 
(3)  If work for which a permit is required by this chapter is commenced or continued before such permit is issued, the permit fees established by resolution for any sign erection so commenced or continued shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work, or from any prescribed penalty. 
(g)  Inspection of work covered by permit. No person conducting or performing work covered by a permit required by this chapter shall fail to notify the building official when such work has been commenced and completed. No person shall conceal any portion of such work until it has been inspected and approved by the director or the director's designated representative. If the work is found to be properly performed and safe, a certificate of inspection shall, if requested, be issued. The director or the director's designated representative shall have the authority to order any corrections of work the director or the director's representative may find necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(h)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The building official or the building official's designated representative shall give notice, in writing, to the holder of a permit issued under this chapter of the reasons for any proposed suspension or revocation of such permit, which notice shall be served upon such holder at least five days before the time set for the hearing before the planning commission. Upon such hearing, the licensee or permittee may appear in person or together with counsel and contest such suspension or revocation. For good cause shown at such hearing, the commission may suspend or revoke any such permit. 
(i)  Correction or removal of unsafe or unlawful signs. When any sign becomes insecure or in danger of falling, or when any sign is unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the owners thereof or the person maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice of the building official or the building official's designated representative, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within not more than ten days, make such sign safe and in conformity with this chapter or remove the sign. 
(j)  Maintenance and annual inspection. 
(1)  All signs for which a permit is required under this chapter, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair in accordance with this chapter and, when not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion-resistant, noncombustible materials, shall be painted when necessary to prevent corrosion or on a regular basis or as may be required for safety purposes and to maintain aesthetic values. 
(2)  All classes of signs shall be inspected by the building official once a year as to the safety, and if found to be well supported, painted to prevent corrosion and so secured to the building as to safely support the weight of the sign as well as resist wind pressure in accordance with the general structural requirements for new sign installation, a certificate of inspection shall be issued, upon request. 
(k)  Existing signs. No sign heretofore approved and erected shall be altered or relocated either on the same premises or to other premises. Except as provided in subsection 32-12(b)(6), no sign, or any substantial part thereof, which is blown down or destroyed shall be reerected, reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated unless the sign is made to comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(l)  Engineering design and materials. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the state building code. 
(m)  Approval of design and structural details. Designs and structural details of all signs shall be submitted to the division of safety inspection before a permit is issued under this chapter. The building official shall determine whether or not any proposed sign installation is compatible with the exterior appearance of the building in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 62-4; Ord. No. 803, § 62-4, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-5. - Illumination generally. 
(a)  Wiring installation; open spark or flame prohibited. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical devices. Wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code and the rules and regulations of the division of safety inspection. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for display purposes. 
(b)  Electrical inspection. No electrically operated or illuminated sign shall be erected before the chief electrical inspector's seal or stamp has been affixed to such sign. 
(c)  Location; prohibited lights. No person shall place, maintain or display a blinking, oscillating or rotating light. Lights that may be mistaken for the distinguishing lights authorized by law for emergency vehicles and safety devices, because of similarities in color and design, shall not be permitted along roadways. 
(d)  Exception. No transformer in excess of 30 milliamperes (MA) with 120 volt primary service shall be permitted, except as may specifically be approved by the building official. 
(Code 1997, § 62-5; Ord. No. 803, § 62-5, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-6. - Internally illuminated signs. 
    All internally illuminated signs shall be constructed so as to produce or emit a subdued lighting effect. Backlighted individual letters are permitted. Interior illuminated signs shall be constructed so that the background face of such sign is opaque or nearly opaque so as to allow the illumination of only letters, numbers, or logos on the display surface so that minimal light passes through the background. 
(Code 1997, § 62-6; Ord. No. 803, § 62-6, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-7. - Illuminated signs. 
    Awnings and canopies shall not be illuminated. The display surface of signs permitted under the provisions of this chapter facing Mack Avenue and Harper Avenue may be illuminated by externally mounted incandescent lights directed to shine upon the display surface and shielded from shining at other than the display surface. Such incandescent lighting shall not exceed 150 watts for every 20 square feet of display surface illuminated. Applications for illuminated signs shall be referred to the building official for approval. Such application shall be accompanied by a drawing or photograph of the building facade showing the area where the proposed sign is intended to be installed and the wording, lettering and appearance of the proposed sign on the building, including the dimensions thereof. The drawings or photographs submitted by the applicant must include photographs of the buildings on either side of the applicant's building. 
(Code 1997, § 62-7; Ord. No. 803, § 62-7, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-8. - Window signage. 
    Window signage, as defined in section 32-3, shall not exceed 20 percent of the elevation's (frontal view) window area. There shall be no limitation on the number of message units. 
(Code 1997, § 62-8; Ord. No. 803, § 62-8, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-9. - Design of business logos. 
    Logos covering no more than one-third of the surface area of a sign face shall be permitted provided that additional lettering or message units other than logos are allowed as long as the maximum allowable area requirements are met. Logos covering an entire sign face are permitted provided the entire sign face does not exceed one-third of the maximum allowable area of the sign face. For purposes of this section, a logo is defined as a symbol, picture or graphic elements arranged in a specific way to represent a business, corporation, trade or profession. 
(Code 1997, § 62-9; Ord. No. 803, § 62-9, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-10. - Maximum number of message units; prohibited signs. 
(a)  Maximum number of message units. 
(1)  Quantity restriction. The total of all signs on a property shall not contain in excess of a total of ten message units, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Exceptions. The following signs shall be exempt from the message unit limitation contained in this section, but shall be subject to the other regulations of this chapter: 
a.  Gasoline price signs. A gasoline service station shall be permitted signs on each pump island indicating the prices, the types of gasoline and the type of service. The area of such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet per pump island. 
b.  Theater marquee signs. 
c.  Business name sign, if the name of the business exceeds ten message units. 
d.  Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps or ice containers indicating only the contents of such devices, provided such devices are located within ten feet of a building. The sign area of each device may not exceed six square feet. 
e.  Signs not exceeding six square feet which contain noncommercial messages including designation of restrooms, telephone location, restrictions on smoking, or door openings, and private traffic control and parking signs. 
f.  Memorial signs on tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into the masonry surface of a building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material affixed to a building. 
g.  Signs of a religious institution, school, museum, community recreation facility or library indicating the name, current displays or activities and having an area not greater than 25 square feet. 
h.  Historical plaques not exceeding two square feet designating a building as a historical structure. 
i.  Business signs not exceeding two square feet per sign face containing information on credit cards or business affiliations. 
j.  Political signs advocating or opposing a candidate for public office or a position on an issue to be determined at an election, provided that such signs are removed within seven days after such election. 
k.  Signs authorized by the U.S. Government, the state, or any of its agencies or political subdivisions, as may be approved by the planning commission. 
l.  Street addresses and telephone numbers, fax machine numbers, e-mail addresses and/or web sites. 
m.  Sandwich board or sign placed on easel. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited, not withstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter: 
(1)  Animated signs. 
(2)  Banner signs, except as authorized by the planning commission. 
(3)  Roof signs. 
(4)  Rotating signs. 
(5)  Signs with flashing, blinking or moving lights, including moving message boards. 
(6)  Signs with exposed incandescent lights. 
(7)  Pennants, streamers, spinners or flags of any type used for advertising purposes. 
(8)  Balloons, with the exception of 12-inch size balloons, if: 
a.  No more than 12 are displayed during business hours for no more than 12 hours for one day only. 
b.  The balloons are attached by string/ribbon not exceeding 30 inches in length. 
c.  The balloons do not obstruct the sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
d.  Any one business is limited to displaying balloons to five times per year for special occasions. 
e.  Balloon displays must be approved by the building official. 
(9)  Strings of lights, excepting holiday decorations. 
(10)  Any sign that is structurally unsafe or is capable of causing electrical shock as determined by the building official which determination is subject to appeal. 
(11)  Any sign that obstructs a window, door or other opening, used for a fire escape. 
(12)  Any sign which makes use of the word "stop," "look" or "danger" or any other words or phrases that would tend to mislead or confuse vehicle operators. 
(13)  Any sign containing obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(14)  Any sign unlawfully installed or erected. 
(15)  Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business or product. 
(16)  Any sign attached to a standpipe, gutter drain or fire escape, or any sign designed or erected so as to impair access to a roof. 
(17)  Any sign within 50 feet of a residential zoning district unless such sign is completely screened by a building, solid fence or evergreen planting so as not to be visible from the residential area. 
(18)  Any sign that would project above the parapet line of any roof or the peak of any roof. 
(19)  Any sign that would project into any public right-of-way or other accessway. 
(20)  Any sign which is attached to a tree, fence or utility pole. 
(21)  Festoon signs. 
(22)  Portable or temporary signs, unless specifically permitted by this chapter. 
(23)  Painted wall signs. 
(24)  Any other sign not specifically permitted by this chapter. 
(25)  Painted or pasted sidewalk signs. 
(26)  Projecting signs over public property. 
(27)  Parapet panel signs. 
(28)  Marquee signs. 
(Code 1997, § 62-10; Ord. No. 803, § 62-10, 2-28-2005; Ord. No. 837, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 839, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 32-11. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Ground signs. 
(1)  Obstruction of access. No ground sign shall be erected so as to obstruct free access to or egress from any building. 
(2)  Setback. 
a.  Location. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no ground sign shall be located nearer to a street property line than the established building line. No ground sign shall be located within 15 feet of a side or rear yard property line. 
b.  Exceptions. 
1.  Pylon-type ground signs which contain an area of 32 square feet or less, in which only noncombustible materials or approved plastics are used, and which do not exceed a height of seven feet above the ground, may be located not less than two feet from a street property line. For the purpose of determining the allowable area of such signs, a double-faced sign shall be considered a single-faced sign. When a masonry or concrete foundation or planter which extends above the ground level is used as part of such pylon-type sign, the area of such foundation or planter shall not be considered a part of the area of the sign. However, the height of such foundation or planter shall be included in determining the maximum height of the sign. 
2.  Pole-type ground signs which are erected so that the bottom thereof is at least ten feet above the ground level, which are constructed of noncombustible materials or approved plastics, and which contain an area of 32 square feet or less, may project to street property lines. 
(3)  Height and dimensions; number of signs. Ground signs may be erected to a height of not more than 20 feet above the ground or to the peak of the roof of the property where the sign is installed, whichever is the least, when in compliance with the restrictions of subsection (2) of this section. No ground sign shall exceed 32 square feet of area or the maximum height and width limitation, whichever is the least. Only one ground sign or freestanding sign shall be permitted per street frontage, except at a shopping center with 200 feet or more of street frontage, in which case two ground or freestanding signs are permitted. 
(4)  Maintenance. Every ground sign and the immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained by the owner of such sign in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. 
(5)  Variances. The city council may grant variances in the height, area and setback requirements of this subsection in cases where there are unusual practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships because of topographical or other conditions, provided that such variations will not seriously affect any adjoining property, aesthetic quality or the general welfare, health or safety. 
(b)  Marquee signs. 
(c)  Temporary sign generally. 
(1)  Duration of permit. Permits for temporary signs may be issued by the building department provided such temporary sign meets the requirements of this chapter. Permits for temporary signs shall authorize the erection of such signs and their maintenance for a period not exceeding 30 days twice per year. 
(2)  Size. Temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(3)  Location. No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, fire escape or ventilating equipment. No sign shall be attached to any standpipe or fire escape. No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, alley or sidewalk a distance greater than four inches from the wall upon which it is erected. No such sign shall be placed or project over any wall opening. 
(d)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Material. Wall signs shall be constructed of noncombustible material, except that approved combustible materials or approved combustible plastics may be used as provided in this Code, and wood may be used for moldings and purely ornamental features. 
(2)  Projection beyond building line. Wall signs shall not project beyond an established building line or a street property line. Wall signs shall not project into alleys. 
(3)  Prohibited locations. No wall sign shall be attached to a building in such manner so as to obstruct any door, window, fire escape or ventilating system. 
(4)  Extension over or beyond wall. Wall signs shall not be erected to extend above the top of a wall or beyond the ends of the wall to which they are attached. 
(5)  Thickness. No wall sign shall be more than eight inches thick. 
(6)  Attachment to parapet wall. No wall signs shall be attached to any parapet wall. 
(7)  Painted wall signs. No wall sign may be painted onto any building wall. 
(e)  Maximum time period for use of trailer signs. No permits shall be issued for the installation or use of any trailer signs for a period of longer than 14 days in any calendar year. 
(Code 1997, § 62-11; Ord. No. 803, § 62-11, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-12. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs erected, constructed or installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which do not conform to the regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be nonconforming signs. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs shall not: 
(1)  Be changed to another nonconforming sign. 
(2)  Have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed unless the sign is specifically designed for periodic change of message. 
(3)  Be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign. 
(4)  Have the face changed unless such sign is of a type of construction to permit such a complete change of the face. 
(5)  Be repaired or replaced after being damaged if the repair or replacement would cost more than 50 percent of the cost of an identical new sign except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Any sign or awning having been destroyed or rendered unusable by unintended damage may be replaced by an identical sign or awning, but must be approved by the building official. 
(Code 1997, § 62-12; Ord. No. 803, § 62-12, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-13. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Where wall signs are placed so as to cover transom windows, the glass in such transoms must be removed and a steel frame in the form of steel studs covered on both sides with metal lath and cement plaster must be provided before the wall sign is erected. In filing applications for the erection of such signs over transoms, it will be necessary that complete detailed sketches be included showing compliance with all these requirements before a permit can be granted. All wall signs to be placed on mansard facades are to be constructed of individual characters, on a raceway or applied directly to the facade. 
(b)  All applications for the erection of a wall sign shall show the location of the sign, details of the building to which the sign is to be attached, the size, color and appearance of the sign and all necessary details for fabrication and erection of such sign and any other requirements as detailed on the application. 
(c)  Wall signs upon building fronts containing up to 40 feet of building frontage shall not exceed three feet in height or a maximum of 30 square feet in size. 
(d)  Wall signs upon building fronts containing 41 feet to 60 feet of frontage shall not exceed three feet in height or a maximum of 42 square feet in size. 
(e)  Wall signs upon building fronts containing 61 feet and over of frontage shall not exceed three feet in height or a maximum of 48 square feet in size. 
(f)  Wall signs upon the sides of buildings shall not exceed three feet in height or 12 square feet in size. 
(g)  Wall signs upon the rear of buildings shall not exceed three feet in height or nine square feet in size. 
(Code 1997, § 62-13; Ord. No. 803, § 62-13, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-14. - Projecting or overhanging signs. 
    Permits shall be required for all projecting or overhanging signs and such signs shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No such sign attached to any building shall be erected so as to overhang public property, except in the case of flat signs attached to a building face, which may project eight inches from the building face. 
(2)  The area of such signs shall not exceed a maximum of 32 square feet. 
(3)  All such signs, including letters, shall be constructed entirely of metal, porcelain or other durable incombustible material. All projecting signs shall be supported by strong steel brackets attached to walls of buildings with through bolts, expansion bolts or other equally secure method, and shall be braced and held firmly in place with soft iron or steel cables of adequate strength. No swinging signs shall be constructed larger than 16 square feet in area. Cables shall be attached to walls of buildings with expansion bolts or equivalent method. Projecting signs which are permitted to extend over parapet walls may be attached to brackets fastened to roofs by means of through bolts but shall not be attached to any part of a wall above the point of bearing of the roof joists or rafters. 
(4)  The thickness of a sign, exclusive of structural attachments, shall not exceed eight inches, but a sign may be made in two portions joined at one point similar to a letter "V," provided the least angle of intersection does not exceed ten feet. 
(5)  In cases where a street is widened, causing signs to project over the curb, such signs shall be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  No sign shall be erected so that any part of it, including cables, guys, etc., will be within four feet of any electric light pole, streetlamp, or other public utility pole or standard. 
(Code 1997, § 62-14; Ord. No. 803, § 62-14, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-15. - Cloth and banner signs. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for all cloth and banner signs. 
(b)  No such sign shall be suspended across or project into any public street or highway. 
(c)  No such sign shall exceed two feet in least dimension or 32 square feet in area, and not more than one such sign shall be placed upon any building for each story in height. When two or more signs are erected on any building, they shall be separated vertically by the height of one story less the width of the sign, or horizontally by a distance of at least nine feet. 
(d)  All such signs shall be strongly constructed and securely attached. 
(e)  Such signs shall not obstruct any door, window or fire escape. 
(f)  Such signs shall be removed as soon as torn or damaged, and, in any case, 30 days after erection. It shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter to fail to notify the division of safety inspection of the erection of such signs or to fail to remove them after 30 days. 
(Code 1997, § 62-16; Ord. No. 803, § 62-16, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-16. - Roof signs. 
    The installation of open roof signs and solid roof signs, as defined in this chapter, shall not be permitted. Any part of a building, such as a wall, pylon or projection, higher than the parapet of the building face or front elevation and serving to carry a sign shall be considered a roof sign and shall not be permitted. This restriction shall be applicable to a gable, hip or mansard type of roof and no sign shall be mounted on the face of such type of roof. All roof signs in existence within the city shall be considered as not conforming to this Code and the reconstruction or replacement of such signs shall not be permitted. For the purpose of this chapter, signs installed on those mansard facades, which are incorporated into the construction of the building front and not into the roof structure of the building, shall not be deemed roof signs, but wall signs. A mansard facade that extends more than four feet above the roof of the building shall not be deemed to be a mansard facade for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 62-17; Ord. No. 803, § 62-17, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-17. - Combination of signs. 
(a)  A building shall be limited to a maximum of two signs from the following classifications: 
(1)  Wall sign. 
(2)  Ground and pole sign. 
(3)  Pylon sign. 
(b)  For a combination of smaller signs, see section 32-10(a). No sign or combination of signs shall contain more than ten message units on any one building except as provided in section 32-8 and section 32-10(a)(2). 
(Code 1997, § 62-18; Ord. No. 803, § 62-18, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-18. - Alteration or relocation of signs. 
    In case any sign is altered in appearance or dimension in any manner or moved to any new location, such sign shall be subject to all restrictions applying to a new sign. 
(Code 1997, § 62-19; Ord. No. 803, § 62-19, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-19. - Blinking and animated signs prohibited. 
    The use of a blinking or animated sign is prohibited. The term "blinking," as used in this section, shall mean the apparent or actual oscillation, cycling or flashing of any sign or portion thereof, whether such apparent or actual oscillation, cycling or flashing is made, created or occasioned by mechanical, optical or electrical means. The term "animated," as used in this section, shall mean the actual or apparent movement of any portion of a sign and shall include replicas or statues of persons, animals and cartoon style characters, whether such statues contain or appear to contain moving parts or not. 
(Code 1997, § 62-20; Ord. No. 803, § 62-20, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-20. - Temporary real estate signs. 
    The provisions of this chapter relative to construction and the obtaining of a permit shall not apply to so-called temporary real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which such signs are situated, provided: 
(1)  Signs of a size not exceeding 24 inches by 30 inches may be placed between the sidewalk and the curb upon the streets, highways and public places in this city advertising the location and the availability for purchase of houses being offered for sale in the city, provided such signs are so placed so as not to create a traffic hazard or a nuisance or inconvenience to the neighborhood, and providing such signs shall not exceed two in number and shall be placed only during the period the premises advertised are open for inspection, but under no circumstances shall such signs be placed prior to 10:00 a.m. and signs shall be removed by 9:00 p.m. No signs shall be placed in accordance with this section without the express written approval for such placement being obtained from the owner or tenant in charge of the private property immediately adjacent to the area wherein such sign is to be located. 
(2)  Any sign so used and placed shall have affixed thereto an identification tag with the name and address of the owner thereof clearly indicated thereon. 
(3)  Upon proper application in writing to the city administrator and upon a good and sufficient showing of necessity, the city administrator may authorize the placing of additional signs upon such terms and conditions as the city administrator shall deem advisable. 
(Code 1997, § 62-21; Ord. No. 803, § 62-21, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-21. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the provisions of this zoning chapter shall be strictly complied with. 
(Code 1997, § 62-22; Ord. No. 803, § 62-22, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-22. - Political signs. 
    The provisions of this chapter relative to the construction, installation and obtaining of a permit shall not apply to temporary political signs advertising a political candidate, a forthcoming election or urging any vote on any topic; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Such signs shall not exceed a size of 36 inches by 36 inches and shall be so placed or installed so as not to obstruct the vision or view of any bicyclist or driver of any motor vehicle upon the streets and alleyways of the city. 
(2)  Not more than one such sign shall be installed or placed upon any property advertising a particular candidate or proposition. However, this section shall not be construed as a prohibition against placing two or more signs upon such property when each sign urges a vote for a different candidate or proposition. 
(3)  The owner of the property where such signs have been installed or placed shall cause the signs to be removed within five days after the date of the election or vote upon the proposition to which the signs pertained. 
(Code 1997, § 62-23; Ord. No. 803, § 62-23, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-23. - "Portable sign" defined. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the term "portable sign" means any sign or display board, searchlights, lighting panel or similar device mounted upon a trailer or upon its own frame and wheels and not being a ground sign or pole sign as defined in this chapter. Portable signs include any so-called "sandwich boards" or signs placed on easels. 
(Code 1997, § 62-24; Ord. No. 803, § 62-24, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-24. - Approval of portable signs required. 
(a)  No portable sign shall be displayed upon any land within the city without prior approval for such display having been obtained from the planning commission of the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, an application for a sandwich board or sign placed on an easel may be submitted to the building official for approval prior to its proposed installation. Approval by the building official may only be granted under all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign may only be placed on the property occupied by the applicant, and the location will not interfere with pedestrian traffic or visibility. 
(2)  The sign may only be displayed during the hours of business of the applicant. 
(3)  The sign must be constructed of either wood or metal or a combination of wood or metal, or other material approved by the building official. 
(4)  The size of the sign must not exceed 42 inches in width, 48 inches in height, and its overall height shall not be greater than 65 inches. 
(5)  The colors displayed on the sign must be in accordance with this chapter. 
(6)  The sign must be structurally sound, stable and adequately maintained. 
(7)  The message on the sign must be related to the business affected. 
(8)  Only one sandwich board or easel sign per address. 
In the event the building official approves the sandwich board or easel sign, no approval of the planning commission is necessary. 
(Code 1997, § 62-25; Ord. No. 803, § 62-25, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-25. - Standards for approval of portable signs. 
    The planning commission shall not signify its approval for the display of a portable sign unless the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  Such proposed display shall be for definite consecutive dates not to exceed seven days. 
(2)  The building official or the building official's designated representative shall certify to the division of safety inspection that the proposed location of the portable sign will not cause traffic congestion, impede traffic, block access to off-street parking spaces, conflict with traffic signalization or signage, or otherwise interfere with orderly traffic movement. 
(3)  The proposed location of the portable sign shall not be on any public right-of-way. 
(4)  The proposed portable sign shall not consist of or utilize flashing lights, beacons or searchlights, banners, balloons, flags, etc. 
(5)  The proposed location for the placement of the portable sign shall not be closer than ten feet to any driveway, road, street, alley, sidewalk or other public property, and the sign shall not be placed upon any property other than where the business or product advertised is located or sold. Nonprofit organizations may advertise fundraising events and similar occasions on other than their own property if written permission of the owner of the proposed location accompanies the application. 
(6)  Each application for a permit for a portable sign shall include a description or sketch showing how such sign will be affixed to the ground or some stationary structure which will prevent the sign from rolling, tumbling, blowing or being pushed onto any driveway, street, alley or other public property. 
(7)  Not more than one portable sign shall be permitted to be displayed on any premises for more than a seven-day period within a calendar year. For the purposes of this subsection, a shopping center shall be considered one premises. 
(8)  No portable sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(Code 1997, § 62-26; Ord. No. 803, § 62-26, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-26. - Review of application for installation of portable sign. 
    Application for a portable sign installation shall be submitted to the division of safety inspection. The application shall be reviewed by the division, and if found to be complete and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, such compliance shall be noted upon the application. The application shall then be referred to the director of public safety, or the director's designated representative, who shall review the application and shall note thereon that the application complies with the traffic safety requirements. Upon completion of such review, the application shall be referred to the planning commission for its consideration. 
(Code 1997, § 62-27; Ord. No. 803, § 62-27, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-27. - Variances for portable signs. 
    Should any party wish to display a portable sign that fails to meet the requirements of section 32-26, an appeal to the city council may be made in accordance with the provisions of section 32-32. 
(Code 1997, § 62-28; Ord. No. 803, § 62-28, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-28. - Temporary garage, yard, basement, estate and rummage sale signs. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter relative to construction and obtaining of a permit shall not apply to temporary garage, yard, basement, estate and rummage sale signs advertising the sale of personal property in a residential zoning district of the city. 
(b)  Signs of a size not exceeding 24 inches by 30 inches may be placed only upon private property advertising a garage, yard, basement or rummage sale and only during the time that such sale is in progress. Such signs shall not be displayed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., local time. 
(c)  The installation or placement of temporary signs advertising a garage, yard, basement or rummage sale at locations within the city other than as authorized by subsection (b) of this section shall be a violation of this Code. 
(d)  The owner, tenant or person in apparent control of the residential property where such sale is being conducted as advertised by signs posted in violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be prima facie the person responsible for the installation or placement of any temporary sign advertising a garage, yard, basement or rummage sale held at such residential property within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 62-29; Ord. No. 803, § 62-29, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-29. - Design of lettering and sign faces. 
    Within the business area of the city, the following rules, regulations and guidelines shall be applicable to all permanent signs installed or erected within the city: 
(1)  Lettering. A list of approved and prohibited lettering styles will be maintained by the building official as approved by the planning commission resolution. Signs shall be comprised of not more than two styles of lettering. There shall be no more than three sizes of lettering per sign. 
(2)  Colors. A maximum of three complimentary, muted colors or shades of colors may be used for a sign. A list of approved colors will be maintained by the building official as approved by the planning commission resolution. 
(Code 1997, § 62-30; Ord. No. 803, § 62-30, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-30. - Flags and flagpoles. 
    Flagpoles shall not be erected between the sidewalk and curbline of Mack Avenue nor within 20 feet of any property line if freestanding. Flags of any nature or design in excess of 120 square feet in size shall not be flown within the city. Flags of other than the United States of America, the state, county and city or Tree City USA shall not be flown within the city other than in residential zoning districts, unless a permit shall first have been obtained from the division of safety inspection. Permits may be obtained to fly flags of any nature for a period not to exceed 30 days. Not more than one such permit shall be issued to any business establishment within a 12-month period. 
(Code 1997, § 62-31; Ord. No. 803, § 62-31, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-31. - Awnings and canopies. 
(a)  Awnings and canopies shall be made with cloth, canvas or vinyl, and may not be covered with metal or hard plastic materials. 
(b)  Awnings and canopies shall be of city approved colors. Such colors shall be approved by resolution of the planning commission and samples shall be maintained by the building official and made available to all applicants seeking a permit to install an awning or canopy free of charge. 
(c)  Striped awnings or canopies shall not be permitted or installed. 
(d)  No advertising message or logo shall be permitted on the face of any awning or canopy. 
(e)  No awning or canopy shall be backlighted with artificial lighting. 
(f)  Advertising material may be contained on the valance of an awning or canopy. Such message shall not exceed the message unit limitations for such property. Letters or numbers on the valance shall be limited in height to eight inches. 
(g)  All applications for a permit to install a new awning or canopy or to install exact replacement awnings or canopies shall be authorized by the building official, provided that such proposed installation meets the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 62-32; Ord. No. 803, § 62-32, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-32. - Appeal of denial of permit. 
    Any party who has been refused a sign permit after review by the building official or planning commission for a proposed installation or has been notified by the city to remove an existing sign may file a claim of appeal with the city clerk. Such claim of appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time or a fee structure designated by the administration and approved by the city council by resolution, payable to the general fund of the city. The city council may grant such appeal and allow an exception to the provisions of this chapter upon a finding that such an exception would be in the best interests of the city and not against the spirit and intent of this chapter. If the building official denies a sign permit, or if a variance is requested, the appeal or variance request will first be reviewed by the planning commission, which will provide a recommendation to the city council. 
(Code 1997, § 62-33; Ord. No. 803, § 62-33, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-33. - Electronic changeable copy signs. 
(a)  Definition. An "electronic changeable copy sign" is defined as a sign upon which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank and which sign meets the definition of a ground sign as contained in this chapter. Scoreboards used to keep track of scores during athletic events are exempt from this definition. 
(b)  Standards. The following rules and regulations shall be applicable to electronic changeable copy signs notwithstanding any other rules or regulations contained in this chapter: 
(1)  Such sign shall not produce blinking or animated messages. 
(2)  The changeable copy or message delivered by the sign shall not be changed more often than once in any eight-hour time period. 
(3)  Such sign shall be permitted to be installed only within a community facilities zoning district of the city, once application is made to the building official and subsequent review and approval by the planning commission. 
(4)  Such sign may be of a size of up to 32 square feet and a height of six feet above the ground. 
(5)  Such sign may be installed within ten feet inside of the property line; provided, however, that such location proposed for the installation receives prior approval from the division of safety inspection as to traffic hazards and pedestrian hazards. 
(6)  All messages shall not exceed four lines of characters. 
(7)  Such sign shall be limited to 50 footcandles power output. 
(Code 1997, § 62-34; Ord. No. 803, § 62-34, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-34. - Multitenant buildings. 
    Generally, multitenant buildings will be exempted from the maximum number of sign restrictions providing a "master"/overall building plan is applied for and approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1997, § 62-35; Ord. No. 803, § 62-35, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 32-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 839, adopted Apr. 18, 2011, repealed § 32-35, entitled "Grandfathering clause; neon", which derived from: Code 1997, § 62-36; Ord. No. 803, § 62-36, adopted Feb. 28, 2005; and Ord. No. 823, adopted Oct. 6, 2008. 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Garbage disposals required; use of incinerators. 
(a)  It shall be required that all residential or commercial buildings or structures where food is prepared or served shall have a garbage disposal of a type approved by the division of building inspection installed in the sewer system. Such garbage disposal unit and all connections thereto shall be of a sufficient size and type to grind all of the garbage and food wastes which may be produced or accumulated in such residential and commercial buildings. Each apartment, dwelling or household unit shall be provided with a separate individual garbage disposal. 
(b)  Incinerators designed to burn garbage and wastes may not be installed or used for such purpose within the city. 
(Code 1975, §§ 3-3-1, 3-3-2; Code 1997, § 66-1) 
Secs. 34-2-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 876, adopted Dec. 4, 2017, amended former Art. II, §§ 34-21-34-50, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1975, §§ 3-2-1-3-2-30; Code of 1997, §§ 66-61-66-90; Ord. No. 808, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 869, 7-11-2016. 

Sec. 34-21. - Duties of occupants. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the occupants of every dwelling, residential building, school building, church building, store building, place of business and other structures or premises in the city to comply with the provisions of this article relating to the composting, disposal, storage and collection and the hauling, transporting or handling of garbage, food wastes, rubbish, refuse, brush, recyclables and yard waste. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush includes, among other things, but is not necessarily limited to, tree limbs, shrubs and bushes. 
    Cart: Cart means the 64-gallon container supplied by the city's refuse contractor for both non-recyclable waste and recyclables. 
    Composting means the process of converting acceptable raw organic materials to humus. Acceptable raw organic materials include a combination of weeds, branches, bark (but not from elm trees), grass clippings, stalks, stems, brush, vines, wood chips, yard waste, wood ashes, cow manure, horse manure, coffee grounds, vegetable scraps, citrus rinds, fruit peelings, egg, peanut shells and nut shells. Prohibited materials are meats, dairy products, vegetable oils, cooked foods, bones, dog, cat and other carnivore feces, elm bark, and plastic, synthetic or other nonbiodegradable materials. 
    Construction wastes includes, among other things, but is not necessarily limited to, brick, broken concrete, concrete blocks, stone, rocks, dirt, cinder, sand, gravel, lumber, shavings, sawdust, construction sweepings, metal, eave troughs, downspouts and other waste building material or debris, felled trees, tree limbs, tree trunks, tree stumps and other wastes resulting from site clearing operations, construction or maintenance of any property. 
    Disease vectors means an animal, insect or tick that transmits the causative organisms of disease from infected to noninfected individuals. 
    Garbage and food wastes includes, among other things, but is not necessarily limited to, every refuse accumulation of animal, fowl, fish, fruit, vegetable or other similar or like substances that pertain to the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, handling or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, or any products or processes involving the use of such substances, including dead animals, fish or fowl requiring disposal and any condemned food or food products or similar or like disposable substances, materials or things found or situated within the city. 
    Hauling, transporting or handling means the collection, hauling or transportation of any materials regulated by the provisions of this article in or upon the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or any other public places of the city. 
    Heavy and extraordinary accumulations means all materials exceeding the weight and length limitations as set forth in this article, including but not limited to, automobiles and automobile frames, parts and tires, or any other heavy and bulky items or materials which may be injurious or too large for the mechanical rubbish collection equipment of the city. 
    Household goods includes, but is not limited to, discarded furniture, carpeting, appliances, mattresses, bed springs, plumbing fixtures, recreational equipment, lawnmowers, barbecue equipment and other similar objects or equipment. 
    Mulching includes, but is not limited to, the practice of finely chopping grass clippings during the mowing process and allowing them to decompose into the lawn and be converted to humus. 
    Property: Property means both improved and unimproved land, and any building, structure, or premises within the city or a portion of the city. 
    Occupant: Occupant means a person or entity occupying a property and includes an owner, tenant, or lessee. 
    Recyclable and curbside recyclable mean newspapers, paper, phone books, magazines, clean cardboard cut to fit, tin or aluminum cans, glass, and plastic containers (#1 through or #7 with triangular recycling symbol on the container) to be collected on the scheduled collection day. 
    Recyclable items include, but are not necessarily limited to, items not put out for curbside pickup, such as household batteries, car or boat batteries, and waste oil. 
    Rubbish and refuse include, among other things, but are not necessarily limited to, trash, sweepings, rags, clothing, ashes, branches and any other similar or like materials which may be so classified by the city and which are accumulated upon the premises of any property within the city for collection and disposal through the municipal rubbish collection system. 
    Storage means the accumulation of materials regulated by the provisions of this article that are awaiting final collection, transportation and disposal. 
    Yard waste includes, but is not necessarily limited to, grass, weeds, shrub clippings, leaves, brush, tree trimmings and other similar materials which may be so classified by the city and which are accumulated upon the premises of any property within the city for collection and disposal separately from the regular rubbish and refuse, and to be picked up on scheduled collection day. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-23. - Disposal of garbage and food wastes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to deposit, place, scatter, strew or bury any garbage or food wastes upon private or public property or premises within the city, except that this section shall not be construed to prohibit composting conducted in accordance with section 34-5049. 
(b)  The disposal of garbage and food wastes shall primarily be accomplished by means of the installation, use and operation of a garbage disposal unit or other equipment that is properly connected to and is discharged into the municipal sewer system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 34-24. - Unlawful disposal of rubbish and refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit, place, scatter, strew or bury any rubbish or refuse upon the property of another or upon any public property, premises, street, alley, right-of-way or other public place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 34-25. - Collection generally. 
    Rubbish and refuse shall be collected and disposed of on a regular once-a-week basis as a contractor service provided by the city in accordance with schedules, rules and regulations as established by this article, the refuse contract, or by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-26. - Collections on holidays. 
    Whenever a holiday occurs on a weekday and is recognized by the city's private contractor, the rubbish collection will be delayed one day for the area in which the normal collection day occurs on the holiday, and each additional area's collection thereafter during the week will be delayed one day after the regular collection day because of the holiday. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-27. - Standards for collection and cart use. 
(a)  Every occupant of residential property, and every occupant of commercial property utilizing the city's refuse contractor, shall comply with these standards: 
(1)  Every occupant of any property utilizing the city's contractor will be provided two separate 64 gallon carts; one to be used for recyclables, and one to be used for all non-recyclable waste. 
(2)  Garbage and food waste shall first be placed into plastic bags before being placed into a cart for collection. 
(3)  Brown paper yard bags shall be used for yard waste. 
(4)  All household waste shall be set at the curbside in carts according to this article and any regulations adopted by city council resolution. 
(5)  Occupants shall first fill applicable carts before using disposable rubbish bags. On limited occasions, (e.g. holidays, moving, special events, etc.), any waste that does not fit into the refuse cart shall be placed next to the cart in disposable rubbish bags (no more than five bags) properly tied and secured. Excess use of plastic bags will require occupants to purchase an extra cart from the contractor. 
(6)  All disposable rubbish bags shall be capable of serving as a liner for a standard 33-gallon rubbish container and be a minimum of 11/2 mils thick. 
(7)  Carts that are damaged from normal use will be replaced by the city's contractor at no charge to the occupant. If a cart is lost, stolen, or damaged by the occupants neglect or abuse, the occupant is responsible for purchasing a new one from the contractor. 
(8)  Brush and tree trimming must be no more than four feet in length, four inches in diameter, and tied in bundles not to exceed 60 pounds. 
(9)  Standards under this section may be amended by city council resolution provided notice is given to residents by posting on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-28. - Residential refuse too large to fit in carts or bags; businesses requiring more than once-a-week collection. 
(a)  Various household items, which because of their odd shapes or size cannot be placed in a cart or disposable rubbish bag, shall be placed alongside a cart for the collection day. 
(b)  Any business or commercial establishment which requires more than once-a-week collection shall provide, subscribe or contract for the private collection and disposal of such rubbish and refuse at the establishment's own expense and in accordance with the provisions for such collection and disposal as set forth in this article or by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-29. - Maximum weight of materials set out for collection. 
    Contents of 64-gallon carts shall not exceed 150 pounds per cart. No rubbish shall be set out for collection having a weight exceeding 40 pounds per disposable bag, container or bundle. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.744. 
Sec. 34-30. - Location for placement of materials set out for collection. 
    The occupant of any property shall place any 64 gallon cart or other materials for collection at a point so designated by the city as being the most accessible for collecting and removing such materials. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-31. - Time of placement of materials set out for collection. 
    All rubbish, refuse and recyclables shall be prepared for collection and placed at the designated collection point for collection on or before 7:00 a.m. on the regularly scheduled collection day for the particular area being serviced. No such rubbish, refuse or recyclables shall be placed at their collection point in any area before 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. Rubbish, refuse and recyclables shall not be stored outside in any commercial district of the city except as permitted in section 34-32. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-32. - Commercial storage facilities. 
(a)  All rubbish, refuse, recyclables or heavy and extraordinary accumulations may be stored on the outside of the building structure in a fire-resistant, windproof and waterproof facility, container or receptacle as may be approved by the city, which containers shall be equipped with a lid, which shall be kept closed except when in use. Such storage facilities shall be so constructed and maintained and the lid or cover for such facilities kept closed so as to prevent the contents thereof from being spilled, strewn, blown or otherwise molested by persons, animals, insects or the forces of nature. Unless otherwise approved in accordance with the provisions of this section, the use of wooden, paper or cardboard boxes or cartons as containers for commercial rubbish is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Two or more business or commercial establishments may utilize the same container as required in this section. The storage and disposal of rubbish and refuse as outlined in this section shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the business or commercial establishments being operated upon the premises involved, and it shall be the duty of such persons to comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-33. - Private collection and disposal permitted. 
    The owner, occupant, renter, tenant or lessee of any business or commercial property within the city may provide for their own collection and disposal service; provided, however, that such collection and disposal service shall comply with the regulatory provisions as set forth in this article, or as may hereinafter be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-34. - Hauling and handling of materials. 
    Any vehicle used for hauling, transporting or handling of materials regulated by the provisions of this article in and upon the streets, alleys and public places in the city shall be provided with a container or body of a substantial character which shall prevent the contents thereof when placed therein from being discharged or strewn upon the streets, alleys and public places of the city. Should such container or body be without a suitable cover or lid, then a cover of metal, canvas or other suitable material shall be provided for such vehicle which shall be so placed and securely fastened down so as to prevent the contents of the vehicle from being discharged therefrom or strewn upon the streets, alleys and public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-35. - Responsibility of operator of vehicle transporting refuse. 
    The operator of any vehicle used for hauling, transporting or handling of materials regulated by the provisions of this article upon the streets, alleys and other public places in the city shall be responsible for any act of omission or commission which shall result in the discharge of any of the contents of such vehicle upon the streets, alleys and other public places in the city, and it shall be the driver's duty to forthwith remove from the streets, alleys and other public places in the city any garbage, rubbish, refuse or other materials so discharged or strewn upon the streets, alleys and other public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-36. - Seizure of vehicles hauling refuse in violation of article. 
    It shall be the duty of the members of the department of public safety of the city to seize and impound any vehicle used in hauling, transporting or handling of materials regulated by the provisions of this article upon streets, alleys and public places in the city in violation of the provisions of this article, and to detain such vehicle until the provisions of this article shall have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-37. - Tree trimmings and other brush. 
    All brush shall be collected and disposed of on a regular once-a-week basis as a municipal service provided by the city and in accordance with the schedules, rules and regulations established under this article, or by city council resolution. Tree trimmings set out for collection shall not exceed four feet in length, nor four inches in diameter, and must be tied in bundles not exceeding 60 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-38. - Heavy and extraordinary accumulations. 
    All heavy and extraordinary accumulations shall be collected and disposed of outside the corporate limits of the city at the expense and as a responsibility of the owner, occupant of the property from which such waste resulted. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-39. - Household goods. 
(b)  Any resident requiring this service must notify the public works division 48 hours in advance of their regularly scheduled pickup day. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-40. - Tree leaves. 
(a)  During the months of October through the first full week of December, all tree leaves (no grass clippings) may be raked into the street gutter for collection as a municipal service on days scheduled by the public works division. 
(b)  During the months of January through September, the collection of tree leaves, as a municipal service, shall be accomplished by the placement of any such leaves into disposable brown paper yard waste bags for collection on the regularly scheduled rubbish collection day of the particular area. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-41. - Disposal of waste created by building contractors. 
    Building contractors shall be responsible for the removal of all wastes, rubbish, remodeling or maintenance materials and site clearing materials from the building site and the transportation and disposal thereof beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-42. - Construction waste to be removed prior to final inspection and issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
    All building contractors' wastes, rubbish and site clearing materials shall be removed or cleared from the premises before final inspection shall be made or before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-43. - Bagging of grass clippings created by grass mowing contractors. 
    Any grass mowing or grass trimming contractor, landscape or nursery employee or other privately employed person who performs or provides a grass mowing or grass trimming service for a fee on any property or premises within the city shall be responsible for bagging such materials for removal by the city, except that this section shall not be construed to prohibit composting conducted in accordance with section 34-5049 or the practice of mulching as defined in section 34-22. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-44. - Disposal of tree limbs, brush, trunks and stumps created by tree trimming contractors or utility employees. 
    Any tree trimming contractor, nursery employee, utility company employee or other privately employed person who performs or provides a tree trimming removal service for a fee, or as a company service, on any property or premises within the city shall be responsible for the removal and disposal beyond the corporate limits of the city of all tree limbs, brush, trunks and stumps accumulated from the performance of such service. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-45. - Collection of refuse from business and commercial establishments. 
(a)  Any business or commercial establishment the rubbish or refuse of which exceeds ten disposable bags or their approximate equivalent per week shall provide, subscribe or contract for the private collection and disposal of such rubbish and refuse at their own expense and in accordance with the provisions for the such collection and disposal as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Whenever, in the conduct of any business, it shall be necessary to establish special rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient storage, collection and disposal of garbage and food wastes or rubbish and refuse, the city may establish such special rules and regulations by City Council resolution, which shall be complied with by the occupants of the premises so affected. Nothing in this article shall prevent the storage or accumulation of rubbish within the building structure, provided such disposal of rubbish can be accomplished in a sanitary and healthful manner and without creating a fire hazard, pollution of the air or other nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-46. - Curbside recycling. 
(a)  All curbside recyclables shall be placed into the 64 gallon cart supplied by the city's contractor for collection on the regularly scheduled pickup day. All curbside recyclables shall be rinsed clean.. Items shall be placed separately in the recycling cart. Newspapers are to be tied or placed in paper bags not to exceed 50 pounds. All recycling containers and other trash containers (including plastic bags), when not placed curbside for pickup, shall be stored in an enclosed structure or in a backyard. All recycling and trash containers shall be removed from the street by midnight of trash pickup day. 
(b)  All cardboard boxes which cannot be ripped up, torn or cut up and placed in a disposable rubbish bag or cart shall be completely flattened or knocked down, cut to lengths not exceeding two feet, tied together and placed next to a cart in a manner which prevent them from being blown, strewn or molested until such boxes are collected on the regularly scheduled collection day. 
(c)  It is the duty of the city's contractor to remove all curbside recyclables from the street. No other vendors shall be permitted to collect any paper, glass, plastic or tin cans on the regularly scheduled collection days. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-47. - Separation of yard waste from other waste. 
    It shall be unlawful to mix yard waste (grass, leaves, brush, etc.) with regular household rubbish and recyclables. All yard waste shall be placed in brown paper yard waste bags and set out for pickup on the same day with the regular household waste and recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 34-48. - Composting. 
(a)  The restrictions contained in this article shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of compost piles on private residential property, provided the following provisions are followed: 
(1)  Compost piles may include acceptable raw organic materials as defined in section 34-22 and shall not contain prohibited materials as defined in section 34-22. Kitchen wastes shall be buried within the pile. 
(2)  Compost piles shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the escape of offensive odors to adjacent property and to prevent the presence of rats or other disease vectors. 
(3)  Compost piles shall be situated to minimize visibility from the street or adjacent dwelling. 
(4)  Compost piles shall not exceed four feet by eight feet or six feet in diameter and shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(5)  The compost facility shall be constructed of wood, fencing, wooden, plastic or steel drum barrels with air holes, cement blocks or other similar materials. 
(b)  In the event of complaint of noncompliance with subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section, a master composter, as certified by the Cooperative Extension Service, shall, at the direction of the city, inspect the compost pile and prescribe required remedial action. If the problems cited by the inspector are not corrected within ten working days, or within any additional time as may be granted by the city's master composter, the property owner, upon conviction of failure to maintain the compost facility in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00, in the discretion of the court. Upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense, the property owner, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 876, 12-4-2017) 
Chapter 36 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq.; powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; public improvement funds, MCL 141.261 et seq. 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Assessor, clerk and treasurer mean those persons duly appointed or elected to such offices in the city. 
    Cost includes the expense of survey, spreading of roll, notice, advertising, printing, financing, legal, engineering and construction and all other costs incidental to the making of the improvement. 
    Engineer means the city engineer, unless an outside engineer is specifically appointed for the work on the improvement, in which case the word "engineer" shall mean that person so appointed. 
    Improvement means any public betterment. 
    Lot or parcel of land means any subdivision lot or portion thereof as officially platted or any unplatted parcel of land as might be described upon any official records. 
    Owner means the last recorded titleholder of any lot or parcel of land. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-1; Code 1997, § 70-1) 
Sec. 36-2. - Petition. 
    Proceedings to provide for any public improvements to be financed in whole or in part by a special assessment tax may be initiated by a petition signed by the owners of more than 50 percent of the assessable frontage subject to any such special assessment tax, or may be initiated without such petition being first filed upon resolution of the council determining that an improvement shall be made and financed in whole or in part by special assessment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-2; Code 1997, § 70-2) 
Sec. 36-3. - Initiatory resolution. 
    When, by the provisions of the city Charter and the laws of the state, the council shall have power to make a public improvement by special assessment, the council shall determine by resolution that the whole or any part of the cost and expense of such improvement shall be defrayed by a special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived therefrom. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-3; Code 1997, § 70-3) 
Sec. 36-4. - Plans and specifications for improvement; recommendation by engineer. 
    The engineer shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications of the improvement to be made under this chapter, an estimate of the cost thereof, and plats of the lands affected thereby, and shall file such information with the city clerk, together with the engineer's recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-4; Code 1997, § 70-4) 
Sec. 36-5. - Notice of hearing on proposed assessment. 
(a)  After filing of the plans and specifications referred to in section 36-4, the council shall, by resolution, provide for a public hearing before the council, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been sent by the clerk, by first class mail, to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(b)  The notice of hearing shall include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing is required in order to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax tribunal. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-5; Code 1997, § 70-5) 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 36-6. - Conduct of hearing on proposed assessment; changes to proposed assessment. 
    At the time and place specified in the notice for the public hearing as provided for in section 36-5, the council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the council and the council may make any changes in the proposed work or assessment which shall seem reasonable or proper in view of any objections, or for any other reason which may appear to be for the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-6; Code 1997, § 70-6) 
Sec. 36-7. - Resolution of determination. 
    After the public hearing provided for in section 36-6, the council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution, the council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement, determine the estimated cost thereof, determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city, determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed six percent per annum, designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessment shall be levied, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination, and designate the name by which the assessment roll shall be known and referred to. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-7; Code 1997, § 70-7) 
Sec. 36-8. - Preparation of assessment roll. 
    Upon adoption of the resolution provided for in section 36-7, the assessor shall prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the council, and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-8; Code 1997, § 70-8) 
Sec. 36-9. - Designation of installments on assessment roll. 
    The assessor, in preparing the special assessment roll, shall divide the assessment into installments and provide a separate column for each installment. The roll and all installments thereof shall be made and reviewed as an original roll and confirmation of the roll shall be made of each and every installment when due without further review or confirmation. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-9; Code 1997, § 70-9) 
Sec. 36-10. - Certification of assessment roll; filing of roll and presentation to council. 
    When the assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, the assessor shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, the assessor's certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by the assessor pursuant to a resolution of the council, giving the date of adoption of the resolution, and that in making the assessments therein the assessor has, as near as may be, according to the assessor's best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and the Charter and the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon, the assessor shall file the special assessment roll with the clerk, who shall present the special assessment roll to the council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-10; Code 1997, § 70-10) 
Sec. 36-11. - Notice of hearing on assessment roll. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the council shall order it filed in the office of the clerk for public examination, and shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof, specifying the purpose, time and place, has been sent by the clerk by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-11; Code 1997, § 70-11) 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 36-12. - Written objections to assessment roll. 
    Any persons deeming themselves aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file their objections thereto in writing with the clerk prior to the close of the hearing, which written objections shall specify in what respect such person is aggrieved. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-12; Code 1997, § 70-12) 
Sec. 36-13. - Conduct of hearing on assessment roll. 
    The council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at a time and place appointed or at an adjourned date therefor and shall consider any written objections thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-13; Code 1997, § 70-13) 
Sec. 36-14. - Corrections and changes to assessment roll. 
    The council may correct the special assessment roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the council minutes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-14; Code 1997, § 70-14) 
Sec. 36-15. - Confirmation or rejection of assessment roll. 
    After the hearing and review provided for in section 36-13, the council may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made, if any, or may refer it back to the assessor for revision, or may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-15; Code 1997, § 70-15) 
Sec. 36-16. - Required vote for confirmation of assessment roll. 
    In order to confirm any special assessment roll, such confirmation shall receive an affirmative vote of a majority of the council elect. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-16; Code 1997, § 70-16) 
Sec. 36-17. - Certificate of confirmation of assessment roll. 
    The clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll and, upon confirmation, such roll shall final and conclusive. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-17; Code 1997, § 70-17) 
Sec. 36-18. - Assessment for sidewalk construction and maintenance or abatement of hazard or nuisance-Council resolution required. 
    The assessment for the cost of the construction and maintenance of any sidewalk or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance to be made pursuant to section 2.2(u) and section 2.2(v) of the city Charter shall be made by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-18; Code 1997, § 70-18) 
Sec. 36-19. - Same-Notice to property owners. 
    Notice of the time at which the council will act upon a sidewalk or hazard resolution shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed as shown by the current tax roll of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-19; Code 1997, § 70-19) 
Sec. 36-20. - Same-Confirmation of roll. 
    For the purposes of collection of assessments under this chapter, the adoption of the resolution as provided in section 36-18 shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment roll set forth in section 36-15. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-20; Code 1997, § 70-20) 
Sec. 36-21. - Assessment to be debt due city; applicability of Charter provisions. 
    The amount of any assessment made under this chapter shall become a debt due to the city upon adoption of such resolution, shall be subject to collection fees and become a lien all as provided under section 11.7 of the city Charter, and shall also be subject to the provisions of sections 11.4, 11.5 and 11.6 of the city Charter and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-21; Code 1997, § 70-21) 
Sec. 36-22. - Expenses chargeable against single lot or parcel of land-Report to assessor; billing of property owner. 
    When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single lot or parcel of land, which expense is chargeable against such lot or parcel of land and the owner thereof, under any city Charter provision, or code of the city, or laws of the state, and is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, the amount of the labor and material or service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the lot or parcel of land upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the assessor, who shall immediately charge the bill to the owner, if known. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-22; Code 1997, § 70-22) 
Sec. 36-23. - Same-Assessment of unpaid charges. 
    The assessor shall annually, at the time of preparing the regular assessment roll, prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges as provided for in this chapter, which charges have not been paid, and shall file the roll with the clerk, who shall present the roll to the council for approval. The provisions of this chapter with respect to special assessments generally and the procedures necessary to be had before making the improvements shall not apply to assessments contemplated under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-23; Code 1997, § 70-23) 
Sec. 36-24. - Determination of number of installments; interest. 
    Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll authorized by this chapter, the council shall determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid and the rate of interest to be charged thereon, which in no case shall exceed six percent per annum. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-24; Code 1997, § 70-24) 
Sec. 36-25. - Lien established. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed until paid. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-25; Code 1997, § 70-25) 
Sec. 36-26. - Personal liability of owner. 
    Any special assessment made under this chapter shall, until paid, be charged against the respective owners of the several lots or parcels of land and shall be a debt owed to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-26; Code 1997, § 70-26) 
Sec. 36-27. - Character of lien. 
    All liens referred to in section 36-26 shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city Charter for taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-27; Code 1997, § 70-27) 
Sec. 36-28. - Effect of vacation of assessment on lien. 
    No judgment or decree nor any action of the council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed under this chapter for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises, or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-28; Code 1997, § 70-28) 
Sec. 36-29. - Failure to receive notice. 
    Any failure to give notice shall not invalidate an entire assessment roll but only the assessments on property affected by the lack of notice. A special assessment shall not be declared invalid as to any property if the owner or the party in interest thereof has actually received notice, has waived notice or has paid any part of the assessment. If any assessment is declared void by court order or judgment, a reassessment against the property may be made. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-29; Code 1997, § 70-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.744. 
Sec. 36-30. - Date assessment and installments due. 
    All special assessments levied under this chapter shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. The annual installments shall not exceed 15 in number as the council may determine at the time of confirmation. If in annual installments, the council shall determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation or on the following July 1 and subsequent installments on July 1 of succeeding years. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-30; Code 1997, § 70-30) 
Sec. 36-31. - Publication of notice to pay. 
    The assessment roll provided for, in this chapter, shall be transmitted by the clerk to the treasurer for collection immediately after its confirmation, and the treasurer shall give notice by one publication in a newspaper, which shall meet the requirements of section 9.15 of the city Charter, that the special assessment roll (identifying it) has been filed in the city treasurer's office and specifying when and where payments may be made thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-31; Code 1997, § 70-31) 
Sec. 36-32. - Collection generally; treasurer's warrant. 
    Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll, the council shall direct that the city clerk shall attach the clerk's warrant to such assessment roll therein commanding the city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in the roll the amount of money assessed to and set opposite their names therein, and, in case any person named in the roll shall neglect or refuse to pay the assessment upon demand, then to levy and collect the assessment by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such person. The city treasurer under such warrant shall be authorized to collect the several installments of any special assessment as and when the installments shall become due and payable, together with interest and penalties, as provided in this chapter. If any such special assessment installment shall remain unpaid for a period of 90 days from and after the due date of such special assessment installment, thereupon the installment shall become delinquent and such delinquent installment and all future installments shall become due and payable forthwith and shall be certified by the city treasurer to the city clerk for spreading upon the next succeeding city tax roll in a column designated "Special Assessments," and there shall be added to such special assessment installments all interest which may have accrued from the date of confirmation of the special assessment tax roll to July 1 of the year in which such city tax roll is made, provided that any fraction of a month shall be considered a full month. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-32; Code 1997, § 70-32) 
Sec. 36-33. - Mailing of statements to owners. 
    The city treasurer may mail statements of the special assessments to the respective owners as indicated by the records of the assessor, of the several lots or parcels of land assessed, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid. However, failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-33; Code 1997, § 70-33) 
Sec. 36-34. - Cash payment. 
    The whole or any part of an assessment under this chapter may be paid within 60 days from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-34; Code 1997, § 70-34) 
Sec. 36-35. - Collection fees. 
    Upon transfer of any delinquent or accelerated delinquent installments of any special assessment to the general city tax roll, there shall be added thereto, in addition to interest as provided in this chapter, a collection fee of four percent of the amount of the delinquent assessment, without interest computed, as shall be so transferred to the general city tax roll. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-35; Code 1997, § 70-35) 
Sec. 36-36. - Payment of past due installments. 
    A taxpayer may, at any time prior to the time when special assessment taxes have been transferred to the general city tax roll, pay one or more of such installments, together with accrued interest from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll to the date of such payment. If all delinquent and past due installments shall have been paid, thereupon the deferred installments shall be reinstated as such and be considered current and may be paid annually as spread upon the original assessment roll, unless and until any subsequent installment shall become delinquent, whereupon the procedure described in this section shall be followed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-36; Code 1997, § 70-36) 
Sec. 36-37. - Collection by suit at law. 
    In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-37; Code 1997, § 70-37) 
Sec. 36-38. - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment unless, within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal and unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days after confirmation of the roll. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-38; Code 1997, § 70-38) 
State Law reference- Statement of right to file written appeal, MCL 211.746. 
Sec. 36-39. - Transfer of delinquent assessments or installments to general tax roll. 
    Special assessment installments shall become delinquent, if unpaid, 90 days after the due date for such special assessment installment, and the delinquency in any one installment shall accelerate the payment of future installments, which, in the event of delinquency of one installment, shall cause all of the remaining special assessment installments to become due and payable forthwith. Delinquent special assessment installments shall be transferred to the general city tax roll for the year commencing July 1 next succeeding the date of such delinquency; provided, however, that, prior to the time that any delinquent special assessment tax has been transferred to the general city tax roll, the taxpayer shall have the right and privilege of reestablishing future installments of such special assessment tax upon payment of all delinquent special assessment tax installments to the date of such payment, together with accumulated interest thereon as provided in this chapter. All delinquent special assessment tax installments as certified to the city clerk by the city treasurer shall be spread upon the general city tax roll as provided in this chapter by the city treasurer, under a column designated "Special Assessments," to which shall be added all interest upon such special assessment installments accruing from the date of confirmation of the special assessment tax roll to July 1 of the current tax year, and in such computation fractions of the month shall be considered as a full month, together with the collection fee as provided in section 36-35. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-40; Code 1997, § 70-39) 
Sec. 36-40. - Collection of assessments or installments transferred to general tax roll. 
    All special assessments or installments thereof which have been transferred to the general city tax roll as being delinquent, or because the delinquency has been accelerated by nonpayment of installments as and when due, shall be collected in all respects as city taxes due upon such general city tax roll, and if uncollected shall be returned to the county treasurer with unpaid general city taxes, as provided in section 9.18 of the city Charter, on March 1 following the date upon which such general tax roll shall have been delivered to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-39; Code 1997, § 70-40) 
Sec. 36-41. - Certification of cost of improvement. 
    Upon completion of an improvement authorized pursuant to this chapter and the payment of the cost thereof, the city administrator shall certify to the council the total cost of the improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for the improvement. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-41; Code 1997, § 70-41) 
Sec. 36-42. - Additional assessment authorized. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they are made, then the council shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots or parcels of land in the same rate as the original assessments to supply the deficiency. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-42; Code 1997, § 70-42) 
Sec. 36-43. - Limitation of additional assessments. 
    Any additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed 25 percent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the council is held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notice shall be given as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-43; Code 1997, § 70-43) 
Sec. 36-44. - Excess assessments under five percent. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-44; Code 1997, § 70-44) 
Sec. 36-45. - Excess assessments over five percent. 
    Should a special assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent, then the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-45; Code 1997, § 70-45) 
Sec. 36-46. - Procedure for refund of excess assessment. 
    Any excess special assessment refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist, and the balance of such refund shall be made in cash. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-46; Code 1997, § 70-46) 
Sec. 36-47. - Restriction on refund of excess assessments. 
    No refunds of any excess assessments may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-47; Code 1997, § 70-47) 
Sec. 36-48. - Illegal or invalid assessments. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-48; Code 1997, § 70-48) 
Sec. 36-49. - Reassessment. 
    All proceedings on any reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, and whenever any sum, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been set aside, if such sum has been paid and not refunded, any payment made thereon shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied, or, if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refund of the excess amount shall be made. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-49; Code 1997, § 70-49) 
Sec. 36-50. - Assessment limited to value of benefits. 
    The total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-50; Code 1997, § 70-50) 
Sec. 36-51. - Maximum area of special assessment district. 
    No special assessment district shall be created by the council for any one public improvement that includes property having an area in excess of 25 percent of the total area of the city. No public improvement project shall be divided geographically for the purpose of circumventing this provision. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-51; Code 1997, § 70-51) 
Sec. 36-52. - Prerequisites to establishment of special assessment district. 
    No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any special assessment district for the making of any public improvement shall be made until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-52; Code 1997, § 70-52) 
Sec. 36-53. - Confirmation of assessment roll required prior to making improvement. 
    No public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll for such improvement. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-53; Code 1997, § 70-53) 
Sec. 36-54. - Special assessment fund. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the city Charter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be segregated in a special fund or account and may be used only to pay the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto and to repay any moneys borrowed therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11-54; Code 1997, § 70-54) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 29; city authority to acquire, own, establish and maintain boulevards, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 23; obstructions and encroachments on public highways, MCL 247.171 et seq.; closing of highway for repairs, MCL 247.291 et seq.; driveways, banners, events and parades, MCL 247.321 et seq.; liability of local government for injury from the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 38-19. - Compliance required. 
    All sidewalks to be constructed or repaired in the city shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-1; Code 1997, § 74-31) 
Sec. 38-20. - Permit required. 
    No sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be laid or repaired without a permit having been obtained from the division of safety inspection, and such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be constructed in accordance with specifications therefor which may from time to time be approved by the city council. Such permit must be returned to the division of safety inspection within 30 days from the date of issuance, with a statement thereon by the contractor of the number of lineal feet of sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway constructed thereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-2; Code 1997, § 74-32) 
Sec. 38-21. - Construction to grade requirements. 
    All sidewalks shall be constructed so that, when completed, the edge of the sidewalk closest to the curb shall be set on a minimum slope of four percent above the top of curb, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. The sidewalk shall have a slope of one-quarter inch per foot toward the curb unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-3; Code 1997, § 74-33) 
Sec. 38-22. - Engineer to approve grades. 
    Wherever sidewalks are to be constructed on streets where grades have not been previously established, before any sidewalk shall be constructed, lines and grades shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-4; Code 1997, § 74-34) 
Sec. 38-23. - Driveways to be constructed. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of property abutting upon any paved street, where a side drive has been provided for such property, to construct and install a driveway of concrete or asphalt between the sidewalk and curb of such street, except as otherwise provided for in section 38-36. Driveways from the curb to the lot line shall be as stated under section 38-21. No property owner shall install or permit the installation of asphalt to cover sidewalks. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-5; Code 1997, § 74-35; Ord. No. 807, § 74-35, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 38-24. - Markings. 
    No person shall construct or maintain any mosaic, art marble, tiling, any colored material, or any name, numbers or advertising in any sidewalk space, except the stamp or plate of the contractor as may be required in the sidewalk specifications, bearing the name of the contractor installing the sidewalk and the year, except as otherwise provided for in section 38-36. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-6; Code 1997, § 74-36; Ord. No. 807, § 74-36, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 38-25. - Illuminated sidewalk spaces. 
    Where covered areas or vaults in sidewalks are constructed, the illuminated pavement shall have in the top coat of the concrete not less than two pounds of no. 10 carborundum floated into every 15 square feet of surface space between the prism or glass sidewalk lights, and such covering shall have a tensile strength of not less than 300 pounds per square foot, except where such covered area is used for driveway purposes, in which event the tensile strength shall not be less than 600 pounds per square foot. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-7; Code 1997, § 74-37) 
Sec. 38-26. - Notice to construct; construction by city. 
    Whenever the council shall, by resolution, declare the necessity for and direct the construction of or reconstruction of sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways in any street in front of or adjoining private property, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the owner or party in interest where such sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways are to be constructed or reconstructed in front of any land or parcel of land or adjacent thereto, by United States mail, addressed to the last known address of such owner or party in interest. Such notice shall require that such construction or reconstruction work shall be done within the time specified in the notice given, as provided for in this section. If the owner or party in interest of any property so notified shall fail to comply with the notice as required in this section to be given, the council may thereupon direct that such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be constructed or reconstructed, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the owner or party in interest of the property affected, within 30 days after a statement therefor has been mailed to such property owner or party in interest. Upon failure to make such payment within such 30-day period, a penalty of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of such statement shall be added to the cost of such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway, computed to the date such cost shall be transferred to the next succeeding general city tax roll and assessed against such property by having the assessor insert the assessment in the next succeeding general city tax roll, in a proper column, such sum, including the penalty, as a special assessment tax for such improvement. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-8; Code 1997, § 74-38) 
Sec. 38-27. - Suit for damages. 
    If any suit or other proceedings are brought against the city, and the city shall be compelled to pay damages for injuries to any person on account of negligence upon the part of the owner or party in interest to properly construct or maintain sidewalks in front of or adjacent to the property owned by such owner or party in interest, such damage costs may be collected by the city, if necessary, by suit in proper court against such owner or party in interest. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-9; Code 1997, § 74-39) 
Sec. 38-28. - Bond required. 
    In order to ensure the quality and guarantee the maintenance of sidewalks, crosswalks and driveways to be laid, every person engaged in the business of laying or constructing sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways in the city shall be required to execute a good and sufficient bond to the city in the penal sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, with sureties to be approved by the council. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance of the terms and conditions of all provisions of this Code in reference to the construction of sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways within the city, and upon the further condition that the person executing such bond shall keep or maintain such sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways which the person constructs in a good condition of repair and fit for public travel for a period of two years from and after the date of completion of construction of such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-10; Code 1997, § 74-40) 
Sec. 38-29. - Construction by owner. 
    The division of safety inspection is hereby authorized to grant a permit to any owner of real estate within the city to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk or driveway in front of or adjacent to the real estate owned by such person, provided that such owner personally is skilled and competent to construct or reconstruct such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway and maintain the same and will observe the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway specifications of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-11; Code 1997, § 74-41) 
Sec. 38-30. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    All sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways to be constructed in the city shall be constructed or reconstructed under the supervision and inspection of the city, and permit fees and inspection fees shall be charged as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-12; Code 1997, § 74-42) 
Sec. 38-31. - Exemption from fees. 
    The provisions as to the payment of permit fees and inspection fees as set forth in section 38-30 shall not be applicable to sidewalks installed in connection with the platting and development of subdivision property under which the developer of the subdivision is required to file a subdivision improvement bond and has been required to make deposits for construction and engineering services under the subdivision procedure for the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-13; Code 1997, § 74-43) 
Sec. 38-32. - Placement of driveway approach. 
    All driveways constructed or reconstructed upon dedicated street rights-of-way shall be located thereupon so as not to encroach upon the street right-of-way in front of any adjoining or adjacent lot, unless the owner of the adjoining or adjacent lot shall consent to such construction or reconstruction by executing a written consent therefor. Such written consent shall be filed with the city as an attachment to the application for the permit for construction. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-14; Code 1997, § 74-44) 
Sec. 38-33. - Appeal procedure. 
    If consent of the property owner of the adjoining or adjacent lot cannot be obtained, the person proposing to construct or reconstruct the driveway approach may request a hearing before the city council for such permission. The city council shall hold a hearing on such request after having caused notice of such hearing to be sent, by regular mail, to the property owner of the adjoining or adjacent lot as shown on the tax records maintained by the city. The city council may authorize the proposed construction or reconstruction on the street right-of-way upon finding that such construction or reconstruction is not detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood or that such proposed construction or reconstruction is the most feasible location for the placement of the driveway approach. Such driveway flare shall not exceed one foot. The petitioner shall pay a hearing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-15; Code 1997, § 74-45) 
Sec. 38-34. - Certain repairs prohibited. 
    No sidewalk or driveway within a public right-of-way shall be repaired with epoxy, patching cement, asphalt or similar material. Sidewalks and driveway approaches in need of repair shall be repaired in such a manner as to provide that accumulations of water and ice shall not occur from impoundment of water. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-16; Code 1997, § 74-46) 
Sec. 38-35. - Conditions requiring repair. 
    Any sidewalk or driveway approach slab or flag that is out of alignment or position by three-fourths of an inch or more with adjoining slab or flag shall be repaired with the permission of the public works division or removed and replaced so as to eliminate such condition. Any sidewalk or driveway approach that is cracked, scaled, pitted, or deteriorated shall be removed and replaced. Any sidewalk slab or flag that accumulates water shall be removed and replaced. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3-17; Code 1997, § 74-47) 
Sec. 38-36. - Imprinted cement and brick pavers. 
(a)  Permitted materials. Driveways and approaches may be constructed with imprinted cement, brick pavers or similar material. The material and color must be approved by the city administrator and director of public works. Sidewalks must remain uniform and utilize the trowel and brush method. Sidewalks constructed as part of an overall project utilizing these types of materials shall be colored to blend with the predominant material color of the driveway or approach. 
(b)  Indemnification. Permits for driveways and approaches involving imprinted cement, brick pavers or similar material shall only be approved if all requirements of this Code and this article are met, and the applicant signs a hold harmless and indemnification agreement approved by the city administrator. The agreement shall, at a minimum, provide that the applicant agrees to remove the material from the public right-of-way, or allow the city to remove those materials based on the finding of a valid municipal purpose. Costs involved in material removed by the city based on defects or condemnation will not be reimbursed. Costs involved in material removal for general work in the right-of-way will only be reimbursed at the city's normal unit price for regular cement. 
(Ord. No. 807, § 74-48, 11-7-2005) 
Secs. 38-37-38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 38-61. - Permit-Required. 
    Unless acting under a contract with the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized city official or city employee in the course of their employment, to make, cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city limits without first having obtained and having in force a permit as provided in this article. In case of an emergency arising out of office hours, at night, Sundays or legal holidays, when an immediate excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, such excavation shall be reported to the department of public safety, which shall grant permission to make the necessary excavation after conferring with the director of public services or his designated representative, upon the express condition that an application be made in the manner provided in this article on or before noon of the next business day. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-2; Code 1997, § 74-76) 
Sec. 38-62. - Same-Application. 
(a)  Filing of; contents. Any person, other than a public utility operating in the state under the jurisdiction and control of the state public service commission, desiring to procure a specific permit as provided in this article shall file with the division of safety inspection, at least 24 hours before the time proposed to begin such work, a written application upon a blank form prepared and provided by the city. Such application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and number of the street, or the location of the alley, sidewalk or public place in, on or under which it is desired to make the excavation or opening; 
(3)  The kind of pavement or sidewalk thereon; 
(4)  The purpose, type (open hole or ditch, bore or tunnel), size and location, as near as can be determined, of the proposed excavation or opening; 
(5)  The name and address of the person for whose benefit the work is to be done; and 
(6)  The time during which it is desired such opening is to be permitted. 
(b)  Driveways. When required by the director of public services or his designated representative, the application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a drawing or pencil sketch showing the location, character and dimensions of the proposed excavation or opening for the installation of new work, or the location and character of the alterations involving the location of pipes, poles, conduits, wires or other conductors. 
(c)  Public utility installations. Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, any public utility operating in the state under the jurisdiction and control of the state public service commission, upon written application on a form provided by the city, and the payment of an annual fee as provided in this article, shall be granted a permit under the provisions of this article for the installation, maintenance or repair of any public utility installations on public property, good for a period of one year, ending June 30 of each year; however, the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be complied with. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-3; Code 1997, § 74-77) 
Sec. 38-63. - Liability for damages. 
(a)  The person to whom such permit shall be granted shall do no injury in any street, avenue, alley, lane, sidewalk, park or other public place, or to any shade trees, shrubs, lawns, concrete paving or sidewalk, drainage structure or other like improvement, or in any manner disturb or interfere with any sewer, water main, pipe or conduit, any other public or private appliances laid or constructed by any authorized person, and shall fully indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all claims and damages for which the city might be made or become liable to pay by reason of the construction, maintaining, repairing or operating such poles, conduits, wires, mains, pipes or any apparatus connected therewith or otherwise arising from the use or possession of any of the rights and privileges granted, or from any neglect on the part of such person or of such person's employees to comply with the provisions of this article or this Code. 
(b)  The person to whom a permit under this article shall be granted shall indemnify the city and assume all liability and damages which may arise, come, or occur to the city from any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work mentioned in this article, or the neglect of any person or its employees to comply with the provisions of this article, or other provisions of this Code relative to the use of streets or other public places, especially as to the putting up of lights, flares, or barriers at or around excavations and the acceptance by any person of any permit under the provisions of this article shall be an agreement by it to pay the city any sum of money for which the city may become liable from or by reason of such injury. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this section, such person shall be given written notice of any and all formal claims, suits and demands filed with the city within 30 days after receipt of such claim, suit or demand and shall be given an opportunity to defend same. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-4; Code 1997, § 74-78) 
Sec. 38-64. - Surety bond. 
(a)  If the excavation involves cutting into or boring or tunneling under a public street, highway, alley or sidewalk, the application shall be accompanied by a surety bond to the city approved as to form by the city attorney in the penal sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, conditioned for the faithful performance of such work in accordance with the rules and regulations of the city within the time fixed by the director of public services in the permit and for the restoration of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in which the excavation or opening shall be made by such person to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the director of public services and for the maintenance of such condition for a reasonable length of time as shall be required by the director of public services. 
(b)  If the excavation involves tunneling under pavement by hand rather than by boring or augering, the excavator shall pay the cost of removing and replacing the pavement after ground settlement has taken place. The director of public services shall estimate the cost of removing and replacing the pavement which will be required and collection of the amount shall be made by the city clerk no later than the completion of the excavation project or the cost shall be deducted from the amount of the bond. 
(c)  Any person duly licensed as a sidewalk contractor, sewer contractor or plumber having filed a bond in the penal sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time with the city, as required by the respective provisions of this Code, shall be deemed to be properly bonded under the terms of this section. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to a public utility operating in the state under the jurisdiction and control of the state public service commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-5; Code 1997, § 74-79) 
Sec. 38-65. - Deposit. 
(a)  If the excavation does not involve the surface of a public roadway, alley or sidewalk and is limited to unpaved space, either between a sidewalk and a curb or in some other public area, the city clerk shall require of the permit applicant a deposit of such sum of money as shall be deemed by the director of public services sufficient to cover and pay all the expenses for furnishing such material, doing such work, making such inspection and taking such means as shall be required properly to restore and secure against settlement of soil and sod which may occur as a consequence of making such excavation, opening or disturbance. The sums of money so collected and deposited shall be paid into the city treasury by the city clerk and may be used for the purpose of paying for the repairing and replacing of any such surface broken into or disturbed for any purposes mentioned in this section. 
(b)  After completion of the work to the satisfaction of the director of public services, the director shall certify to the city clerk the cost of the work and the amount of any surplus remaining from the amount deposited in such case, and such surplus shall thereupon be returned to the proper claimant. If for any reason the amount of such deposit shall have been insufficient to cover the cost of such work or if any damage shall have been done not contemplated in the original estimate, which shall have caused increased expenditure, the amounts of such deficiency or damage shall be collected from the person to whom the permit was issued. No further permits shall be granted to such person until the amount of such deficiency shall have been paid. 
(c)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to a public utility operating in the state under the jurisdiction and control of the state public service commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-6; Code 1997, § 74-80) 
Sec. 38-66. - Granting of permit. 
(a)  The director of public services, upon the filing of the application and bond or deposit and the payment of a permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, may, at the treasurer's discretion, issue an excavation permit which shall state the name and address of the person making application, the location, nature, purpose and extent of the excavation or opening, the kind or kinds of pavement to be disturbed, the amount of the bond filed or deposit paid by the applicant and the dates of granting and expiration of the permit. All permits shall be consecutively numbered and shall be made in triplicate, one copy to be given to the applicant, one copy to be delivered to the director of public services and one copy to be filed with the city treasurer. Such permit shall at all times be in the possession of a competent person actually at the work site and shall be shown upon demand to a public safety officer or properly authorized city official or employee of the department of public services. 
(b)  This section shall not apply where inconsistent with the permit fee provisions of this Code regulating sewers, drains, plumbing and sidewalk, or to a public utility to which an annual permit shall have been issued under the provisions of this article. The annual fee for a yearly permit issued under this article shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, payable in advance, for the fiscal year ending June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-7; Code 1997, § 74-81) 
Sec. 38-67. - Required notification by annual permit holders. 
(a)  Monthly reports. Any public utility company that has been issued an annual permit, as provided in section 38-66, shall make a monthly report to the director of public services indicating the address of any excavation made on, in, or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk, driveway approach or unimproved public place within the city limits. 
(b)  Annual reports and notice. 
(1)  Any public utility company that has made or caused to be made any excavations shall notify the director of public services by March 1 of each year, in order to designate the needed repairs, replacement or restoration of any previously excavated area. 
(2)  The public utilities shall also contact the director of public services between the first two weeks of the month of May, annually, for the marking of any such areas to be repaired, replaced, or restored. If such public utilities do not make contact with the director of public services within the aforesaid period, the director of public services shall proceed with the marking of the areas to be repaired, replaced, or restored. 
(c)  Work to be completed by October 1. The public utility companies shall complete their respective repairs, replacements, or restoration of any excavated areas within the city by October 1 of each year. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-8; Code 1997, § 74-82) 
Sec. 38-68. - Openings prior to improvement. 
    Before any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall be paved, resurfaced, repaved, widened or otherwise improved, notice thereof shall be furnished to all public service corporations and similar persons concerned. Prior to any excavation or treatment of existing street or alley surfaces, such persons shall lay therein all wires, pipes, poles, cables, conduits and the like which may be deemed necessary or contemplated by the utility during the life of the improvement. On the recommendation of the city administrator, the council may, by resolution, set a reasonable time limit prior to which all work on such wires, pipes, poles, cables, conduits and the like in the street, alley, sidewalk or other public places to be improved must be completed. Any person who, without the written consent of the director of public services, continues to do such work after the expiration of the time set shall be subject to the penalties provided in this Code. Failure of the city to give or receive notice to or from specific persons shall not affect the other provisions of this article or the penalties hereby imposed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-9; Code 1997, § 74-83) 
Sec. 38-69. - Barriers and warning lights; temporary sidewalks and other structures. 
(a)  Any person making or causing to be made an excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or within five feet of the line of any street or public place shall, between sunset and sunrise on every night that such excavation or opening remains open or danger exists therefrom, keep such excavation or opening fenced or barricaded and properly lighted so as to warn all persons of such excavation or opening and all obstructions. No unauthorized person shall remove or interfere in any way with any such lantern, kerosene bomb or other danger signal or any such barriers. 
(b)  When it is necessary to block or close a sidewalk to pedestrian traffic, safe temporary walks with guardrails or fences shall be provided as requested by the director of public services or the director of public safety. 
(c)  Bridges across a trench shall be built of sound material with substantial guardrails and of sufficient width and strength to accommodate the pedestrian traffic without danger. When it is necessary to provide bridges for vehicular traffic across openings too large to permit the use of steel plates, such bridges shall be substantially constructed of sufficient width and strength to permit the safe passage of traffic. Temporary structures, fences or bridges shall be maintained in a safe passable condition at all times. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-10; Code 1997, § 74-84) 
Sec. 38-70. - Work to conform to city specifications. 
    All work under a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be under the jurisdiction of the director of public services and shall be accomplished in conformity with the specifications as approved by resolution of the city council and on file with the city clerk, which specifications may be amended from time to time by the city council, with copies of the amended specifications being forwarded to the respective public utility companies. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-11; Code 1997, § 74-85) 
Sec. 38-71. - Failure to comply with permit conditions. 
    If any person to whom a permit under this article has been granted shall fail to comply with the terms thereof, such permit shall become null and void, and any and all expenses, including administrative costs, which may be incurred by the city in making the necessary restoration, repair or replacement of any excavation made on, in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk, driveway approach or unimproved public property shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-12; Code 1997, § 74-86) 
Sec. 38-72. - Enforcement of article. 
    All public safety officers shall be vigilant in the enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall report through proper channels any violation thereof to the director of public services on observing or being informed of the opening of or excavation in any street, and shall require the person making such opening or excavation to exhibit the permit therefor. If no permit has been issued, or if the exhibition thereof is refused, the officer shall, without delay, enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6-13; Code 1997, § 74-87) 
Secs. 38-73-38-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MATERIALS ON STREETS 

Sec. 38-103. - Unlawful deposits of materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, dump or wash sand, gravel, asphalt, cement or other similar materials from tools, equipment or transporting trucks; or to allow such materials or debris, grass cuttings, dirt, sod or similar or like substances deposited on a paved or graveled surface to flow or be poured into a street, alley, gutter, drainage ditch, sewer or catchbasin at any time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-1; Code 1997, § 74-111) 
Sec. 38-104. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit sand, gravel, equipment, dumpsters or containers upon any street or alley without first having acquired a permit for such activity from the department of public services. Contractors working under contract with the city are exempt from acquiring a permit for work associated with such contract. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-2; Code 1997, § 74-112) 
Sec. 38-105. - Same-Fee; deposit. 
    Where an application for a permit to deposit materials or equipment upon a street or alley indicates that such materials or equipment will be removed the same day as deposited and will not obstruct travel upon the roadways, a permit may be issued by the department of public services without a permit fee, but if it shall appear from such application that such equipment or materials will remain on the street or alley for a longer period, then a permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be required, together with a deposit of $200.00, which shall be held as security for the prompt and proper removal of all materials or equipment deposited under any permit issued. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-3; Code 1997, § 74-113) 
Sec. 38-106. - Deductions from deposit. 
    The director of public services or the director's designated representative shall deduct from any security deposit any costs or expenses incurred by the city in removing any equipment or materials deposited under the permit issued under this article or to cover the costs of restoring any street or alley to its original condition. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-4; Code 1997, § 74-114) 
Sec. 38-107. - Deposit of materials. 
    Any person to whom a permit under this article has been issued shall deposit the materials or place the equipment in the space designated in such permit and in no other place upon the streets or alleys. Materials deposited upon streets surfaced by the chip and seal process shall be deposited only upon plywood or other protective materials so that the deposited material does not come into contact with the surface of the roadway. The permit holder shall notify the department of public services in advance of depositing materials or equipment under the provisions of any permit issued. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-5; Code 1997, § 74-115) 
Sec. 38-108. - Barriers and safeguards. 
    It shall be the duty of any person depositing materials or equipment on streets or alleys to provide lighted barriers or lighted sawhorses and safeguards to warn the public against the obstruction created by depositing such materials or equipment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-6; Code 1997, § 74-116) 
Sec. 38-109. - Refund of deposit. 
    The director of public services or his designated representative, upon removal of the materials or equipment from the street or alley, shall refund to the depositor any sums remaining on hand in the deposit fund provided for in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-7; Code 1997, § 74-117) 
Sec. 38-110. - Protection of sidewalk and curb. 
    Any contractor or permit holder under this article shall provide sufficient cover or protection for any sidewalk or curb over which materials are to be hauled so as to prevent damage to such sidewalks or curbs. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7-8; Code 1997, § 74-118) 
Secs. 38-111-38-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-134. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parades and processions means and includes parades, processions, fun runs, group walks, marathon walks or races, bike-a-thons, and similar events as interpreted by the city administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17-1; Code 1997, § 74-141; Ord. No. 805, § 74-141, 9-19-2005) 
Secs. 38-135-38-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 38-152. - Required. 
    All parades and processions conducted within the city shall require a permit. Application for such a permit shall be made in writing and submitted to the city clerk no less than 90 days prior to the date such event is scheduled to occur. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17-2; Code 1997, § 74-161; Ord. No. 805, § 74-161, 9-19-2005) 
Sec. 38-153. - Information required. 
    The application for a parade or procession permit shall contain such information as may be required by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17-3; Code 1997, § 74-162; Ord. No. 805, § 74-162, 9-19-2005) 
Sec. 38-154. - Standards for approval. 
(a)  The city clerk shall submit the application for a parade or procession permit to the department of public safety for review and comment concerning the following: 
(1)  Traffic and pedestrian safety measures that may be required. 
(2)  The necessity of marshals to assist in directing or controlling the participants in the event, and the estimated number of participants. 
(3)  The estimated additional manpower of the public safety department that will be required to handle the proposed event and the hours of overtime, if any, that may be required. 
(4)  Whether or not such proposed event will apparently conflict with other events in the city such as regular or special church services, business promotions or other events. 
(b)  Upon receiving the report from the department of public safety, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city administrator shall estimate the costs that will be incurred by the city if the activity takes place. If the application is an organization's first request for a permit under this article, then the city administrator shall refer the application for a permit, the report of the department of public safety, and the administrator's recommendations to the city council for consideration. However, if the council has previously approved an organization's request for a permit of a substantially similar event, then subsequent renewals of the permit may be approved by the city administrator subject to the standards for approval (report from department of public safety and cost estimate still required) and conditions for approval contained in this article. Any denial of renewal requests may be submitted to city council. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17-4; Code 1997, § 74-163; Ord. No. 805, § 74-163, 9-19-2005) 
Sec. 38-155. - Grant or denial by council; conditions for approval. 
    The city council shall consider an application for a permit under the provisions of this article and may deny such request or may approve such request subject to conditions which may include any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant agrees to reimburse the city part or all of the costs incurred by the city because of such event. A performance deposit may be required to guarantee such payment to the city. 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish the number of marshals that have been indicated as necessary by the department of public safety. The applicant may be required to provide readily identifiable clothing, uniform jackets or arm patches for the marshals and agree that such marshals shall be used to assist in traffic control or crowd control under the direction of the department of public safety. 
(3)  Require the applicant to agree to remove any debris, which may be associated with or generated by the event, or to agree to reimburse the city for cleanup costs incurred by the city. 
(4)  Require the applicant obtain the prior approval of any businesses, schools, churches or other entities that may be affected by the event. 
(5)  Require the applicant to obtain permission for such event from the county road commission if the use of Mack Avenue is requested. 
(6)  Require the applicant to obtain liability insurance protecting the city from potential risks associated with the event, including the amount of such coverage. 
(7)  Require the applicant to meet any other condition that is deemed in the best interests of the city and its residents. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17-5; Code 1997, § 74-164; Ord. No. 805, § 74-164, 9-19-2005) 
Sec. 38-156. - Automatic revocation. 
    Should the permit requested under this article be issued conditioned upon the applicant fulfilling certain requirements prior to the event and should the applicant fail or neglect fulfilling any such condition, then the approval for such event as obtained from the city council or city administrator shall be automatically rescinded. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17-6; Code 1997, § 74-165; Ord. No. 805, § 74-165, 9-19-2005) 
Secs. 38-157-38-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOW REMOVAL 

Sec. 38-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, but shall not include the state or a political subdivision of the state, an employee of the state or an employee of a political subdivision of the state operating within the scope of such employee's duties for the state or political subdivision thereof. The term "corporation" shall include the officers thereof. 
    Safe vision means an unobstructed line of sight enabling a driver of a motor vehicle to travel upon, enter or exit a roadway or alley, including a dedicated right-of-way open for vehicular travel, in a safe manner. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-1; Code 1997, § 74-186) 
Sec. 38-182. - Obstructing safe vision prohibited. 
    No person shall remove or deposit, or cause to be removed or deposited, snow, ice or slush onto or across a street right-of-way, roadway or alley in any manner that obstructs the safe vision of the driver of a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-2; Code 1997, § 74-187) 
Sec. 38-183. - Deposits on roadway prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited snow, ice or slush on any roadway or alley. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-3; Code 1997, § 74-188) 
Sec. 38-184. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, for money or other valuable thing, to use a motor vehicle to remove, plow or shovel snow or slush from any land or premises within the city without first obtaining and maintaining a snow removal license from the city. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-4; Code 1997, § 74-189) 
Sec. 38-185. - Application for license. 
    Application for a snow removal license shall be made upon a form provided by the city clerk. The applicant shall provide the following information to the city clerk: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the individual, firm, partnership or corporation requesting such license. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner or tenant and location of the property where such snow removal operations will be or are intended to be conducted. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-5; Code 1997, § 74-190) 
Sec. 38-186. - Fee and term of license. 
    The applicant for a snow removal license shall pay a license fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city, and upon approval of such license and receipt of the fee, the city clerk shall issue the applicant a snow removal license, which license shall expire July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-6; Code 1997, § 74-191) 
Sec. 38-187. - List of customers. 
    Any licensee holding a snow removal license shall keep the city clerk advised, in writing, of the name and address of any new or additional customers and locations where snow removal activities will be or are intended to be conducted. It shall be a violation of this Code for any person having a snow removal license to use a motor vehicle to remove, plow or shovel snow within the city at a location or premise not listed with the city clerk as a customer or location of such licensee. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7-7; Code 1997, § 74-192) 
Secs. 38-188, 38-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SNOW EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 38-190. - Parking prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall park a motor vehicle on any street or alley during a declared snow emergency. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-191. - Method of declaration; procedure. 
(a)  In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the city administrator or designated representative may declare a snow emergency whenever, in his or her judgment, ice or snow has accumulated or is significantly likely to accumulate to such an extent as to impede safe travel upon the streets of the city. 
(b)  Method of declaration. 
(1)  Mandatory. A snow emergency shall exist when the city administrator declares an emergency to be publicly announced by broadcast from one or more radio or television stations within normal operating range covering the city. 
(2)  Discretionary. When practical, such declaration shall also be made over the appropriate cable television channel, on the city hall telephone message machine, and the city website. 
(3)  The city administrator shall make a record of each time and date and methods of such declaration. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-192. - Duration of no parking ban. 
(a)  The parking prohibition shall begin one hour after a snow emergency has been declared. The prohibition shall end on any individual street when both of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
(1)  The snow, ice or sleet has stopped. 
(2)  The city has completed snow plowing on that street from curb to curb for the entire block. 
(b)  The parking prohibition shall, in general, expire 48 hours after the weather conditions creating the emergency have stopped, unless the state of emergency is extended. Such an extension shall require that the procedures outlined in section 38-191 be repeated. 
(c)  Despite expiration of the no parking ban of a declared snow emergency, a parked vehicle surrounded or partially surrounded by plowed snow, shall constitute a presumption that the vehicle was parked in violation of the no parking ban. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-193. - Abandoning disabled vehicles. 
    Whenever a vehicle becomes disabled for any reason on any street during a parking prohibition for snow emergency, the owner or person operating the vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the street. No person shall abandon or leave a vehicle on the street except for the purpose of securing immediate assistance and in such cases the person securing assistance shall leave the vehicle only for the time actually necessary to make contact for assistance and shall return to the vehicle thereafter without delay. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-194. - Impounding of vehicles. 
    The public safety department is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle which is parked on any street during a declared snow emergency and to transport the vehicle to an impound facility designated by the city. Prior to impounding a vehicle, the city shall take reasonable steps to attempt to provide the owner of the vehicle with actual notice pursuant to a written policy approved by the city council, as amended by resolution. Towing and impound fees shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-195. - Presumption of ownership: failure to receive notice. 
    Proof that the particular vehicle described in a complaint was parked in violation of this article, together with proof that the respondent named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle in violation of this chapter. If this presumption is rebutted, the owner of the vehicle may be required to produce evidence regarding the person who actually parked the vehicle in violation of this article. The failure of a respondent to receive notice of a snow emergency shall not be a defense. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-196. - Exception for hardship. 
    The director of public safety or his or her designated representative shall have the authority to issue an annual permit for on-street parking during a declared snow emergency upon the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and proof of hardship. Issuance of a permit is discretionary and shall be based on the same criteria utilized for issuing permits for parking vehicles between 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. The annual permit fee shall be $25.00, as amended by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-197. - Permit required; application information. 
    A permit is required for each vehicle parked on the street during a designated snow emergency. Permits shall be nontransferable and valid for not more than one year. All permits shall expire on March 31 of each year in any event. Application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Copies of the titles, registrations or lease agreements for all vehicles at the location; 
(2)  Copies of the drivers' licenses of the immediate family members residing at the location at the time of application; and 
(3)  Payment of $25.00 for each permit, as amended by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-198. - Permit display; authorized parking. 
    In the event the director of public safety or his or her designated representative grants a permit pursuant to this article, such permit shall be in the form of a sticker which the applicant shall affix in the driver's side inside front lower left window of the permitted vehicle. The application shall contain the year, model and license plate number of the vehicle. A vehicle properly bearing such a sticker shall be permitted to park either in front of, or directly across from the permitted residence depending on existing signage. If such a vehicle cannot be so parked for reasons not created by the applicant, then such a vehicle may be parked within 50 feet of the residence. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-199. - Relationship to other laws. 
    Any provision of this article which becomes effective shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedent over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. However, nothing in this article shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-200. - Violations. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Park a vehicle on a street during a declared snow emergency without a permit or with a permit improperly displayed; 
(2)  Transfer a permit to a vehicle other than the one for which it was issued; 
(3)  Falsify any information or documentation required by this chapter for issuance of a permit; or 
(4)  Park a permitted vehicle contrary to section 38-198. 
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 38-201. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor as defined by this Code and upon a finding of responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine in accordance with the following schedule: 
1 st violation: Up to $100.00, as amended by council resolution. 2 nd violation: Up to $200.00, as amended by council resolution. 3 rd or subsequent violation: Misdemeanor.  
(Ord. No. 830, 9-14-2009) 
Secs. 38-202-38-225. - Reserved. 
Chapter 40 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

Sec. 40-1. - Regulations applicable to subdivisions. 
    The subdivider is urged to become acquainted with the following state statutes and provisions of this Code prior to actual work on any proposed subdivision: 
(1)  Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). Copies of this item may be obtained from the auditor general of the state at Lansing. 
(2)  This chapter and chapter 50. Copies of these items may be obtained from the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-1; Code 1997, § 78-1) 
Sec. 40-2. - Discussion of drainage plans with city administrator. 
    Before the subdivider shall confer with the city engineer relative to stormwater drainage plans, the matter shall be discussed with the city administrator, who, in his judgment, may then refer the matter of drainage plans to the city engineer, such reference to be made by written direction. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-2; Code 1997, § 78-2) 
Sec. 40-3. - Submission of deed restrictions and preliminary plat; contents of preliminary plat. 
    At least seven days prior to the scheduled meeting of the planning commission, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission 14 copies of deed restrictions and 14 copies of the preliminary plat. Regular meetings of the planning commission are held on the fourth Tuesday of each month. The preliminary plat shall show: 
(1)  The subdivision name and location. 
(2)  Identity and addresses of all owners, and identity and address of the designer or engineer. 
(3)  Date of submission to the planning commission. 
(4)  North point and graphic scale of the plat. 
(5)  Location of property lines, location of streets, location of existing utilities, location of existing easements and location of proposed easements. 
(6)  Present zoning classification. 
(7)  Names of adjoining properties or subdivisions. 
(8)  Proposed utility system (water mains and sewers), with sizes indicated. 
(9)  Names of new streets or extensions of existing streets. 
(10)  Lot lines, lot dimensions and lot numbers. 
(11)  House numbering system obtained from the city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-3; Code 1997, § 78-3) 
Sec. 40-4. - Forwarding of deed restrictions and preliminary plat to planning commissioners. 
    Following initial study by the city, a copy of the deed restrictions and the preliminary plat will be forwarded to each planning commissioner prior to the next scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-4; Code 1997, § 78-4) 
Sec. 40-5. - Action by planning commission on deed restrictions and preliminary plat. 
    After approval by the planning commission of the deed restrictions and the preliminary plat, one copy of each shall be filed in the city's master subdivision file. The remaining copies shall be held by the city administrator for use by the council. The planning commission shall advise the council and the subdivider of its action in connection with the deed restrictions and the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-5; Code 1997, § 78-5) 
Sec. 40-6. - Review of preliminary plat by utility company. 
    A copy of the approved preliminary plat, appropriately stamped and signed, should be submitted by the subdivider to: 
The Detroit Edison Company 
9980 Gratiot Avenue 
Detroit, Michigan 
Attention: Engineering Department 
Planning Division 
for its recommendation on the number and location of streetlights and light poles, including necessary easements to permit their installation. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-6; Code 1997, § 78-6) 
Sec. 40-7. - Review of preliminary plat by director of public safety. 
    The secretary of the planning commission shall submit two copies of the approved preliminary plat to the director of public safety, who shall: 
(1)  Make recommendations on the street pattern and characteristics of the preliminary plat. 
(2)  Enter thereon recommendations on the location of fire hydrants. 
(3)  Enter the number, location and price (installed) of the necessary street and traffic signs. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-7; Code 1997, § 78-7) 
Sec. 40-8. - Review of water, sewer and street plans. 
(a)  The subdivider shall make the data acquired under sections 40-6 and 40-7 available to the subdivider's engineer, after which the subdivider shall submit detailed plans and design data of water mains, sewers, concrete pavements and sidewalks to the city engineer, together with detailed estimates of the cost of these improvements. 
(b)  The city engineer will forward water and sewer plans to the state department of health, the county water and sewage authority and the City of Detroit for their approval. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-8; Code 1997, § 78-8) 
Sec. 40-9. - Prerequisites for preparation of final plat. 
    After notice of approval of the plans and design data of water mains, sewers, concrete pavements and sidewalks by the city engineer and approval by the state department of health, the county water and sewage authority, and the City of Detroit, the subdivider's designer or engineer may prepare a final plat. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-9; Code 1997, § 78-9) 
Sec. 40-10. - Submission of final plat, fees and improvement bond. 
    The subdivider shall submit the final plat on approved material and ten prints thereof to the council at least three days prior to the next scheduled meeting, together with: 
(1)  A letter from the city engineer approving the design of utilities and confirming the subdivider's estimate of the cost of all improvements, plus a deposit for inspection costs estimated to be two percent of the cost of all improvements, plus a deposit of one-half percent of the cost of all improvements for engineering fees. 
(2)  A fee of $60.00 (land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(3)  A subdivider's improvement bond in the amount of the total estimated costs of the improvements and inspection fees, together with a guarantee of the materials and construction of such improvements for a period of one year from and after the date of the acceptance of such improvements by the city; provided that the subdivider may substitute a surety bond of the contractor, in favor of the city, guaranteeing the improvement against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of one year from and after the date of acceptance of the improvement by the city, which surety bond shall be in the principal sum of ten percent of the contract cost of the improvement for improvements installed prior to January 1, 1963, and in the principal sum of 15 percent of the contract cost of the improvements installed thereafter. No such improvement shall be accepted by the city unless and until such bond is filed and accepted. The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of the following improvements: 
a.  Adequate water mains, including necessary fire hydrants. 
b.  Adequate sewers and drainage facilities, including positive rear yard drainage. 
c.  Concrete pavement and concrete sidewalks. 
d.  Necessary street and traffic signs. 
e.  The planting of trees between the sidewalk and the curb, which trees shall be of a minimum size of one inch to 11/2 inches in diameter and six feet to eight feet in height and shall be so spaced so that there shall be a distance of not less than 40 feet and not more than 80 feet between existing trees or trees to be so planted. The provisions of article III of chapter 46 shall be complied with in connection with the planting of any such trees. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-10; Code 1997, § 78-10) 
Sec. 40-11. - Enforcement of compliance. 
    The subdivider's improvement bond (performance bond) will not be released, nor will building permits be issued, until all of the regulations of this article have been complied with. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-11; Code 1997, § 78-11) 
Sec. 40-12. - Improvements to be installed and accepted before issuance of building permits. 
    Before building permits are issued in any subdivision, the improvements, consisting of the necessary sewers, water mains and paving, as approved by the city engineer, shall have been installed and accepted by the city. The installation of sidewalks shall be under the direction of the city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-12; Code 1997, § 78-12) 
Sec. 40-13. - Conditions for approval of subdivision prior to installation of improvements. 
    The council may, in its discretion, approve any subdivision plat without such improvements being first installed if the owners of the property platted shall give to the city a bond conditioned upon the owners either within 12 months after such approval installing such improvements at their own expense, or petitioning the proper public authorities for such improvements on the basis of special assessment of all the cost thereof against the property benefited within such time as will reasonably permit such installation within 12 months after such approval. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-13; Code 1997, § 78-13) 
Sec. 40-14. - Street widths. 
    All streets, which shall be platted or dedicated to the public's use within the limits of the city shall be of a width to be established by the council. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-14; Code 1997, § 78-14) 
Sec. 40-15. - Sewer system. 
    No plat of land shall be approved by the council until a sewer system satisfactory to the city engineer or council shall have been installed at the expense of the owners of the property platted; provided that the council may, in its discretion, approve any such plat without such improvements being first installed if the owners of the property platted shall give to the city a bond conditioned upon the owners either within 12 months after such approval installing such improvements at their own expense, or petitioning the proper public authorities for such improvements on the basis of special assessment of all the cost thereof against the property benefited within such time as will reasonably permit such installation within 12 months after such approval. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-15; Code 1997, § 78-15) 
Sec. 40-16. - Street pavement and drainage. 
    No plat of land shall be approved by the council until pavement on streets on which lots front and a system of surface drains on all streets satisfactory to the city engineer or council shall have been installed at the expense of the owners of the property platted; provided that the council may, in its discretion, approve any such plat without such improvements being first installed if the owners of the property platted shall give to the city a bond conditioned upon the owners either installing such improvements at their own expense, or petitioning the proper public authorities for such improvements on a basis of special assessment of all the cost thereof against the property benefited within such time as will reasonably permit such installation within 12 months after such approval. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-16; Code 1997, § 78-16) 
Sec. 40-17. - Sidewalks. 
    No plat of land shall be approved by the council until sidewalks on both sides of each street not less than five feet wide (except that sidewalks along Mack Avenue frontage shall be not be less than six feet wide), satisfactory to the city engineer or council, shall have been installed at the expense of the owners of the property platted; provided that the council may, in its discretion, approve any such plat without such improvements being first installed if the owners of the property platted shall give to the city a bond conditioned upon the owners within 12 months after such approval installing such improvements at their own expense. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-17; Code 1997, § 78-17) 
Sec. 40-18. - Water mains and fire hydrants. 
    No plat of land shall be approved by the city council until the following improvements shall have been installed at the expense of the owner of the property and in a manner satisfactory to the city council: 
(1)  Water mains. Water mains shall be constructed and laid in all streets, and connections shall be established with the sources of supply of the city. 
(2)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants of a kind and size to be approved by the city engineer or by the division of public works shall be installed along all streets not more than 500 feet apart. The location of the hydrants shall be approved by the department of public safety. 
The council may, in its discretion, approve any such plat without such improvements being first installed if the owners of the property platted shall give to the city a bond conditioned upon the owners either, within 12 months after such approval, installing such improvements at their own expense, or petitioning the proper public authorities for such improvements on a basis of special assessment of all the cost thereof against the property benefited within such time as will reasonably permit such installation within 12 months after such approval. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-18; Code 1997, § 78-18) 
Sec. 40-19. - Landscaping of parkways and culs-de-sac. 
    It shall be the duty of the subdivider of property which provides for culs-de-sac or parkways, which may hereafter be presented for approval, to landscape all culs-de-sac and parkways, providing that the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the space between the property line and the street line of residential lots, where such lots abut upon any cul-de-sac or parkway. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-19; Code 1997, § 78-19) 
Sec. 40-20. - Removal of debris. 
    It shall be the duty of the subdivider to provide for the removal of all dead trees, logs and debris from the premises and to provide for the removal of all trees from the street right-of-way and the sidewalk right-of-way. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-20; Code 1997, § 78-20) 
Sec. 40-21. - Street signs and traffic signs. 
    The subdivider of any plat shall be required to install all street signs and traffic signs and, in order to guarantee the installation thereof, shall be required to deposit with the clerk a sum of money sufficient to cover the costs of such installations. The street and traffic signs shall be of such design and structural requirements as shall be in conformity with the standards approved and used by the city. The subdivider may authorize the city to make such installations, using the deposit for such purpose; otherwise, the deposit shall be returned to the subdivider upon compliance with the provisions of this section, and in default thereof may be forfeited to the city and used to cover the cost of the required installations. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-21; Code 1997, § 78-21) 
Sec. 40-22. - Underground installation of utility wires-Deposit required. 
    The subdivider of any land shall be required to install all utility service wiring below the ground within one year and, in order to guarantee the installation thereof, shall be required to deposit with the clerk a sum of money or a surety bond sufficient to cover the cost of such installation as determined by the city engineer. The deposit shall be returned to the subdivider upon compliance with the provisions of this section, and in default thereof may be forfeited to the city to be used to cover the cost of such installation. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-22; Code 1997, § 78-22) 
Sec. 40-23. - Same-Waiver of requirements. 
    The provisions of section 40-22 may be waived in total or in part by the council upon application of the subdivider when it can be shown that the location of such proposed plat is adjacent to an existing developed plat wherein the utility service lines are above ground. 
(Code 1975, § 5-20-23; Code 1997, § 78-23) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Inspection fee; determination of defective equipment. 
    There shall be an inspection fee, the amount thereof established by resolution of the city council adopted from time to time, for each inspection of a motor vehicle conducted by the department of public safety made to determine that defective equipment has been corrected. Such fee shall be payable to the city in advance of such inspection. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1-10; Code 1997, § 82-1) 
State Law reference- Vehicle inspections, MCL 257.217c. 
Secs. 42-2-42-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-21-42-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSSING GUARDS 

Sec. 42-44. - Position created. 
    The position of crossing guard is hereby created to perform police traffic duties under the direction of the director of public safety and in compliance with such rules and regulations as shall be promulgated by the director. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-1; Code 1997, § 82-46) 
Sec. 42-45. - Duties. 
    The duty of the crossing guard shall be to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic at street intersections and other places in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-2; Code 1997, § 82-47) 
Sec. 42-46. - Appointment; number; work assignments. 
    Crossing guards shall be appointed by the director of public safety, who shall determine the number to be so appointed and who shall assign such crossing guards to their respective posts of duty, and the director shall also designate the hours and days when such guards shall be on duty. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-3; Code 1997, § 82-48) 
Sec. 42-47. - Oath of office; equipment. 
    Crossing guards shall be administered the oath of office by the city clerk and shall be identified by such badges, wearing apparel and insignia as the director of public safety shall determine, and shall be provided with such equipment as shall be necessary for the proper discharge of their duties. However, no crossing guard shall have on his person, when on duty, any firearm, blackjack, handcuffs or other similar or like police equipment. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-4; Code 1997, § 82-49) 
Sec. 42-48. - Rules and regulations; compensation. 
    The director of public safety shall promulgate rules relating to the qualifications, appointment and removal of crossing guards. Such persons shall be compensated at the rate from time to time fixed by the annual city salary and wage schedule. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-5; Code 1997, § 82-50) 
Sec. 42-49. - Authority limited. 
    No crossing guard shall exercise any authority as such a guard, wear the uniform or insignia of the position or display the badge of the office in any attempt to exercise authority except as shall be required during the performance of assigned duties in the regulation of traffic at such guard's assigned post. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-6; Code 1997, § 82-51) 
Sec. 42-50. - Neglect of duty. 
    No crossing guard shall knowingly or willfully neglect or refuse to respond for an assignment of duty when so required under the rules and regulations as promulgated by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15-7; Code 1997, § 82-52) 
Secs. 42-51-42-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES 

Sec. 42-74. - Findings. 
    The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and accidents in the city involve drivers who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or a controlled substance. In addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or a controlled substance, there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and/or financial burden is placed upon the department of public services and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or a controlled substance. 
(Code 1975, § 8-22-1; Code 1997, § 82-76; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-75. - Expenses for which reimbursement may be ordered. 
    As part of the sentence for a conviction of any of the following offenses, in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the court may order the person convicted to reimburse the city or other local unit of government for expenses incurred in relation to that incident, including but not limited to expenses for an emergency response and expenses for prosecuting the person: 
(1)  Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(2)  Operating a motor vehicle with an unlawful blood alcohol content. 
(3)  Operating a motor vehicle when visibly impaired. 
(4)  A person who is less than 21 years of age operating a motor vehicle with any bodily alcohol content as defined in MCL 257.625(6). 
(5)  Operating a commercial motor vehicle while having a blood alcohol content of 0.04 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(Code 1975, § 8-22-2; Code 1997, § 82-77; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-76. - Reimbursable expenses defined. 
    The expenses for which reimbursement may be ordered include all of the following: 
(1)  The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which the conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the person after the arrest, preparing reports on the incident, investigating the incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including, but not limited to, determining bodily alcohol content and determining the presence of and identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath or urine. 
(2)  The salaries, wages or other compensation, including overtime pay, of fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose. 
(3)  The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, in providing services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose. 
(4)  Reasonable city attorney fees involved in prosecuting the person including review of evidence, responses to demands for discovery, and time expended for attendance at pretrials, trials and appeals. 
(Code 1975, § 8-22-3; Code 1997, § 82-78; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-77. - Multiple units of government incurring expenses. 
    If police, fire department or emergency medical service personnel from more than one unit of government incurred reimbursable expenses, the court may order the person convicted to reimburse each unit of government for the expenses it incurred. 
(Code 1975, § 8-22-4; Code 1997, § 82-79; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-78. - Payment of reimbursable expenses to the clerk of the court. 
    The amount ordered to be paid under this section shall be paid to the clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate amount to the unit or units of government named in the order to receive reimbursement. If not otherwise provided by the court under this section, the reimbursement ordered under this section shall be made immediately. However, the court may require that the person make the reimbursement ordered under this section within a specified period or in specified installments. 
(Code 1997, § 82-80; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-79. - Default in payment of reimbursable expenses. 
    If the person convicted is placed on probation, any reimbursement ordered under this section shall be a condition of that probation. The court may revoke probation if the person fails to comply with the order and if the person has not made a good faith effort to comply with the order. In determining whether to revoke probation, the court shall consider the person's employment status, earning ability, number of dependents, and financial resources, the willfullness of the person's failure to pay, and any other special circumstances that may have a bearing on the person's ability to pay. 
(Code 1997, § 82-81; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-80. - Enforcement of order for reimbursement. 
    An order for reimbursement under this section may be enforced by the local unit of government named in the order to receive the reimbursement in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action. 
(Code 1997, § 82-82; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 42-81. - Imprisonment for failure to make reimbursement. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person shall not be imprisoned, jailed, or incarcerated for a violation of probation, or otherwise, for failure to make a reimbursement as ordered under this section unless the court determines that the person has the resources to pay the ordered reimbursement and has not made a good faith effort to do so. 
(Code 1997, § 82-83; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 2-26-2001) 
Secs. 42-82-42-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE VEHICLE CODE 

Sec. 42-106. - Code adopted. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), is adopted by reference. 
(Code 1997, § 82-391; Ord. No. 793, 5-17-2004) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 42-107. - References in code. 
    References in the state vehicle code to "local authorities" shall mean the city. 
(Code 1997, § 82-392; Ord. No. 793, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 42-108. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the state vehicle code are adopted by reference; provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provisions of the state vehicle code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days, except as authorized by specific state statute. 
(Code 1997, § 82-394; Ord. No. 793, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 849, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 42-109. - Amendments. 
(a)  Section 627 of the state vehicle code (MCL 257.627) is hereby amended to add the following specific speed limits established in the city: 
(1)  On Mack Avenue from the north city limits to the south city limits, a maximum speed not exceeding 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  On Vernier Road from the west city limits to the east city limits, a maximum speed not exceeding 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  On all other streets, a maximum speed not to exceed 25 miles per hour. 
(4)  On all alleys, a maximum speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  Any amendments made to the state vehicle code after enactment of this article are hereby adopted by reference into this article. 
(c)  Public Act No. 61 of 2003 (MCL 257.625 et seq.) is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference. 
(d)  All other amendments to the state vehicle code which were enacted since October 21, 2002, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1997, § 82-395; Ord. No. 793, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 42-110. - High BAC. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference MCL 257.625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code prohibiting operating a vehicle with an alcohol blood content of 0.17 grams or more as specifically enumerated by MCL 257.625. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
(3)  A fine of not less than $200.00, or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 849, 8-20-2012) 
Secs. 42-111-42-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 42-132. - Adoption. 
    The uniform traffic code for cities, townships and villages, promulgated by the director of the department of state police and published in the Michigan Administrative Code, 2002 MR 20, and amendments as published in the state administrative code, in accordance with Public Act No. 62 of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq.), as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as modified in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1-1; Code 1997, § 82-101) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt uniform traffic code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 42-133. - References. 
    Reference in the uniform traffic code for cities, townships and villages to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1-2; Code 1997, § 82-102) 
Sec. 42-134. - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of the uniform traffic code adopted in this article are hereby amended as set forth in this section, and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Section numbers set out in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections in the uniform traffic code. 
R 28.1125 The director of public safety. Whenever the term "chief of police" or the term "traffic engineer" is used in such code, it shall be construed and be deemed to mean the director of public safety of the city. 
R 28.1153 Traffic control orders. 
(1)  The authority to regulate traffic contained in the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be exercised by the director of public safety by the issuance of traffic control orders that shall specify the rules and regulations adopted or established by the director. Such traffic control orders shall become effective upon being filed with the city clerk and upon erection of adequate signs or signals giving notice of the existence of such regulation, if signs or signals are required by the provisions of this article pertaining to such regulation. Traffic control orders may be either temporary or permanent and all such orders shall be filed with the city clerk. All such orders and any action modifying or repealing such orders shall be kept in a separate book by the city clerk to be known as the traffic control order book. 
(2)  Copies of traffic control orders certified by the city clerk to be a true transcript compared by the clerk with the original in the clerk's office shall be evidence in all courts and proceedings in like manner as the original would be if produced. If it shall appear that a traffic control sign, signal or device conforming to the provisions of the ordinance from which this article is derived was erected or in place when the alleged violation of this article occurred, such showing shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of a lawful traffic control order authorizing such traffic control, sign, signal or device, and it shall be unnecessary for the prosecution to affirmatively show the existence of a valid traffic control order in such cases, unless and until such presumption is rebutted by competent evidence. 
R 28.1154 The following duties prescribed for the clerk shall relate to that person who is designated by the city administrator of this governmental unit. 
R 28.1410a Speed limits. The following speed limits are hereby established in the city: 
On Mack Avenue from the north city limits to the south city limits, a maximum speed not exceeding 35 miles per hour. 
On Vernier Road from the west city limits to the east city limits, a maximum speed not exceeding 35 miles per hour. 
On all other streets, a maximum speed not to exceed 25 miles per hour. 
On all alleys, a maximum speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinbefore set forth, any person driving a vehicle upon any street, highway or alley of the city shall drive such vehicle at a careful and prudent speed not greater than or less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and width of the street, highway or alley and any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive any vehicle upon any street, highway or alley in the city at a speed greater than will permit such person to bring such vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead; 
Nor shall any person drive any vehicle in the city under any circumstances when such speed would be unsafe; provided, that where a different speed is lawfully established and posted such lawfully established and posted speed shall prevail, notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinabove provided. 
R 28.1713 (a) Hitchhiking. No person shall solicit a ride in any motor vehicle, other than a commercially operated bus or taxicab, in any manner or by any gesture, sign or other method within the limits of the city. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
R 28.1713 (b) Soliciting rides; business. No person shall stand in any street, alley, highway or other public place for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle traveling upon any street, alley, highway or other public place unless previously authorized to do so by the city council. 
R 28.1810 (u) Parking between sidewalk and street curbing. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on that portion of the property located between the lot lines and the curb contiguous to Mack Avenue, unless authorized by written approval by the director of public safety. 
R 28.1810 (v) Trespass on posted property. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any premises with a motor vehicle or park such vehicle upon such premises when such premises has posted thereon signs prohibiting such action, or to enter upon or park a motor vehicle upon such premises contrary to the posted permitted parking regulations on such premises. 
(Code 1975, §§ 9-1-4-9-1-6, 9-1-9, 9-1-13; Code 1997, § 82-103; Ord. No. 741, § 1, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 760, § 1, 11-20-2000) 
Secs. 42-135-42-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION 

Sec. 42-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle means any motor-driven or horse-driven vehicle used for the purpose of carrying or transporting materials, merchandise, equipment or the like as distinguished from a vehicle used for transporting passengers only. 
    Through traffic means all commercial vehicular traffic which has for its destination a place without the city limits, or which originates without the city limits and has for its destination or route of travel Mack Avenue within the city limits. 
(Code 1975, § 9-5-2; Code 1997, § 82-131) 
Sec. 42-153. - Commercial traffic restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle in, along and upon Bournemouth Avenue, for through traffic purposes, from Mack Avenue to the west city limits. 
(Code 1975, § 9-5-1; Code 1997, § 82-132) 
Sec. 42-154. - Designated; placement of stop signs. 
(a)  The following through streets are hereby designated and established in the city: 
(1)  Bramcaster Road from Prestwick Road to Huntington Boulevard. 
(2)  Charlevoix Avenue from Vernier Road to the north city limits. 
(3)  Eastbourne Road from Prestwick Road to Stanhope Avenue. 
(4)  Fairway Drive from Fairford Road to Sunningdale Drive. 
(5)  Goethe Avenue from Anita Avenue to Eight Mile Road. 
(6)  Helen Avenue from Norwood Drive to Brys Drive. 
(7)  Holiday Road from Cook Road to Sunningdale Drive. 
(8)  Jackson Avenue from Kenmore Drive to Van Antwerp Avenue. 
(9)  Mack Avenue from the south city limits to the north city limits. 
(10)  Marter Road from Vernier Road to the north city limits. 
(11)  Morningside Drive from Cook Road to Blairmoor Court. 
(12)  River Road from Brys Drive north to Moorland Drive. 
(13)  Van K Drive from Brys Drive south to Rosedale Court. 
(14)  Vernier Road from the west city limits to the east city limits. 
(15)  Wedgewood Drive from Fairford Road to Hidden Lane. 
(16)  Wedgewood Drive from Vernier Road to Moorland Drive. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director of public safety to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or streets or intersecting that portion thereof as described in subsection (a) of this section unless at any such intersection traffic is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two of such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the director of public safety upon the basis of an engineering or traffic study. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1-3; Code 1997, § 82-151) 
Secs. 42-155-42-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a); stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.672 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-176. - Special permits. 
(a)  Physically incapacitated war veterans entitled to and/or using vehicles under federal legislation, or similar special constructed vehicles, shall be entitled to park such vehicle for periods not to exceed 24 hours at any one time on streets and in areas, including metered areas, where parking is limited but not prohibited, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any veteran so entitled shall possess a card issued by the director of public safety certifying that the holder thereof meets the requirements of this section. Such card shall be kept in the veteran's personal possession and be exhibited upon the request of any public safety officer. The vehicle, when parked, shall carry a sticker conspicuously displayed at all times on the sun visor, such sticker to be issued by the director of public safety and indicating the right to park under the provisions of this article. The director of public safety may limit the privilege granted to certain areas or streets, and may impose such other restrictions as the director may deem necessary. 
(2)  The unauthorized possession or use of such card and/or sticker is hereby declared a violation of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this section relative to certain parking privileges for physically incapacitated war veterans may be extended to other physically incapacitated persons by the director of public safety upon a proper showing of a need therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1-7; Code 1997, § 82-177) 
Sec. 42-177. - Parking of commercial vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle on any street in districts R-1 and R-2 for a period longer than actually required in connection with the delivery of merchandise or materials or the rendering of any services or performance of any building construction, and in all other districts, no such vehicle shall be permitted to park between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for making deliveries of merchandise or materials or the rendering of any services or performance of any building construction, and then only for the actual time required to make such delivery of merchandise or materials or the rendering of any services or performance of any building construction; provided that where parking is prohibited, restricted or limited as to time, such restrictions or limitations shall be observed notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1-8; Code 1997, § 82-178) 
Sec. 42-178. - Residential parking and semicircular drives. 
    For cross reference purposes on residential parking and semicircular drives, see section 50-531. 
(Code 1997, § 82-206; Ord. No. 777, § 2, 2-25-2002) 
Secs. 42-179-42-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY-OWNED PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 42-210. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, motor scooter, motorcycle or other self-propelled vehicle. 
    Municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lot and parking lot mean such properties which are owned or leased by the city and designated by the council as metered off-street parking lots. 
    Operator means and includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner. 
    Parking space means any area marked off by lines or markings upon the pavement of any such parking lot intended to be used for the parking of vehicles. 
    Service driveways means those portions of the parking lot set aside and intended to be used for means of ingress and egress to the parking lot and the parking spaces. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-1; Code 1997, § 82-231) 
Sec. 42-211. - Council to establish. 
    The council shall, from time to time, establish and designate properties owned or leased by the city as municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lots, which shall be subject to the regulations and provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-2; Code 1997, § 82-232) 
Sec. 42-212. - Use of lots to comply with division. 
    The use of municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lots shall be in conformity with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-3; Code 1997, § 82-233) 
Sec. 42-213. - Plans and layout. 
    The city administrator is hereby instructed to lay out or cause to be laid out municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lots so as to provide for parking spaces, service driveways and for lines or markings painted or placed upon the pavement of such parking lots to indicate such parking spaces and service driveways. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-4; Code 1997, § 82-234) 
Sec. 42-214. - Method of parking. 
    It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle in a municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lot in such a position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area so designated as a parking space by such lines or markings. All vehicles parked or stood in any parking space shall be parked in such a manner so that the front of such vehicle shall be facing the parking meter designated for the parking space so occupied. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-5; Code 1997, § 82-235) 
Sec. 42-215. - Use of service driveways. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any service driveways for parking purposes or in a direction other than that designated or established by proper markings installed for such purpose of designation. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-6; Code 1997, § 82-236) 
Sec. 42-216. - Meters. 
    The city administrator shall cause to be placed parking meters on each parking space in such manner as to show or display a signal that such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display upon the deposit of the coins required to be so deposited for use of the parking space a signal indicating legal parking or standing for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time which has been or may be established for that parking space upon which such meter is installed, and shall continue to operate from the deposit of such coin or coins therein until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit for the parking space upon which such meter is placed. Each meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of such legal parking time, it will indicate by a mechanical operation and the displaying of a proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-7; Code 1997, § 82-237) 
Sec. 42-217. - Time limits; fees. 
    The city administrator, by and with the consent and approval of the council, shall establish from time to time the maximum time limit for the use of parking spaces and the fees for parking in a municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lot. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-8; Code 1997, § 82-238) 
Sec. 42-218. - Prohibited parking hours. 
    The city administrator is hereby authorized to restrict the hours of the day or night during which municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lots shall be in operation, and it shall be unlawful for any operator to park any vehicle in such parking lot during the prohibited parking period. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-9; Code 1997, § 82-239) 
Sec. 42-219. - Information to be posted. 
    The city administrator shall recommend to the city council regulations to be posted by signs in the city-owned or leased off-street parking lots. Such regulations shall provide for the hours during which such lot shall be in operation, the meter fees to be charged for legal parking, the restricting of any such lot to use by certain authorized vehicles or the spaces thereon by certain authorized vehicles, and any other information required to properly advise the operators of vehicles using such parking lots of the regulations affecting the use thereof. Upon the approval of such regulations by the city council, such lots shall be posted accordingly. It shall be deemed a violation of this division for the operator or owner of a motor vehicle to park such vehicle contrary to the regulations posted at such lots. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-10; Code 1997, § 82-240) 
Sec. 42-220. - Vehicle operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator to operate any vehicle in any parking lot at a speed in excess of the speed posted therein, or in a careless and heedless manner, in willful or wanton disregard for the rights or safety of others or without due caution and circumspection, and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or likely to endanger any person or property. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-11; Code 1997, § 82-241) 
Sec. 42-221. - Deposit of coins. 
    When any vehicle shall be parked or shall be left standing in any parking space, the operator of such vehicle, upon entering such parking space, shall immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the parking meter coins of United States currency for the lawful period of parking desired by such operator, and shall place in operation such meter and such parking space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking or standing time which has been prescribed for such parking space, and which has been paid for by the meter deposit. If such vehicle shall remain parked or shall remain standing in any such parking space beyond the parking or standing time limit fixed for each parking space, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking or standing. In that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking or standing time, and the parking or standing of a vehicle in such parking space shall be a violation of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-12; Code 1997, § 82-242) 
Sec. 42-222. - Overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle to stand or to be parked overtime beyond the period of legal parking or standing time established for any parking space, or to stand at or remain parked at a meter after the time period paid for by the deposit of a coin in such meter has expired, as indicated by the red violation tag of such meter. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-13; Code 1997, § 82-243) 
Sec. 42-223. - Parking time extension. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter additional coins of United States currency for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking or standing time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking or standing time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which such parking meter is placed. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-14; Code 1997, § 82-244) 
Sec. 42-224. - Substitute coins and slugs. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, devices or substitutes for any coin of the United States. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-15; Code 1997, § 82-245) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.801. 
Sec. 42-225. - Damage to meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter, sign or other equipment or structure installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-16; Code 1997, § 82-246) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 42-226. - Vehicle owner responsible for violations. 
    In any proceeding for violation of the provisions of this division or any parking rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of the parking laws of the city, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where such violation occurred. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-17; Code 1997, § 82-247) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.675c. 
Sec. 42-227. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this division, or any amendments thereto, are hereby levied and assessed to provide for the proper regulation and control of parking in the municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lots. The coins deposited in such meters shall be collected by the duly authorized agents of the city treasurer, and shall be deposited by the treasurer in a special fund to be known as the parking meter fund, from which fund, upon duly approved vouchers, payments shall be made to cover the cost of acquiring the property for such parking lots and for installing parking meters, costs of supervision, inspection service, maintenance, supply of parts, the cost of collection and the enforcement of this division. Any balance remaining after the use of the funds as provided in this section shall be used for the reimbursement of funds advanced for the acquisition, improvement and placing in operation of such parking lots, for the acquisition, construction and operation of additional parking facilities, or for such other lawful purpose as the council shall direct. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4-18; Code 1997, § 82-248) 
Secs. 42-228-42-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS AND PARKING METER ZONES 

Sec. 42-248. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, motor scooter, motorcycle or other self-propelled vehicle. 
    Municipally owned off-street parking lot and parking lot mean any property owned or leased by the city and designated by the city council as an off-street parking lot. 
    Operator means and includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle, whether such operation shall be by the title holder or his agent, employee or permittee. 
    Parking space means any area marked off by lines painted upon the pavement of any off-street parking lot or street intended to be used for the parking of vehicles and designating such parking area. 
    Service driveway means those portions of municipally owned off-street parking lots set aside and intended to be used for means of ingress and egress to and from the parking lot and parking spaces. 
    Street means any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public place established for the use of vehicles. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-1; Code 1997, § 82-271) 
Sec. 42-249. - Designation of off-street parking lots. 
    The city council shall, from time to time, establish and designate properties owned or leased by the city as off-street parking lots, which lots shall be subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-2; Code 1997, § 82-272) 
Sec. 42-250. - Establishment of parking spaces. 
    The city administrator is hereby authorized to establish parking spaces on streets and municipally owned off-street parking lots so as to provide for parking spaces on such streets and lots and service driveways in such lots and to establish pavement markings for such parking spaces and service driveways. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-3; Code 1997, § 82-273) 
Sec. 42-251. - Parking meter zones-Designation. 
    The city administrator is hereby authorized and directed to establish immediately, and from time to time hereafter, where in the administrator's opinion traffic conditions warrant the same, zones to be known as parking meter zones, upon such streets and municipally owned off-street parking lots as are selected by the city administrator for the location of such zones, and therein the city administrator shall cause parking meters to be installed, and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated as provided in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-4; Code 1997, § 82-274) 
Sec. 42-252. - Same-Placement and operation. 
    Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as provided in section 42-251 shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places described in this section. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display upon the deposit of coins, in United States currency, therein, a signal indicating legal parking or standing for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time which has been or may be established for that area or zone of the street or parking lots upon which such parking meter is installed, and shall continue to operate from the time of the deposit of such coin therein until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit for the part of the street or parking lot upon which such meter is placed. Each meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of such legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and the displaying of proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-5; Code 1997, § 82-275) 
Sec. 42-253. - Method of parking. 
    Each vehicle parking or standing alongside of or next to any parking space on any street or upon any municipally owned off-street parking lot shall park or stand within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division to park or stand any vehicle in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. When a parking space in any meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parking or standing in such parking space shall be parked or stood so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be alongside of and nearest to the parking meter. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-6; Code 1997, § 82-276) 
Sec. 42-254. - Use of meters. 
    When any vehicle shall be parked or left standing in any space alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle, upon entering such parking space, shall immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin or coins of United States currency in such parking meter, and shall place in operation such meter, and such parking space then may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking or standing time which has been prescribed for the part of the street or lot on which such parking space is located. If such vehicle shall remain parked or shall remain standing in any such parking space beyond the parking or standing time limit fixed for each parking space, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking or standing, and in that event such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking or standing time, and the parking or standing of a vehicle where any such meter is located shall be a violation of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-7; Code 1997, § 82-277) 
Sec. 42-255. - Overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to stand or to be parked overtime beyond the period of legal parking or standing time established for any parking meter zone, or to stand at or remain parked at a meter after the time period paid for by the deposit of a coin in such meter has expired, as indicated by the red violation tag of such meter. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-8; Code 1997, § 82-278) 
Sec. 42-256. - Extension of parking time. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter additional coins of United States currency for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking or standing time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking or standing time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which such parking meter is placed. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-9; Code 1997, § 82-279) 
Sec. 42-257. - Use of slugs, substitute coins. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs, devices or substitutes for any coin of the United States. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-10; Code 1997, § 82-280) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.801. 
Sec. 42-258. - Damage to meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-11; Code 1997, § 82-281) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 42-259. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters, as provided in this division or any amendments thereof, are hereby levied and assessed to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the streets. The coins deposited in such meters shall be collected by the duly authorized agents of the city treasurer and shall be deposited by the treasurer in a special fund to be known as the parking meter fund, from which fund, upon duly approved vouchers, payments shall be made to cover the cost of purchasing, acquiring and installing parking meters, the cost of supervision, inspection service, maintenance, supply of parts, the cost of collection, and the enforcement of this division. Any balance remaining after use of the funds as provided in this section shall be used, upon due appropriation by the council, for the acquisition and installation of other traffic control devices and for the acquisition, construction and operation of off-street parking facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-13; Code 1997, § 82-282) 
Sec. 42-260. - Time limits; fees; signs. 
    The city administrator, by and with the consent and approval of the city council, shall establish from time to time the maximum time limit for the use of parking spaces and the fees for parking in any such parking spaces, which shall be deposited in parking meters. The city administrator is authorized to restrict the hours during which such parking spaces shall be available for parking of vehicles and shall cause to be erected and maintained signs in each parking lot and on the streets indicating the hours during which such parking spaces shall be available for parking, the meter fees to be charged for legal parking and any other information as may be required to advise operators of the regulations affecting the use of such parking spaces. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-14; Code 1997, § 82-283) 
Sec. 42-261. - Public sidewalk crossings. 
    The crossing of public sidewalks for entrance to or exit from any parking lot shall be permitted in only such cases where there shall be no traffic or pedestrian hazard created. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-16; Code 1997, § 82-285) 
Sec. 42-262. - Removal of ignition key in parked vehicle by police. 
    Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this division, such police officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle and to deliver the key to the police officer in charge of the nearest police station. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-18; Code 1997, § 82-287) 
Sec. 42-263. - Residential streets, hours when prohibited. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on any residential street within the city limits between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-19; Code 1997, § 82-288) 
Sec. 42-264. - On-street parking permit-Authorized. 
    The director of public safety or the director's representative may issue a permit for on-street parking to any resident who demonstrates that the physical layout of such person's residence is such that compliance with this division is impossible or would impose extreme hardship. The director also may issue such a permit upon a showing of any other circumstances of a permanent nature that would make compliance with this division impossible or would impose an extreme hardship upon such resident. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-10; Code 1997, § 82-289) 
Sec. 42-265. - Same-Stickers; expiration. 
    If the director of public safety or the director's representative shall determine that any resident shall be entitled to a permit for on-street parking in accordance with section 42-264, such permit shall be in the form of a sticker which shall be affixed to the lower left front windshield. Permits shall be issued for specific vehicles only and shall not be transferable. Permanent permits shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall be renewable upon the showing of continued need. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-21; Code 1997, § 82-290) 
Sec. 42-266. - Temporary permits-Authorized. 
    The director of public safety or the director's representative may issue temporary permits for a fixed period not to exceed 30 days to residents who demonstrate temporary circumstances which make compliance with this division impossible or unduly harsh. Such circumstances shall include, but not be restricted to, situations involving home improvement work, property maintenance programs and other specific events. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-22; Code 1997, § 82-291) 
Sec. 42-267. - Same-Form and display. 
    The temporary permits authorized under section 42-266 shall be in the form of a card which shall be affixed to the sun visor and be displayed so as to be visible through the front windshield while such vehicle is parked on a residential street during the hours of restrictive parking. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-23; Code 1997, § 82-292) 
Sec. 42-268. - Parking in driveway approach. 
(a)  It shall be lawful to park one motor vehicle, other than a commercial vehicle or motorhome, in a side driveway approach of corner properties provided, however: 
(1)  Such parking area on the driveway approach shall be approved for parking by the director of public safety or the director's designated representative. Such parking area, not to exceed a total of 25 feet, shall be paved, and it shall be determined by the director of public safety or the director's designated representative that a motor vehicle may be parked in such driveway approach without creating or tending to create a traffic safety hazard. Upon such a determination, the department of public safety shall issue a one-time permit approving such driveway approach for parking. 
(2)  That upon approval of such parking area, parking thereon shall be restricted to the owners or occupants of the property contiguous thereto or to persons having permission of such owners or occupants. 
(3)  That motor vehicles parked in an approved driveway approach shall be parked facing with the flow of traffic and parallel to the curb so as not to extend over either the curb or sidewalk. 
(b)  Should any application for approval of a driveway approach parking area be denied, the applicant may, within 30 days of such denial, file a written appeal to the city council for a review of such decision. The city council shall review such denial and the reasons therefor and may uphold, reverse, or modify the determination of the director of public safety or the director's designated representative. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-24; Code 1997, § 82-293) 
Sec. 42-269. - Parking on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Complaint for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-25; Code 1997, § 82-294) 
Sec. 42-270. - Violations deemed civil infractions. 
    All parking meter violations and other parking violations designated as civil infractions by state law shall be deemed to be civil infractions under the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3-26; Code 1997, § 82-295) 
Sec. 42-271. - Double parking. 
    A vehicle shall not be parked, except if necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the law, or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, on the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(Ord. No. 843, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 42-272. - Fee schedule. 
    Parking fees for article VI violations regarding stopping, standing and parking may be set from time to time by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 843, 9-12-2011) 
Secs. 42-273-42-288. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY 

Sec. 42-289. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.). 
    Commercial vehicle means that term as defined in section 7 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.7). 
    Motor carrier means a carrier of passengers or property in a commercial vehicle and includes a person who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or that assigns employees to operate the vehicle. The term "motor carrier" includes a motor carrier's agents, officers and representatives, as well as employees responsible for hiring, supervising, training, assigning or dispatching of drivers and employees concerned with the installation, inspection and maintenance of motor vehicle equipment and accessories. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle which is self-propelled or a vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Operation means being in actual physical control of a vehicle, regardless of whether the person is licensed under the state vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Out-of-service means that process established under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.). 
    Person means every natural person, partnership, association or corporation and their legal successors. 
    Trailer means a vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Truck means a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck tractor means a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-1; Code 1997, § 82-321; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Sec. 42-290. - Drivers, hours of operation restricted. 
(a)  A motor carrier shall not permit or require a driver of a commercial motor vehicle, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the driver's services, to drive for any period after having been on duty 60 hours in any seven consecutive days if the employing motor carrier does not operate every day of the week, or having been on duty 70 hours in any period of eight consecutive days if the employing motor carrier operates commercial motor vehicles every day of the week. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following drivers if their total driving time does not exceed 40 hours in any period of seven consecutive days: 
(1)  Any driver-salesperson. 
(2)  Any driver delivering home heating fuel from the months of October through April in a commercial motor vehicle of less than 40,000 pound gross vehicle weight. 
(3)  Any driver involved with the pickup or delivery of crude oil products driving the time when weight limitations are imposed due to seasonal climatic changes. 
(4)  Any driver of a commercial motor vehicle engaged in seasonal construction related activities within a 100-air mile radius of the normal work reporting location. 
(5)  Any driver of a commercial motor vehicle which is being used in the delivery of beverages to retail businesses. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-2; Code 1997, § 82-322; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Sec. 42-291. - Qualifications of drivers, maintenance personnel. 
    A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not employ, engage, hire or contract for hire any person to operate, drive or maintain, any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, unless the person meets the qualifications as set forth by the act and the department of state police under the authority of the act. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-3; Code 1997, § 82-323) 
Sec. 42-292. - Operators and chauffeurs, license required. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of this city unless that person has a valid operator's or chauffeur's license with the appropriate group designation and endorsements for the type or class of vehicle being operated or towed as required by MCL 257.312e. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-4; Code 1997, § 82-324) 
Sec. 42-293. - Physical qualification of operators; possession of medical examiner certificate. 
(a)  A person shall not drive a commercial motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of this city unless he is physically qualified to do so and, except as provided by the act, has on his person the original, or a photostatic copy, of a medical examiner's certificate that he is physically qualified to drive a commercial vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-5; Code 1997, § 82-325; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Sec. 42-294. - Safety standards for equipment and devices. 
    An individual, partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate any truck, truck tractor or trailer or permit any person to drive any bus, truck or truck tractor, or certain other vehicle, which does not meet driver or operator safety standards, safety standards for equipment and devices on buses, trucks, truck tractors or trailers, or certain other vehicles, and the loading and unloading thereof as set forth in the motor carrier safety act (MCL 480.11 et seq.), and rules promulgated by the department of state police under the authority of the act. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-6; Code 1997, § 82-326) 
Sec. 42-295. - Facilities, safety standards for operation and maintenance. 
    An individual, partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate or maintain any facility used in connection with the transportation of persons or property by any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, which facility does not meet safety standards for the operation and maintenance of such facility as set forth in the act and rules promulgated by the department of state police under the authority of the act. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-7; Code 1997, § 82-327) 
Sec. 42-296. - Rules and regulations of state police department. 
    The rules and regulations promulgated by the department of state police under the authority of the act shall be enforced in conjunction with the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-8; Code 1997, § 82-328) 
Sec. 42-297. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to a unit of government or its employees, officers or representatives or to a motor vehicle, truck, truck tractor or trailer owned or operated thereby, except as provided in section 601a of the state vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.601a). 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-9; Code 1997, § 82-329) 
Sec. 42-298. - Violation declared misdemeanor; notice to appear. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any person, driver or operator who violates this article or a rule promulgated under the act, or any owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, or an officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by a court that is the owner or user of a vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive a bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, in violation of this article or a rule promulgated under the act, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a fine of not more than $250.00 for each violation. 
(b)  A public safety officer, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to the act, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-10; Code 1997, § 82-330; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Sec. 42-299. - Serious safety defect; fine. 
(a)  A driver or operator or an owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, or any officer or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court that is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate a vehicle with a serious safety defect is subject to a fine of not more than $300.00 for each violation. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "serious safety defect" means a violation of the act or a rule promulgated pursuant to the act relative to brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, taillights, brake lights and turn signals that result in the vehicle being placed out of service. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-11; Code 1997, § 82-331) 
Sec. 42-300. - Motor carrier fuel tax license required; penalty. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to the motor carrier fuel tax act, being Public Act No. 119 of 1980 (MCL 207.211 et seq.), and particularly, section 5 of such act (MCL 207.215), shall be affixed to the right-hand side of the cab of every commercial motor vehicle required to hold a license pursuant to such act. 
(b)  Every person or entity convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-12; Code 1997, § 82-332) 
Sec. 42-301. - Driving vehicle of size or weight exceeding stated limitations. 
(a)  Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit to be driven or moved on a street or highway in this city a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in this article or otherwise in violation of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article governing size, weight and load shall not apply to fire apparatus or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued as provided in the state vehicle code. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-13; Code 1997, § 82-333) 
Sec. 42-302. - Width of vehicle or load. 
(a)  The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe, agricultural products or unprocessed logs, pulpwood or wood bolts shall not exceed 108 inches. 
(c)  If a vehicle which is equipped with pneumatic tires is operated on a street or highway in this city, the maximum width from the outside of one wheel and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and tire shall not exceed 102 inches, and the outside width of the body of the vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches. 
(d)  The total outside width of a bus shall not exceed 102 inches. 
(e)  The city may designate a street or highway in the city as a street or highway on which a person may operate a vehicle or vehicle combination which is not more than 102 inches in width, including load, the operation of which would otherwise be prohibited by this section. The city may require that the owner or lessee of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the vehicle combination secure a permit before operating the vehicle or vehicle combination. This subsection does not restrict the issuance of a special permit under section 42-313 for the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination. This subsection does not permit the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination described in section 42-305 carrying a load described in that section if the operation would otherwise result in a violation of that section. 
(f)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-14; Code 1997, § 82-334) 
Sec. 42-303. - Width of load carried on passenger type vehicle. 
(a)  A passenger type vehicle shall not be operated on a street or highway in the city with a load carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side of the vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-15; Code 1997, § 82-335) 
Sec. 42-304. - Height, weight, length, and equipment specifications; flammable liquids. 
(a)  Maximum height. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a vehicle unloaded or with load shall not exceed a height of 13 feet six inches. The owner of a vehicle which collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct shall be liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by the height of the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted or not. 
(b)  Flammable liquids. A truck, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer manufactured on or after July 27, 1978, shall not be used to transport flammable liquids, in bulk, having a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, if the truck, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer exceeds 11 feet, 81/2 inches in height. However, safety equipment and those appurtenances which are required by state law, when added to a vehicle, may cause the vehicle height to exceed 11 feet, 81/2 inches, but shall not cause the vehicle height to exceed 13 feet six inches. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Length. 
(1)  A vehicle, except a truck tractor, trailer or semitrailer, including load, or articulated buses operated by a local public transit system funded by Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq.), shall not exceed a total length of 40 feet. 
(2)  The total length of a semitrailer operating in a truck tractor and semitrailer combination shall not exceed 53 feet, including load. All semitrailers longer than 50 feet shall have a wheel base of 40.5 feet, plus or minus one-half foot, measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of the rear axles or to the center of the tandem axle assembly if equipped with two axles. 
(3)  Articulated buses operated by a local public transit system funded by Public Act No. 51 of 1951 may operate with a maximum length of 65 feet. 
(4)  A combination of truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer, or truck and semitrailer or trailer, or combination of truck tractor and two semitrailers, including load, shall not exceed a total overall length of 59 feet, except as provided for on routes designated and approved by the state transportation department and by local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction on which a person may operate a combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer or a truck tractor and two semitrailers with no limit on the overall combination length, if the length of each semitrailer or trailer including load does not exceed 281/2 feet or the overall length of the semitrailer and trailer or semitrailers as measured from the front of the first towed unit to the rear of the second towed unit while the units are coupled together does not exceed an overall length of 58 feet, including load. 
(5)  The city may designate streets or highways where the overall length of a truck and trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 65 feet. 
(6)  A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be allowed to operate with more than two axles on the semitrailer. All truck tractor and semitrailer combinations with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall travel exclusively on streets and highways designated by the city. 
(7)  The city shall have the option of prohibiting stops within the city unless the stop occurs along appropriately designated routes, or is necessary for emergency purposes, or to reach shippers, receivers, warehouses and terminals along designated routes. 
(8)  A truck tractor shall not haul more than one trailer and one semitrailer or more than two semitrailers in combination at any one time, except that garbage and refuse haulers may, during daylight hours, haul up to four trailers for garbage and refuse collection purposes, not exceeding in any combination a total length of 55 feet at a speed of not to exceed 15 miles per hour. In determining the length of a vehicle or a vehicle combination under this subsection, the length shall not be considered to include safety and energy conservation devices, including but not limited to impact absorbing bumpers, rearview mirrors, turn signals, lamps, marker lamps, steps and handholds for entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mudflaps or splash and spray suppressant devices, load induced tire bulge, refrigeration or heating units, or air compressors. A device shall be excluded from a determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the carrying of cargo. Semitrailers and trailers shall be measured from the front vertical plane of the foremost transverse load supporting structure to the rearmost transverse load supporting structure. 
(d)  Combinations. If a combination of two semitrailers is pulled by a truck tractor, a fifth wheel connecting assembly which conforms with motor carrier safety rules promulgated by the department of state police pursuant to the act shall be used on each semitrailer. 
(e)  Train of vehicles. A train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load extending more than three feet beyond the front of the train of vehicles or vehicle. 
(f)  Additional lamps and reflectors. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be operated on the streets or highways of this city at the times specified in MCL 257.684, unless equipped with all of the following lamps and reflectors, in addition to any other lamps and reflectors required under the state vehicle code: 
(1)  Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at one-half the distance from the front to the rear of the semitrailer. 
(2)  Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at one-half the distance from the front to the rear of the semitrailer. 
(3)  Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at one-half the distance from the front to the rear and as near to the top of the semitrailer as practicable. 
(g)  Visibility of lamps. A lamp required under subsection (f) of this section shall be lighted at the times specified in MCL 257.684, and shall be visible when lighted at a distance of 500 feet from the side of the semitrailer on which it is mounted. A reflector required under subsection (f) of this section shall be visible at the times specified in MCL 257.684, from all distances from 50 to 500 feet from the semitrailer when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps. 
(h)  Hauling of vehicles. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may operate a combination of truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer, or truck tractor and semitrailer or trailer designed and used exclusively to transport assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles or boats, which does not exceed a total length of 65 feet. Stringer-steered combinations of truck tractor and semitrailer shall not exceed a total length of 75 feet. The load on the combination of vehicles may extend an additional three feet beyond the front and four feet beyond the rear of the combination of vehicles. Retractable extensions used to support and secure the load that do not extend beyond the allowable overhang for the front and rear shall not be included in determining the length of a loaded vehicle or combination of vehicles. As used in this subsection, "stringer-steered" means a semitrailer combination in which the fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the rearmost axle of the power unit. 
(i)  Maximum number of axles. A combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles. 
(j)  Towing. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a number of motor vehicles, wholly or partially assembled, may be transported over the highways of this city in combination, utilizing one tow bar or three saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one of the vehicles in combination. The combination shall not exceed the maximum length of 65 feet for the transportation of assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in the combination shall be adequately and securely fastened together in compliance with regulations of the state and of any federal agency having jurisdiction over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by means of triple saddle mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all wheels which are in contact with the roadway. A combination exceeding 55 feet in length may be operated only on highways and routes approved and designated for that operation by the state transportation department and by the city with respect to streets and highways in the city. 
(k)  Total gross weight. The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer combination or a truck tractor and two semitrailer combination which exceeds 59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per engine net horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in the SAE handbook published by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. (1977). 
(l)  Violations. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-16; Code 1997, § 82-336) 
Sec. 42-305. - Vehicle bumper specifications. 
(a)  A motor vehicle, except truck tractors, pole trailers, vehicles engaged in driveaway-towaway operations, and truck tractors and semitrailer combinations described in subsection (b) of this section that were manufactured after December 31, 1952, that are so constructed that the body or the chassis assembly if without a body has a clearance at the rear end of more than 30 inches from the ground when empty, shall be provided with bumpers or devices serving similar purposes which shall be so constructed and located that: 
(1)  The clearance between the effective bottom of the bumpers or devices and the ground shall not exceed 30 inches with the vehicle empty. 
(2)  The maximum distance between the closest points between bumpers or devices, if more than one is used, shall not exceed 24 inches. 
(3)  The maximum transverse distance from the widest part of the motor vehicle at the rear to bumper or device shall not exceed 18 inches. 
(4)  The bumpers or devices are located not more than 24 inches forward of the extreme rear of the vehicle. 
(5)  The bumpers or devices are substantially constructed and firmly attached. Motor vehicles constructed and maintained so that the body chassis or other parts of the vehicle afford the rear end protection contemplated shall be considered to be in compliance with this section. 
(b)  A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet the frame or body of which extends more than 36 inches beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the roadway shall not be operated on the streets or highways of this city unless equipped with an underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The underride guard shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground clearance of 22 inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on level ground. 
(2)  Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the trailer on both left and right sides. 
(c)  An asphalt hauling vehicle that is required to be equipped with an underride guard under this section shall be exempt from that requirement of this section if the underride guard prevents the vehicle from being attached to an asphalt paving machine. As used in this section, the term "asphalt hauling vehicle" means a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer specifically designed for attachment to asphalt paving machines and which is used for hauling asphalt paving materials. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-17; Code 1997, § 82-337) 
Sec. 42-306. - Prevention of escape of contents. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or move a vehicle, except a vehicle carrying logs or tubular products, on a street or highway in the city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing off or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. The tailgate, faucets and taps on a vehicle shall be securely closed to prevent spillage during transportation whether the vehicle is loaded or empty, and the vehicle shall not have any holes or cracks through which material can escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle engaged in either ice or snow removal shall be exempt from this section. 
(b)  Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not necessary to prove a violation of this section. 
(c)  A vehicle carrying a load, other than logs or tubular products, which is not completely enclosed shall meet either of the following requirements: 
(1)  Have the load covered with firmly secured canvas or a similar type of covering. A device used to comply with the requirements of this subsection (c) shall not exceed a width of 108 inches nor by design or use have the capability to carry cargo by itself. 
(2)  Have the load securely fastened to the body or the frame of the vehicle with binders of adequate number and of adequate breaking strength to prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load. 
(d)  A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle, or causes it to be loaded or unloaded, with knowledge that it is to be driven on a public street or highway in the city in a manner so as to cause a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be prima facie liable for a violation of this section. 
(e)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle carrying logs or tubular products on a street or highway in the city unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  If the logs or tubular products are loaded crosswise or at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the load of logs or tubular products shall be securely fastened to the body or frame of the vehicle with not less than two binders which are secured to the frame at each end of the load and pass over the load so that the frame and binders completely encircle the load. 
(2)  If the vehicle is a truck or trailer carrying logs which has a loading surface more than 33 feet in length and the logs are loaded crosswise or at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be equipped with a center partition located approximately one-half the distance from the front to the rear of the loading surface of the truck or trailer. The center partition shall be either a center mounted hydraulic loader or a center set of stakes and shall be pinned, bolted or otherwise securely fastened to the frame. The load shall be secured as required by subsection (c)(1) of this section and, in addition, the two lengthwise tiedowns shall be attached or threaded through the center partition at a level not less than one foot below the load height. 
(3)  If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, with metal stakes and pockets, the load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows: 
a.  With two tiedowns from frame to frame for every tier. 
b.  So that not more than one-half the diameter of the top log or tubular product extends higher than the stake tops. 
c.  With two cross chains per tier if the load extends more than five feet above the loading surface. 
d.  So that every ten linear feet, and any remaining fraction thereof, has not less than one tiedown from frame to frame. 
(4)  If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, with permanent metal gusseted bunks, the load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows: 
a.  With two tiedowns from frame to frame for every tier. 
b.  So that not more than one-half the diameter of the top log extends higher than the stake top. 
c.  So that every ten linear feet, and any remaining fraction thereof, has not less than one tiedown from frame to frame. 
(5)  The tiedowns, cross chains, stakes and other materials used to secure loads of logs or tubular products as required under subsections (a)-(d) of this section shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Chain shall be of steel and shall be of a strength not less than five-sixteenth inch in diameter "transport," which is embossed with a grade stamp representative of grade 70, or not less than three-eighths inch in diameter "high test," which is embossed with a grade stamp representative of grade 40. Chain shall not be repaired by welding, wire or cold shuts. 
b.  Wire rope shall be of improved plow steel and not less than three-eighths inch in diameter. 
c.  Webbing strap shall be not less than three inches in width and shall have a minimum breaking strength of 14,000 pounds. 
d.  Metal stakes shall be of sufficient strength to hold and contain the load. 
e.  Connecting links and hooks shall be at least as strong as the tiedown material used. 
(f)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to a motor vehicle transporting items of a load which because of their weight will not fall off the moving vehicle and which have their centers of gravity located at least six inches below the top of the enclosure nor to a motor vehicle carrying metal which because of its weight and density is so loaded as to prevent it from dropping or falling off the moving vehicle. 
(g)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles and other equipment engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street in a designated work area. 
(h)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(i)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cross chain means a chain that extends through the load of logs or tubular products and is connected at each end to a side stake. 
    Logs means sawlogs, pulpwood or tree length poles. 
    Tiedown means a high strength material which is used to secure the load of logs or tubular products to the frame or the bed of the vehicle. 
    Tier means a vertical pile or stack of logs or tubular products. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-18; Code 1997, § 82-338) 
Sec. 42-307. - Load extending beyond body of vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in MCL 257.684, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-19; Code 1997, § 82-339) 
Sec. 42-308. - Trailers and towed vehicles; violation. 
(a)  A passenger vehicle shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or having attached to the passenger vehicle more than one vehicle or trailer. 
(b)  The drawbar or other connection between two vehicles, one of which is towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in length from one vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a red flag or other signal or cloth not less than 12 inches both in length and width. 
(c)  A vehicle or trailer drawn by a motor-propelled vehicle shall be so attached to the vehicle with forms of coupling devices which will prevent the vehicle or trailer from being deflected more than six inches from the path of the towing vehicle's wheel. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected to the towing vehicle by suitable safety chains or devices, one on each side of the coupling and at the extreme outer edge of the vehicle, and each chain or device and connection used shall be of sufficient strength to haul the trailer when loaded. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-20; Code 1997, § 82-340) 
Sec. 42-309. - Maximum axle load; distance between axles. 
(a)  (1)  The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds designated in the following provisions, which prescribe the distance between axles: 
a.  When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires. 
b.  When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between axles but more than 31/2 feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 13,000 pounds for high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires. 
c.  When axles are spaced less than 31/2 feet apart, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle. 
(2)  Subsections (a)(1)a-c of the section shall be known as the normal loading maximum. 
(b)  When normal loading is in effect, the city may designate certain streets and highways, or sections of those streets and highways, where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier loading, which designation may be revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle assembly loading shall not exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly, if there is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section, on a legal combination of vehicles only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on the designated highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly and if no other tandem axle assembly in the combination of vehicles exceeds a gross weight of 13,000 pounds per axle. When the maximum gross weight of a combination of vehicles does not exceed 73,280 pounds, two tandem axle assemblies shall be permitted on the designated highways at a gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly. 
(d)  The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by the manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel shall not exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire. 
(e)  During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavements with a concrete base, shall be reduced by 25 percent from the maximum axle load as specified in this article, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other types of roads during these months shall be reduced by 35 percent from the maximum axle loads as specified. The maximum wheel load shall not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire width on concrete and concrete base or 450 pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads during the period the seasonal road restrictions are in effect. 
(f)  The city may suspend the restrictions imposed by this section when and where, in its discretion, conditions of the highways or the public health, safety and welfare so warrant, and may impose the restricted loading requirements of this section on designated streets and highways at any other times that the conditions of the street or highway may require. 
(g)  For the purpose of enforcement of this article, the gross vehicle weight of a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads shall be determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the total weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In addition, the gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing individual axles or by weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight of the group of axles by the number of axles in the group. Pursuant to subsection (h) of this section, the overall gross weight on a group of two or more axles shall be determined by weighing individual axles or several axles, and the total weight of all the axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of the group. 
(h)  The loading maximum in this subsection shall apply to interstate highways and the city may designate a street or highway, or a section of a street or highway, for the operation of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of not more than 80,000 pounds, which are subject to the following load maximums: 
(1)  Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle, including all enforcement tolerances. 
(2)  A tandem axle weight of 34,000 pounds including all enforcement tolerances. 
(3)  An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles equaling: 
W =  (       LN       
N-1  + 12N + 36 )  
Where W equals overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals distance in feet between the extreme of a group of two or more consecutive axles, and N equals number of axles in the group under consideration; except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each if the first and last axles of the consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than 36 feet apart. The gross vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds including all enforcement tolerances. Except for five axle truck trailer, semitrailer combinations having two consecutive sets of tandem axles, vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross weight determined by application of the formula in this subsection (h) shall be subject to the maximum axle loads of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section. 
(4)  As used in this subsection, the term "tandem axle weight" means the total weight transmitted to the road by two or more consecutive axles, the centers of which may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches, but not more than 96 inches, apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(i)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine as provided in section 42-312(c). 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-21; Code 1997, § 82-341) 
Sec. 42-310. - Transportation of flammable liquids in bulk; restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit within this city. 
(b)  The owner or driver of a vehicle which transports a flammable liquid in violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-22; Code 1997, § 82-342) 
Sec. 42-311. - Information to be painted on trucks, tractors, trailers. 
(a)  All motor trucks or truck tractors, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, of more than 5,000 pounds registered weight, and all towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles in operation upon the public highways of this city, shall have the name, city and state or the registered logo or emblem of the registered owner of the vehicle, and lessee of the vehicle if the vehicle is being operated under lease, painted or permanently attached on each side of the cab on a motor truck or truck tractor in letters of not less than three inches in height, not lower than the bottom edge of the door, except that motor trucks with closed van bodies may place the information on each side of the van body not lower than the bottom edge of the cab door. This information shall be in sharp color contrast to the background. 
(b)  Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the identification requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be met through the use of removable devices which meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. These devices shall be of durable construction and securely attached to each side of the motor truck or truck tractor. The removable devices shall be attached so that the identification is in a horizontal position. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with farm license plates. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-23; Code 1997, § 82-343) 
Sec. 42-312. - Authority to require weighing of vehicle; failure to stop; fines. 
(a)  Weighing of vehicle. A public safety officer of the city having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful may require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by the department of agriculture as a legal weighing device, and may require that the vehicle be driven to the nearest weighing station of the state transportation department for the purpose of allowing an officer or agent of the state transportation department or county road commission to determine whether the conveyance is loaded in conformity with this section. 
(b)  Determination of violation. 
(1)  When the officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until that portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle load weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted under this section. All material unloaded as provided in this subsection (b) shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator. A judge or magistrate imposing a civil fine and costs under this section which are not paid in full immediately or for which a bond is not immediately posted in double the amount of the civil fine and costs shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at the driver's own risk to a place of safekeeping within the jurisdiction of the judge or magistrate, inform the judge or magistrate in writing of the place of safekeeping, and keep the vehicle until the fine and costs are paid or sufficient bond is furnished or until the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the fine and costs will be paid. 
(2)  The officer who has determined, after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful may require the driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the city. If the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the probable civil fine and costs will be paid by the owner or lessee, the judge or magistrate may allow the driver to proceed, after the load is made legal. If the judge or magistrate is not satisfied that the owner or lessee, after a notice and a right to be heard on the merits is given, will pay the amount of the probable civil fine and costs, the judge or magistrate may order the vehicle to be impounded until trial on the merits is completed under conditions set forth in this section for the impounding of vehicles after the civil fine and costs have been imposed. Removal of the vehicle, and forwarding, care or preservation of the load shall be under the control of and at the risk of the owner or driver. Vehicles impounded shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona fide lien of prior record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the civil fine and costs are not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the judge or magistrate shall certify the unpaid judgment to the city attorney, who shall proceed to enforce the lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedures authorized in the case of chattel mortgage foreclosures. 
(c)  Fines. An owner of a vehicle, or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator, or other person, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved on a highway when the weight of that vehicle violates section 42-309 is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine in an amount equal to $0.03 per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000 pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $0.06 per pound of excess load when the excess is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pounds; $0.09 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 3,000 pounds but not over 4,000 pounds; $0.12 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000 pounds; $0.15 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds; and $0.20 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 10,000 pounds; however, the civil fine which may be imposed shall not exceed $1,500.00. Provided that the court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of the civil fine within the schedule provided in this subsection (c) and may impose the civil fine provided in section 907(3) of the state vehicle code (MCL 257.907(3)) for a civil infraction where, at the time of the violation, either the motor vehicle, motor vehicle and semitrailer or trailer did not exceed the total weight which would be lawful for each unit by a proper distribution of the load upon the various axles supporting each unit. 
(d)  Failure to stop. A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when requested or ordered to do so by a public safety officer authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle and load by means of a portable scale is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-24; Code 1997, § 82-344) 
Sec. 42-313. - Special permits. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a written application and good cause being shown, the city may issue a written special permit authorizing an applicant to operate upon or remove from a street or highway in the city a vehicle or combination of vehicles that are any of the following: 
(1)  Of a size, weight or load exceeding the maximum specified in this article. 
(2)  Otherwise not in conformity with this article. 
(b)  The application for a special permit under this section shall be on a form prescribed by the city and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved and the particular streets or highways in the city upon which the special permit to operate is requested. 
(c)  A special permit issued under this section shall specify the trip and date for which it is valid and the city may restrict or prescribe conditions of operation of a vehicle, if necessary to protect the safety of the public or to ensure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces, structures or installations, and may require a reasonable inspection fee and other security as the city determines necessary to compensate for damages caused by the movement. A special permit may be issued on an annual basis. 
(d)  A person may transport telephone, telegraph or electric poles of a greater length than otherwise authorized over the streets and highways in the city in the construction, maintenance or repair of telephone, telegraph or electric lines pursuant to a special permit issued under this section. 
(e)  A person may transport concrete pipe of a greater width than otherwise authorized over streets and highways in the city pursuant to a special permit issued under this section. 
(f)  A special permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by a public safety officer or authorized agent of the city. A person shall not violate any of the terms or conditions of the special permit. 
(g)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-25; Code 1997, § 82-345) 
Sec. 42-314. - Operation without valid registration certificate and plates. 
(a)  A person shall not operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated, upon any street or highway in the city, a commercial vehicle which is required to be registered according to the schedule of elected gross vehicle weights under MCL 257.801(1)(k), unless there is attached to and displayed on the vehicle a valid registration plate issued for the vehicle by the department of state for the current registration year. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-26; Code 1997, § 82-346) 
Sec. 42-315. - Adoption of federal motor carrier regulations. 
    The city hereby adopts the following provisions of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations as of February 28, 1990, to provide for the safe transportation of persons and property with the intent of following the policies and procedures of the United States Department of Transportation's Federal Highway Administration as they relate to title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the North American Standard Uniform Out-of-Service Criteria and Inspection Procedures and the policies and procedures of the motor carrier division of the state police: Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR 390, 392, 393, 395-397, and 399, including appendixes D and E, as stated fully in appendix 1. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-27; Code 1997, § 82-347) 
Sec. 42-316. - Driving unsafe or improperly equipped vehicle; citations. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or move or the owner shall not cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on a street or highway in the city a vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such an unsafe condition as to endanger a person or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by this article, or which is equipped in a manner in violation of this article. A person shall not do an act forbidden or fail to perform an act required by this article. 
(b)  A public safety officer on reasonable grounds shown may stop a motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle, and if a defect in equipment is found, the public safety officer may issue the driver a citation for a violation of a provision of this article. 
(c)  This article shall not prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on a vehicle which are not inconsistent with this article. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-28; Code 1997, § 82-348) 
Sec. 42-317. - Operation of commercial vehicle with certain blood alcohol level. 
(a)  A person, whether licensed or not, whose blood contains 0.015 of a percent or more by weight of alcohol shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle on the streets and highways of this city. 
(b)  A public safety officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a commercial motor vehicle within the city while the person's blood contained 0.015 of a percent or more by weight of alcohol, as measured by a preliminary chemical breath analysis or a chemical test provided under MCL 257.625a, shall order the person out-of-service immediately for a period of 24 hours, which shall begin upon issuance of the order. 
(c)  A public safety officer shall order out-of-service immediately for a period of 24 hours, which shall begin upon issuance of the order, a person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis requested under MCL 257.625a(2). 
(d)  A person ordered out-of-service under this section shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this city during the 24-hour out-of-service period. 
(e)  A public safety officer who issues an out-of-service order under this section shall provide for the safe and expeditious disposition of a product carried by a commercial motor vehicle that is hazardous or would result in damage to the vehicle, human health or the environment. 
(f)  Failure to comply with subsection (a) of this section is not a civil infraction or criminal violation of this article. 
(g)  A person who violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8-29; Code 1997, § 82-349) 
Secs. 42-318-42-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 42-338. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means a device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement, all of which are over 14 inches in diameter. Such term includes pedal bicycles with helper motors rated less than one BHP transmitted by friction and not by gear or chain, which produce only ordinary pedaling speeds up to a maximum of 20 miles per hour. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-2; Code 1997, § 82-376) 
Sec. 42-339. - Compliance required; responsibility for violation by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden by or fail to perform any act required in this article. The parent of any child and the legal guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. The regulations in this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-1; Code 1997, § 82-377) 
Sec. 42-340. - License-Required. 
    No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license sticker is attached thereto. Licenses may be issued to nonresidents upon request. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-3; Code 1997, § 82-378) 
Sec. 42-341. - Same-Application. 
    Application for a bicycle license shall be filed with and processed through the department of public safety. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-4; Code 1997, § 82-379) 
Sec. 42-342. - Same-Issuance; records. 
    The department of public safety, upon receiving a proper application, is authorized to issue a bicycle license upon receipt of a fee that shall be established by resolution of the city council. The department of public safety shall not issue a license for any bicycle when it is known or there are reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle. The department of public safety shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, together with a record of all bicycle license fees collected by the department. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-5; Code 1997, § 82-380) 
Sec. 42-343. - Attachment of license sticker. 
    The department of public safety, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a license sticker bearing the sticker number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. Such license sticker shall be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle for which issued in such position as to be plainly visible. No person shall remove a license sticker from a bicycle during the period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership or if the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-6; Code 1997, § 82-381) 
Sec. 42-344. - Inspection of bicycles. 
    The department of public safety may inspect any bicycle before licensing such bicycle and shall refuse a license for any bicycle that is determined to be in unsafe mechanical condition. No bicycle found in an unsafe mechanical condition may be operated upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-7; Code 1997, § 82-382) 
Sec. 42-345. - Replacement of license. 
    Upon the loss of any bicycle license, such license shall be renewed upon application and payment of the same fee as upon an original application. This also applies if the license becomes defaced by accident. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-8; Code 1997, § 82-383) 
Sec. 42-346. - Transfer of ownership. 
    Upon any sale or transfer of ownership of any bicycle, the licensee shall immediately report such transfer of ownership to the department of public safety. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-9; Code 1997, § 82-384) 
Sec. 42-347. - Rental agencies. 
    A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license sticker is attached thereto and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-10; Code 1997, § 82-385) 
Sec. 42-348. - Secondhand dealers. 
    Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the department of public safety of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the number of license sticker or other device if any is found thereon. Dealers must surrender all license plates or stickers attached to such secondhand bicycles. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-11; Code 1997, § 82-386) 
Sec. 42-349. - Pedal and wheel reflectors. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, offer for sale, or deliver for sale in this city a bicycle or a pedal for use on a bicycle, either of which was manufactured after January 1, 1976, unless it is equipped with a type of reflex reflector located on the front and rear surfaces of the pedal. The reflector elements may be either integral with the construction of the pedal or mechanically attached, but shall be sufficiently recessed from the edge of the pedal, or of the reflector housing, to prevent contact of the reflector element with a flat surface placed in contact with the edge of the pedal. The pedal reflectors shall be visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during the nighttime from a distance of 200 feet when directly exposed to the lower beam headlamps of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  A person shall not sell, offer for sale, or deliver for sale in this city a bicycle manufactured after January 1, 1976, unless it is equipped with either tires which have reflective sidewalls or with wide-angle prismatic spoke reflectors. If the bicycle is manufactured with reflective sidewalls, the reflective portion of the sidewall shall form a continuous circle on the sidewall, and may not be removed from the tire without removal of the tire material. If the bicycle is equipped with wide-angle prismatic spoke reflectors, the reflectors of the front wheel shall be essentially colorless or amber, and the reflectors on the rear wheel shall be essentially colorless or red. Reflective sidewalls or spoke reflectors shall cause the bicycle to be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when viewed under lawful low beam motor vehicle headlamps under normal atmospheric conditions. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-22; Code 1997, § 82-387) 
Sec. 42-350. - Operation by minors. 
(a)  No person under the age of 12 years shall operate a bicycle upon any street, highway or alley in the city; provided, however, that such person under 12 years of age may operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city. 
(b)  Any person over the age of 12 years and under the age of 15 years may operate a bicycle upon the streets, highways and alleys of the city provided such person has the consent to do so of his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-25; Code 1997, § 82-388) 
Sec. 42-351. - Arm signals. 
    The driver of a bicycle on a street or highway, before starting, stopping or turning from a direct line, shall first see that the movement can be made in safety and shall give a signal as required in this section. The signal required in this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm in the manner specified in this section, or by a mechanical or electrical signal device which conveys a clear signal or warning to other highway traffic. When a signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate the intention to start, stop, or turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle and signal as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-26; Code 1997, § 82-389) 
Sec. 42-352. - Violation of article by juvenile; notice; ticket. 
    In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this article by a juvenile, the department of public safety shall notify the parent or legal guardian of the juvenile violator, giving details of the violation, and shall recommend the confiscation of the bicycle by such parent or legal guardian for a period of time commensurate with the severity of the violation. Upon failure of the parent or legal guardian to cooperate in this matter, the department of public safety, at its discretion, may issue a regular violation ticket therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6-27; Code 1997, § 82-390) 
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Responsibility for sewer leads. 
(a)  The total length of the sewer or service leads that connect a building or dwelling to the lateral or trunk sewer, including the street connection, shall be deemed the "building sewer". All costs and expenses incident to the maintenance and/or installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property whereat the building sewer is located. 
(b)  If the building sewer crosses a sidewalk or a street and a portion of the sidewalk or street has to be removed by the owner of the property to repair or maintain the building sewer, the city will bear the cost of the materials and installation of the materials to replace the portion of the sidewalk or street removed by the owner of the property, provided prior approval is obtained from the city. 
(Code 1997, § 10-167; Ord. No. 761, § 1, 11-20-2000) 
Secs. 44-2-44-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-21. - Jurisdiction over water system. 
    The public works division shall have complete jurisdiction over the water distribution system and shall make all taps and connections, install water meters, collect rates for water consumed, and do all other things necessary for the proper conduct of the water system. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-2; Code 1997, § 86-32) 
Sec. 44-22. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The public works division shall have a separate account in which all monies received for water consumed shall be deposited and from which all disbursements made by the division shall be withdrawn. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-3; Code 1997, § 86-33) 
Sec. 44-23. - Records. 
    The public works division shall keep a record of all services installed and the location thereof, and of such other information as shall be required from time to time by the board of water commissioners of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-4; Code 1997, § 86-34) 
Sec. 44-24. - Rules and regulations. 
    The public works division is hereby given permission to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary, expedient and advisable for the carrying out of the terms and provisions of this article or for the proper operating and maintaining of the division of public works, which rules and regulations shall be published in printed form so that the rules and regulations may be distributed to anyone wishing a copy thereof and shall be complied with by all persons desiring to use water or doing and performing any labor or material in connection with the water system of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-63; Code 1997, § 86-35) 
Sec. 44-25. - Special regulations during water shortage-Authority of city administrator. 
    Whenever the city administrator has been notified by the board of water commissioners of the City of Detroit that the demand for water from the Detroit distribution system is such that, unless the usage is regulated, the public health, safety and general welfare is likely to be endangered, the city administrator shall prescribe rules and regulations, not less restrictive than those adopted by the City of Detroit, to regulate the water usage in the city during such emergency. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-64; Code 1997, § 86-36) 
Sec. 44-26. - Same-Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rule or regulation prescribed under section 86-36; provided that, before any such rule or regulation shall become effective, it shall be approved by resolution of the council, and then published in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-65; Code 1997, § 86-37) 
Sec. 44-27. - Unlawful use of water. 
(a)  Whoever intentionally, by any means or device, prevents water from passing through any meter belonging to the division of public works or used in connection with the supply of water to any consumer by the division of public works to register the amount of water passing through the meter, or intentionally prevents a meter from duly registering the quantity of water supplied, or in any way interferes with its proper action or just registration, or without the consent in writing of the office manager of the division of public works intentionally diverts any water from any pipe of the division of public works or otherwise intentionally uses, or causes to be used, without the consent of the division of public works, any water produced or distributed by the division of public works, or any person who retains possession of or refuses to deliver any meter or other appliance loaned to such person by the division of public works, shall, for every such offense, be fined as provided in this Code. 
(b)  The presence at any time of any device or pipes resulting in the diversion of water or prevention of its free passage and registration by the meter or diverting water from the meter as defined in this section or resulting in the prevention of water from reaching the meter, or preventing the just registration of the meter or the taking of any water except through a meter as set forth in this section, shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the person owning or having custody and control of the room, building, place or premises where such device or pipe is of existence thereof and knowledge of such existence by the person who would be benefited by the failure of the water to be properly metered, and shall further constitute prima facie evidence of the intention on the part of such person to defraud, and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope, meaning and penalties of this article and this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-66; Code 1997, § 86-38) 
Sec. 44-28. - Voluntary irrigation system restrictions. 
(a)  A property which is connected to the municipal water system is strongly encouraged to irrigate during the following days and times between May 15 and October 1: 
(1)  A property with an even-numbered address is strongly encouraged to irrigate on even-numbered dates between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  A property with an odd-numbered address is strongly encouraged to irrigate on odd-numbered dates between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Exceptions. This voluntary recommendation does not apply to a newly seeded or sodded lawn, newly planted trees, shrubs and bushes, which may for the first 21 days after planting, be irrigated as often as required for growth. 
(b)  Adherence to section 44-28, is strictly voluntary and is not subject to any code violation. 
(Ord. No. 828, 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 44-29-44-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION AND INSTALLATION 

Sec. 44-58. - Application for water service. 
    All applications for the use of water through a service pipe, or for the introduction of service pipes, or for the installation of a water meter, shall be made to the division of public works of the department of public services, and such application shall state in full, upon a form prepared by the division, the purpose for which the supply is required, the street address, the lot number, and such other information as shall be required by the division. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-5; Code 1997, § 86-61) 
Sec. 44-59. - Connections with other sources of water. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any connection between water pipes receiving their supply from the city mains, and pipes, pumps or tanks receiving their supply from any other service. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-16; Code 1997, § 86-62) 
Sec. 44-60. - Work to be done by licensed plumber. 
    No person shall make any attachment or connection with the pipes of the city, or make any repairs, additions to or alterations of any fixtures connected with service pipes, unless licensed as a plumber by the state. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-17; Code 1997, § 86-63) 
Sec. 44-61. - Violations by plumbers. 
    The permit of any plumber may, at any time, be suspended by the division of public works for violation of any of the provisions of this article, or may be revoked by the council for such violation. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-18; Code 1997, § 86-64) 
Sec. 44-62. - Inspections. 
    All work regulated by this article performed by any plumber shall be inspected by the director of public services or the director's subordinates, who are hereby given authority to order any part of the work to be discontinued, changed, repaired or altered in order that the work may comply with the regulations and requirements of the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-19; Code 1997, § 86-65) 
Sec. 44-63. - Authority to shut off water. 
    The division of public works is hereby authorized to shut off the supply of water from any premises when any of the terms of this article, or any provision of this Code passed for the regulation or maintenance of the water system, or any of the rules of the division of public works, have been violated. If the water is shut off, no person shall permit the premises to be supplied with water without permission of the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-20; Code 1997, § 86-66) 
Sec. 44-64. - Tampering with mains, valves or other equipment. 
    No person shall tap or connect any water main or insert any service cock therein, or open or close any valves in the public main, or molest or interfere with any valve box cover, unless such person is an employee of the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-21; Code 1997, § 86-67) 
State Law reference- Malicious destruction, etc., of utility property, MCL 750.383a. 
Sec. 44-65. - Temporary taps. 
    There shall be no temporary water taps used unless a permit is first secured from the division of public works. The permit shall state the place where the temporary tap shall be made and the time during which it shall be used, and shall be issued only upon conditions satisfactory to the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-22; Code 1997, § 86-68) 
Secs. 44-66-44-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS 

Sec. 44-89. - Use required. 
    All service connections shall be prepared for the use of water through a meter. No connection, including a plugged tee or any other accessible outlet, shall be installed between the meter and the main. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-23; Code 1997, § 86-91) 
Sec. 44-90. - Apartment houses. 
    The owner of terraces and apartment houses may have a single meter installed for all of the terraces or apartment houses, or may have a separate meter installed for each terrace or apartment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-24; Code 1997, § 86-92) 
Sec. 44-91. - Meters to be furnished by city; payment of cost; ownership. 
    Water meters to be used shall be furnished by the division of public works at the expense of the consumer. The cost to the consumer of water meters shall be fixed by the council by resolution. All water meters shall be the property of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-25; Code 1997, § 86-93) 
Sec. 44-92. - More than one meter on single service connection. 
    If more than one meter is furnished and connected to one service connection, the owner of the property shall execute an agreement, in writing, authorizing the division of public works to discontinue service to the entire property if it shall be necessary to discontinue water service to such property for any reason. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-26; Code 1997, § 86-94) 
Sec. 44-93. - Type and size of meter. 
    All property that consists of a combination of a residence and a business shall be classed as business property. The division of public works shall furnish to all business property one meter of a size that in the discretion of the division of public works shall be proper. In all residential properties and apartment hotels where a meter of the size of three inches or larger is required, the meter shall be of the compound type. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-27; Code 1997, § 86-95) 
Sec. 44-94. - Couplings. 
    The division of public works shall furnish couplings for meters upon receipt of a permit properly filled out by the plumber or owner. All couplings shall be set before the property becomes occupied. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-28; Code 1997, § 86-96) 
Sec. 44-95. - Removal of meters. 
    No person shall interfere with or remove a water meter from any service connection without first receiving a written permission from the division of public works. Whenever a meter is removed by permission, it shall be immediately returned to the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-30; Code 1997, § 86-98) 
Sec. 44-96. - Damaged meters. 
    The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water and from injury or interference by any person, and if any meter is damaged the cost of repairing the meter shall be paid by the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-31; Code 1997, § 86-99) 
Sec. 44-97. - Access to meters. 
    No meter or its valve shall be placed in any closet or compartment that is kept locked, in coal bins, under toilet room floors, under buildings, porches, show windows or show boards, or where access to it will be difficult. The division of public works shall have the right and authority to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the division has been refused access or has been unable to obtain access for the purposes of inspecting, installing or reading water meters. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-32; Code 1997, § 86-100) 
Sec. 44-98. - Setting of meters. 
    All meters shall be set horizontally in dry, clean, sanitary places, perfectly accessible, with valves on both sides, and where a small leak or the spilling of water will do no damage. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-33; Code 1997, § 86-101) 
Sec. 44-99. - Pipes entering building through coal bin. 
    All pipes entering a building through a coal bin shall be run exposed to the meter and shall be provided with a valve where they enter the building and with two valves at the meter. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-34; Code 1997, § 86-102) 
Sec. 44-100. - Testing tee. 
    All services one and one-half inches or larger must have a tee between the meter and outlet valve, to be used for testing the meter without necessitating its removal. The size at the side opening of this tee shall be one and one-half inches for one and one-half-inch service pipes; two inches for all service pipes up to four inches, and three inches for larger service pipes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-35; Code 1997, § 86-103) 
Sec. 44-101. - Meters to be protected. 
    All meters shall be set below the grade line and in a brick or cement wall, or in a cellar or basement. No meter shall be set in a cellar or basement unless its nearest wall is 100 feet or less from the lot line nearest the main and meters shall be set on the service pipe at the entrance of the basement or cellar. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-36; Code 1997, § 86-104) 
Sec. 44-102. - Checkvalves. 
    In all private homes or buildings used for residence purposes only, the owner may, if the owner so desires, use checkvalves on feed pipes entering the range boiler, provided that a safety valve shall be used whenever a checkvalve is set. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-37; Code 1997, § 86-105) 
Sec. 44-103. - Meter wells generally. 
    All meter wells shall be of brick or concrete construction, with cover openings directly over meters, according to the drawings furnished the division of public works. Devices designed to take the place of wells may be used if approved by the division of public works. The plumber shall be responsible for the condition of all wells at the time the plumber installs meter fittings. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-41; Code 1997, § 86-106) 
Sec. 44-104. - Outside meter wells. 
    All outside meter wells shall have iron covers. No part of iron covers shall weigh more than 100 pounds, and the clear entrance opening shall be at least 24 inches in diameter; except, with meters six inches in diameter or larger, wells shall be provided with double square iron covers with openings 24 inches by 44 inches. The manhole shaft from cover to well shall not exceed one foot in length, and all wells shall be provided with iron steps and other proper means of access. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-42; Code 1997, § 86-107) 
Sec. 44-105. - Inside meter wells. 
    All inside meter wells shall be constructed of brick or concrete and shall be built full size up to the floor with a cover of iron not less than 24 inches by 30 inches with a ring or handle attached and weighing not over 100 pounds. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-43; Code 1997, § 86-108) 
Sec. 44-106. - Size and depth of meter well. 
(a)  All three-quarter-inch and one-inch connections shall have wells at least three square feet and five feet deep with iron covers, and shall have at least three feet from floor to ceiling. 
(b)  All one and one-fourth-inch and two-inch connections shall have wells at least three square feet and five and one-half feet deep, with not less than three and one-half feet from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  All three-inch connections shall have wells at least three square feet and six and one-half feet deep, with not less than three and one-half feet from floor to ceiling. 
(d)  All four-inch connections shall have wells at least four square feet and six and one-half feet deep, with not less than four feet from floor to ceiling. 
(e)  All six-inch connections shall have wells at least five square feet and six and one-half feet deep, with not less than four feet from floor to ceiling. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-44; Code 1997, § 86-109) 
Sec. 44-107. - Drainage of meter wells. 
    All meter wells shall be drained to a sewer if within 100 feet of a sewer and shall in such case have a trap next to the well. If not drained, then they shall be equipped with a pump in order that they can be pumped out. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-45; Code 1997, § 86-110) 
Sec. 44-108. - Pumping out meter wells. 
    The owner or occupant of any building which has a meter well which is impossible to drain shall pump out the well whenever required by the division of public works, and, on such person's failure to do so, the division of public works shall shut off the water. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-46; Code 1997, § 86-111) 
Sec. 44-109. - Door for meter wells. 
    All meter wells under a building with an outside entrance shall have a door at least two feet wide by four feet high and cellar steps leading to the well, according to a blueprint furnished by the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-47; Code 1997, § 86-112) 
Sec. 44-110. - Use of meter wells. 
    No risers shall be allowed inside or taken through the top of a meter well. Wells shall be used for no other purpose than the reception of the water meter and valves. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-48; Code 1997, § 86-113) 
Sec. 44-111. - Bypasses. 
    Bypasses of the same size as the meter are required on one and one-half-inch to six-inch connections. Bypasses will not be allowed by one-inch meters or smaller. The bypasses shall be constructed according to blueprints furnished by the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-49; Code 1997, § 86-114) 
Sec. 44-112. - Fire lines. 
    No private fire lines or sprinkler systems shall be installed and connected unless through a meter separate from the meter for the building, which meter shall be purchased by the owner and turned over to the division of public works for testing. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-50; Code 1997, § 86-115) 
Sec. 44-113. - Attachment of reciprocating pumps to main. 
    No reciprocating pump shall be attached directly to any city main unless the pump is used exclusively for fire purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-51; Code 1997, § 86-116) 
Sec. 44-114. - Meter tests. 
    Any consumer who desires to have a test made of the consumer's water meter shall deposit the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time with the division of public works, and thereupon it shall be the duty of the division of public works to cause the meter to be tested. If the test of the meter shall show that the meter is accurate, such sum shall be forfeited for the service rendered, but if such test shall show that the meter is defective a new meter shall be installed and the deposit returned. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-57; Code 1997, § 86-117) 
Sec. 44-115. - Maintenance of lines. 
    It shall be the duty of the division of public works to maintain the service connection from the main to the lot line, and the owner of the premises shall maintain the service from the lot line to the meter, but, if such owner shall fail or neglect to do so, the division of public works shall have the right to shut off the supply of water until such defect has been remedied. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-61; Code 1997, § 86-119) 
Secs. 44-116-44-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND COSTS 

Sec. 44-144. - Combined water-sewer rate and capital improvement levy; billing; delinquent bills. 
(a)  A combined water-sewer rate shall be established by resolution of the city council as may be adopted from time to time, plus a capital improvement levy as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to cover the cost of purchasing and distribution of water, and the cost of collecting and treatment of combined sanitary and stormwater sewage, to extend, improve, replace and correct deficiencies to such systems and to maintain and administer such systems. 
(b)  All water and sewage disposal bills shall be rendered bimonthly by the city comptroller/treasurer and shall be due and payable on the 15th day of the month following the quarter. A penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill shall be added if the amount of the bill is not paid on or before the due date. The comptroller/treasurer may waive that penalty only in those very limited circumstances that comply with the city policy for a waiver of penalty. 
(c)  The city comptroller shall have the right and power to shut off the supply of water to any property where the payment of the water bill, after rendered in manner specified in this section, is delinquent. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-54; Code 1997, § 86-141; Ord. No. 873, 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 875, 10-2-2017) 
Sec. 44-145. - Meter costs; tapping fees. 
    The costs to be paid to the city for water meters and water tapping fees shall be established by a resolution adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-55; Code 1997, § 86-142) 
Sec. 44-146. - Payment of costs for repair of meters. 
    All expenses of repairing any water meter shall be charged to the consumer or property owner unless the damage was caused by a defect in the construction of the water main. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-56; Code 1997, § 86-143) 
Sec. 44-147. - Connection charges. 
    The division of public works shall make the water main tap, and install the corporation cock and the meter. The council shall, from time to time, fix the charges to be paid by the property owner for the water tap, installation of corporation cock, and supervision and inspection of water service installed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-58; Code 1997, § 86-144) 
Sec. 44-148. - Use of water for construction purposes. 
(a)  No contractor, builder or any other person shall have the right to use water for construction purposes or for purposes not specifically mentioned in this article unless and until such person shall first apply in writing to the division of public works for permission to use the water, and shall, with such person's application, deposit with the division of public works a sum sufficient to cover the water consumed, which deposit may be required to be increased from time to time, in the discretion of the division of public works, in order to pay for the water consumed. 
(b)  Upon the termination of the use of such water, the consumer shall pay all charges for water consumed and any damages that may arise by reason of the use of such water. 
(c)  In the event of the failure of the consumer to pay such charges and damages, the division of public works shall have the right to take such sum from the deposit, and the remainder shall be returned to the consumer. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-59; Code 1997, § 86-145) 
Sec. 44-149. - Appeals. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by any rule or action of the division of public works, such person shall have the right to appeal from such ruling to the council. Such appeal from the ruling to the council shall be made in writing, setting forth the grievances complained of, and filed with the clerk, whereupon the matter shall be referred to the council for determination. All rulings or actions of the division of public works shall remain in full force and effect pending such hearing. No appeal shall be considered in connection with any charge for water consumed after 60 days from the due date of any bill rendered therefor unless special permission to lodge such an appeal shall first be obtained from the council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1-60; Code 1997, § 86-146) 
Secs. 44-150-44-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIENS FOR WATER BILLS 

Sec. 44-167. - Authorized. 
    In accordance with the authority vested in the city by the provisions of Public Act No. 178 of 1939 (MCL 123.161 et seq.), as amended, and as expressly authorized by section 12.4 of the City Charter, a lien upon any house or other building or any premises, lot or parcel of land is hereby created as security for water rates or any assessments, charges or rentals due or to become due for the use or consumption of water supplied thereto by the division of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2-1; Code 1997, § 86-171) 
Sec. 44-168. - Effective date of lien. 
    Such lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution of the water to the premises supplied, provided that enforcement of such lien shall not be undertaken after three years after the water charge shall have accrued. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2-2; Code 1997, § 86-172) 
Sec. 44-169. - Notice of pendency of lien. 
    The official records of the division of public works of the city shall constitute notice of the pendency of the lien. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2-3; Code 1997, § 86-173) 
Sec. 44-170. - Priority of lien; exception for leased premises. 
    The lien created pursuant to this article shall have priority over all other liens except taxes or special assessments, whether or not such liens accrued or were recorded prior to the accrual of the water lien created under this article. The provisions of this article shall not apply in any instance where a lease has been legally executed containing a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for the payment of water bills accruing subsequent to the filing of the affidavit provided for in this section, provided that an affidavit with respect to the execution of such a lease containing the expiration date thereof shall be filed with the division of public works of the city and 20 days' notice shall be given by the lessor of any cancellation, change in or termination of the lease. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2-4; Code 1997, § 86-174) 
Sec. 44-171. - Authority to discontinue water service; legal action. 
    Water service may be discontinued to the premises against which a lien has accrued under this article whenever any person shall fail to pay the rates, assessments, charges or rentals referred to in this article, or suit may be instituted for the collection of such rates, assessments, charges or rentals in any court of competent jurisdiction, but no attempt to collect such water rates, assessments, charges or rentals by any process shall in any way invalidate or waive the lien upon the premises. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2-5; Code 1997, § 86-175) 
Sec. 44-172. - Entry of delinquent charges on general tax roll; enforcement of lien. 
    Where any such water rates, assessments, charges or rentals shall become delinquent for a period of not less than six months, the division of public works shall certify to the city assessor the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charges shall be entered upon the next general tax roll of the city as a charge against the premises and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes levied and assessed against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced; provided that, where notice is given as provided in this article that a tenant is responsible for such charges or services, no further water service shall be rendered to such premises until the tenant so responsible for such water service charge shall deposit with the division of public works a sum of money equal to the estimated amount of the next ensuing water bill for the premises as security for the payment of such charges or service, which deposit may be used to apply upon the payment of any such unpaid water service charge upon the failure of such tenant to make payment thereof when such water service charge shall become due. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2-6; Code 1997, § 86-176) 
Secs. 44-173-44-197. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 44-198. - Adoption of state rules. 
    The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the state department of environmental quality, being Mich. Admin. Code R325.11401 to R325.11407. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8-1; Code 1997, § 86-211; Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-199. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the division of safety inspection of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based upon potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8-2; Code 1997, § 86-212; Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-200. - Access to property. 
    The representative of the division of safety inspection of the city shall have the right to request entry from the owner or tenant of any property within the city served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessee or tenant of any property so served shall furnish to the representative of the division of safety inspection any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal to furnish information or refusal of access to the property at reasonable times for the purpose of conducting such inspection when requested shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections existing in such water system. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8-3; Code 1997, § 86-213; Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-201. - Authority to discontinue water service. 
    The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8-4; Code 1997, § 86-214; Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-202. - Protection of potable water supply; labeling of outlets not supplied by potable system. 
    The potable water supply made available on properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
(Code 1975, § 3-8-5; Code 1997, § 86-215; Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-203. - Additional requirements. 
    The provisions of this article do not supersede the state plumbing code or any other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8-6; Code 1997, § 86-216; Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-204. - Periodic testing. 
    All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the assembly is working properly. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall be tested on an annual basis as required by the City of Grosse Pointe Woods and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals that are approved and State of Michigan certified shall be qualified to perform such testing, and the individual shall certify the results of the testing. 
(Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-205. - Fees. 
    Council may provide appropriate fees regarding testing, inspection and compliance with this article by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 44-206. - Violations. 
    A violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction as provided in chapter 2, Administration, article VIII, Municipal Civil Infractions, with fines under section 2-813. 
(Ord. No. 827, 3-16-2009) 
Secs. 44-207-44-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRAINAGE FROM RAINWATER DOWNSPOUTS 

Sec. 44-230. - Disconnection of downspouts from sewer system. 
(a)  Purpose. The city council, in order to reduce the sudden inflow of rainwater into the combined sewer detention treatment facility known as the Milk River Intercounty Combined Sewer Overflow Retention Basin so as to reduce the overflow of the drainage system and the resulting pollution of Lake St. Clair, and the reduction of basement flooding, does hereby adopt the rules and regulations set out in this section requiring the disconnection of rainwater downspouts within the city. 
(b)  Disconnection required. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any owner of property located within the city to permit, allow or maintain the connection of gutter downspouts with the sewer system of the city, unless an exemption has been granted in accordance with this section. Each day of noncompliance will be deemed a separate violation and subject to a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Appeal board. There is created a board of appeals which will consist of three members appointed by the mayor. One member shall be an employee of the city department of public works, one member shall be an employee of the city engineering firm and one member shall be a citizen resident of the city. The mayor may appoint an alternate member from the department of public works to serve in the absence of a regular appointed member. The terms of office of each board member shall be three years, excepting those members first appointed, of whom each one shall be appointed for terms of one, two, and three years. The alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three years. The terms of office shall expire September 30 of the year and members, other than those first appointed, shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. The first members of the board shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance creating this board. 
(d)  Procedures. The board of appeals shall hear appeals from property owners who have been notified by the city to disconnect their downspouts and who believe that their property should be exempt from the requirements of this Code. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of receiving the notice to disconnect the downspouts. No violation complaints shall be issued while an appeal is pending. 
(e)  Exemption by hazardous condition . In order for property to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter related to downspout disconnection, the board of appeals, by a vote of at least two members of the board, must find that disconnection of the downspouts would lead to a hazardous condition or would not be cost effective. Hazardous conditions shall be such conditions that would be likely to cause structural damage to an existing building and which are not reasonably capable of correction or of being prevented. Cost effective shall mean a cost associated with disconnecting a downspout that exceeds the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time per downspout. 
(f)  Appeal document submission. The appeal documents submitted by the property owner shall show the lot size, the dimensions of the buildings thereon, the location of the connected downspouts, the cost of removing the downspouts from the sewer system and the reason for requesting an exemption from the provisions of this Code. Any exemption granted by the board of appeals shall remain in effect until changing circumstances cause the appeal board to revoke such exemption. The building inspector shall review the appeal documents and make a recommendation to the board of appeals. 
(g)  Meeting attendance of the board. The board of appeals shall meet at least once per month as needed. A meeting shall require three members, or two members and the alternate member, in attendance. The decisions of the board of appeals shall be final. 
(Code 1975, §§ 3-9-1-3-9-4; Code 1997, § 86-241; Ord. No. 764, § 1, 1-15-2001) 
Sec. 44-231. - Placement of downspouts. 
    Rainwater downspouts that are existing or which are installed upon any real property in the city shall be directed in such a manner that the water discharged from such downspouts shall be directed towards the street or other area of the property to minimize or reduce the flow of rainwater onto abutting properties. 
(Code 1975, § 3-10-1; Code 1997, § 86-242; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 12-5-1994) 
Secs. 44-232-44-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE 

Sec. 44-256. - Delegation of authority. 
    The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the city. The city has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority consistent with this article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law. 
(Code 1997, § 86-271; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-257. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the water collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the city and enabling the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR403). 
(b)  The objectives of this section are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and 
(4)  To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system. 
(c)  This section provides for the regulation of contributors to the city and the City of Detroit wastewater collection and treatment system through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties. 
(Code 1997, § 86-272; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-258. - Authority. 
    By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the city by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, being (33 USC 1251 et seq.); the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.); the city Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this section shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW. 
(Code 1997, § 86-273; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-259. - Definitions. 
    (a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act and the act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this article is a corporation, who is either: 
a.  The president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this article is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively. 
    Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CN); hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq); and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved under 40 CFR 136. 
    Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by a user, which can or does lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including, but not limited to, the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and economic considerations. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods. 
    Board means the board of water commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of an industrial users treatment facility. (See 40 CFR 403.17.) 
    Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer/roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment, including: 
(1)  A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site; and 
(2)  A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site. 
    City means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods. 
    Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater. 
    Compatible pollutant means pollutants that can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream. 
    Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. (See 40 CFR 403, Appendix E.) 
    Confidential information means the information, which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. (See section 44-265.) 
    Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as such by the state under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12. (See 40 CFR 403.12(a).) 
    Cooling water means the noncontact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and the only function of which is the exchange of heat. 
    Days means consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this article. 
    Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the department. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director means the director of the Detroit Department of Water and Sewerage, or the director's designee. 
    Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW. 
    Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works. 
    Environmental protection agency, administrator and EPA administrator mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA. 
    Facility means a location that contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable. 
    Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
    Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
    Indirect discharge and discharge mean the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under 33 USC 1317(b), (c) or (d). 
    Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single-family and multifamily residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
    Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC 1345); the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), 42 USC 6901 et seq. (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act RCRA); and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act, (15 USC 2601 et seq.), and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act (16 USC 1431 et seq.). 
    May is permissive. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 USC 1317(b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 USC 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered; or 
(2)  Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(3)  Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal or existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
    Pass through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns. 
    pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. (See 40 CFR 403.3(r).) 
    Pretreatment standards means all national categorical pretreatment standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in section 44-260. 
    Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 USC 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 USC 1362, including: 
(1)  Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature; 
(2)  Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  The municipality, as defined in 33 USC 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
    Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant. 
    Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
    Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site noncommercial consumption. 
    Shall is mandatory. 
    Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who: 
(1)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water; 
(2)  Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards; 
(3)  Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this article; 
(4)  Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 USC 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this article as determined by the department; 
(5)  Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by the state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or 
(6)  Is found by the City of Detroit or the city to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW. 
    Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, Fats, Oil and Grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority; 
(5)  Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date; 
(6)  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due date; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug means any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
    Standard methods means methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants. Where these two references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be followed. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids (total) means the total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods. 
    Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated as zero. 
    Total phenolic compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the state department of environmental quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations. 
    Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and the secrecy of which the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this article or with national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein. 
    Wastewater and wastestream mean the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, stormwater, and cooling water. 
    Wastewater discharge permits means permits issued by the department in accordance with section 44-262. 
    Waters of the state mean groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this section: 
(1)  BMR - Baseline monitoring report 
(2)  BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand 
(3)  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
(4)  EPA - Environmental Protection Agency 
(5)  FOG - Fats, oil or grease 
(6)  l - liter 
(7)  mg - milligrams 
(8)  mg/l - milligrams per liter 
(9)  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(10)  POTW - Publicly owned treatment works 
(11)  RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
(12)  SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
(13)  SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
(14)  TSS - Total suspended solids 
(15)  USC - United States Code 
(Code 1997, § 86-274; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-260. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units; 
(4)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals; 
(5)  Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
(6)  Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 USC 1345, with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), the Federal Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.), or with state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's national pollutant discharge elimination system permit; 
(8)  Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged; 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150 degrees Fahrenheit or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(10)  Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; 
(12)  Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or 
(13)  Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the POTW. 
(b)  Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants. See section 44-271. 
(2)  Noncompatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
Arsenic (As ..... 1.0 mg/l 
Cadmium (Cd) ..... See section 44-271 
Chromium (Cr) ..... 25 mg/l 
Copper (Cu) ..... 2.5 mg/l 
Cyanide (Available) ..... 1.0 mg/l 
Iron (Fe) ..... 1,000 mg/l 
Lead (Pb) ..... 1.0 mg/l 
Nickel (Ni) ..... 5.0 mg/l 
Silver (Ag) ..... 1.0 mg/l 
Zinc (Zn) ..... 7.3 mg/l 
Total Phenolic Compounds ..... 1.0 mg/l or See section 44-270. 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136. 
a.  The limitation for total PCB is nondetect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with subsection 44-267(d). 
b.  The limitation for mercury (Hg) is nondetect. Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with subsection 44-267(d). 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. 
(3)  Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this article, the department shall notify all existing industrial users operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of this article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or noncompliance with these limitations, and in the event of noncompliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of this article. 
An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The department, shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision. 
(c)  National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall comply with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 CFR 405-471 (Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards), which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided, however, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this article, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403, and as established by the department. The national categorical pretreatment standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are delineated in section 44-269. 
(1)  Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the state department of environmental quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 CFR 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such pollutants in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and of this article. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 CFR 403.7, or as determined by the department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(3), and/or 40 CFR 403.6(c)(4), and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 USC 1317(d) and of this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(5)  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards; baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(5). In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4) and (5). 
(d)  Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the city, the City of Detroit or by the state. 
(e)  Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in section 44-262. The department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this article. 
(f)  Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. An industrial user that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof: 
(1)  The general nature, source and processes generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards as delineated in section 44-269, shall be so designated; 
(2)  The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater; 
(3)  At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in subsection (f)(1) of this section; 
(4)  A statement that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility's treatment processes; 
(5)  The identity of the materials and/or pollutants, the transport or treatment of which are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department; and 
(6)  Other information requested by the department including, but not limited to, information required by subsection 44-262(c)(1)-(18), or by rules adopted by the board. The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained in section 44-262, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in section 44-262 regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in this subsection (f)(6) and in subsections (f)(1)-(5) of this section. All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the department. 
(g)  Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited. The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its enactment. If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or underground storage tank (UST) projects, has applied for and received a permit from the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in section 44-262, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board. 
(h)  City's right of revision. The City of Detroit and the city reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. Ninety days after adoption by the board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(i)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of this section. New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging. For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of five percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW. The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory. 
(2)  At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the department. 
(j)  Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or city laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection (i)(1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its control center and notify the department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property. 
(k)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge. 
(l)  Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's NPDES permit and the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this article, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity. 
(m)  Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users who discharge into the city's collection system shall notify the department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261. Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(n)  Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in subsection 44-259(a), may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection 44-259(a) where: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in subsection 44-259(a); 
(2)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is submitted to the department. 
(o)  Pollution prevention. The department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this article. The department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit. 
(Code 1997, § 86-275; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-261. - Fees. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(b)  The board shall adopt charges and fees, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining or improving the department's industrial waste control and pretreatment programs; 
(2)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; 
(3)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law. 
(Code 1997, § 86-276; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-262. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of section 44-260. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of this article, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in subsection (c) of this section and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). 
(2)  All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application must include all information specified in subsection (c) of this section and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW. 
(3)  Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from the department for the discharges at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the discharge. 
(b)  Permit application or reapplication. The department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this article. 
(1)  A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in subsections (c) and (g) of this section. 
(2)  A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility. 
(3)  Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the department. 
(c)  Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Corporate or individual name, any assumed names, federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility; 
(2)  Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally; 
(3)  All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(4)  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in subsections 44-260(a) and (b), those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC 1314(g) and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator; 
(5)  A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to subsection (c)(4) of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process; 
(6)  Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4) of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4) of this section. Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity; 
(7)  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week; 
(8)  Denote the average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and stormwater flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and each combined wastestream; 
(9)  A drawing showing #1 sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross referenced to the information furnished in subsection (c)(8) of this section; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only; 
(11)  A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this article and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional; 
(12)  Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of subsection 44-260(i); 
(13)  Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process; 
(14)  A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type; 
(15)  If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source; 
(16)  If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this article and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures; 
(17)  Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and 
(18)  Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following: 
(1)  The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6); 
(3)  The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12, or by the department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable; 
(4)  The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination. 
    The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this article. If the department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in section 44-269, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each permit. 
(e)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii), and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or the city without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in section 44-260, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards; 
(2)  Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user; 
(4)  Restrictions on which of the user's discharge wastestreams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW; 
(5)  Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges; 
(7)  Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application; 
(8)  Additional reporting requirements: 
a.  All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this article. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department. Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit; 
b.  Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of subsections (e)(8)d. and e. of this section. The report shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with subsectionsx (e)(9) and (11) of this section; 
c.  Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the department no later than 90 days following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the department and incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance with subsections (e)(8)d. and e. of this section. The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the department or on an alternate form approved by the department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with subsections (e)(9) and (11) of this section. The report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing the combined wastestream; 
d.  Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR 403, or by the department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards; 
e.  This report, and those required under subsection 44-260(c)(5) and subsections (e)(8)b. and c. of this section, shall include the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." Said certification shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative, as defined in section 44-259. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative definition must be submitted to the department prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative; 
f.  If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the user shall notify the department within 24 hours of the time said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation; 
(9)  In the event the director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this article, the department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit; 
(10)  Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and 
(11)  Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final. 
(g)  Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in section 44-260 are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change; 
(2)  Changes in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order; 
(4)  Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control authority; 
(5)  An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing permit; 
(6)  A change of conditions within the POTW; 
(7)  A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the industrial user; 
(8)  Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 CFR 403 and those delineated in section 44-269. Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the department may initiate this action; 
(9)  Changes in the monitoring location (See section 44-263); 
(10)  Typographical errors or omissions in permits; 
(11)  The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or 
(12)  The user may request a modification of the permit. 
    When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in section 44-268, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance. 
(h)  Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the department allows to be retained. 
(i)  Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 86-277; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-263. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this article. In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall provide the department with: 
(1)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW; 
(2)  A flow schematic showing: 
a.  Which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream; 
b.  Which connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water; and 
c.  Which lines handle each combined wastestream. 
This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred therein. 
(b)  The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. See subsection 44-262(g). 
(Code 1997, § 86-278; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-264. - Inspection, sampling and recordkeeping. 
(a)  For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities. 
(b)  Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity. 
(c)  While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this article, which shall be maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with section 44-265. 
(d)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(e)  Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent analysis. 
(f)  Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 CFR 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA. 
(g)  Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to copy such records. 
(h)  In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee or representative shall leave with the user a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling unless proven invalid. 
(i)  In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in subsection 44-260(b), or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the limitation in the future. 
(Code 1997, § 86-279; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-265. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
(b)  When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, to the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, and to the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however, that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be nonconfidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. 
(c)  The department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in writing. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(d)  Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's authorized representative during normal business hours. 
(Code 1997, § 86-280; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-266. - Statutes, laws and regulations. 
    The national categorical pretreatment standards defined in 40 CFR 405-471 (subchapter N,) shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this article to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the city shall be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 86-281; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-267. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any user to: 
(1)  Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge; 
(2)  Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in subsection 44-262(g)(1); 
(3)  Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the department; 
(5)  Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers; 
(6)  Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)  Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this article including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this article shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article, and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this article until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance schedules. 
(b)  Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment standards where the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section are met. 
(1)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the causes of the upset; 
b.  At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
1.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(3)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(c)  Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten days in advance. 
(2)  Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(3)  Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user properly notified the department as described in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the department may approve an anticipated bypass. 
(d)  Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in section 44-260 during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum nondetect ordinance limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP as part of its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as part of an enforcement response. Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP, shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and a certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions and orders. The department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or his designated representative, within ten days of such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in subsection (d) of this section, whenever the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, the department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement response. 
(g)  Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this article, the department, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible. 
(1)  Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates this article, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this article. Nothing contained herein shall require the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (f)(2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this article and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder. 
a.  Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, or an administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions: 
1.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction; 
2.  No single increment referred to in subsection (f)(1)a.1. of this section shall exceed nine months; 
3.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reasons for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
4.  Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this article. 
b.  Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this article or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order. 
(2)  Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial user, who violates this article or allows such violation to occur, to show cause before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative. 
a.  Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may: 
1.  In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
2.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
b.  Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter. 
(3)  Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
a.  Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this article, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation; 
b.  Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period; 
c.  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time period; 
d.  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date; 
e.  Control of discharge quantities; 
f.  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the department during compliance efforts; 
g.  Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed; and/or 
h.  A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this article or of a duly issued permit did not occur. 
(4)  Public notification of significant noncompliance. The department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and the city a list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy. 
(h)  Legal actions. 
(1)  Criminal action. Any user, who violates any provision of this article including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this article. 
(2)  Civil action. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this article, the director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The department or board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit does not constitute an exclusive election of remedies and does not prohibit the department, director, board, City of Detroit or the city from commencing action in federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this article, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit and/or the city may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(3)  Payment of fines, costs and penalties. All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and the city where applicable. 
(Code 1997, § 86-282; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-268. - Reconsideration and appeal. 
    Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this article. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this article. 
(1)  Selection of reconsideration or of appeal. 
a.  Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department by the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this article. 
b.  An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by a permit issued as final by the department, or by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration. 
c.  Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the department's general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement of the reasons, and the factual basis underlying the request. 
d.  A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration or appeal may be deemed waived. 
(2)  Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing. 
a.  A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. 
b.  Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected. 
c.  Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time. 
d.  The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issues being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court reporter. 
e.  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer shall issue a final decision which shall contain a recommendation to the director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by certified mail. 
f.  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration. 
(3)  Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition: 
a.  Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this article. 
b.  Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected. 
c.  The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the department. 
d.  The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be submitted to the board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
e.  In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
f.  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal. 
(Code 1997, § 86-283; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-269. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Aluminum Forming 40 CFR 467 Asbestos Manufacturing 40 CFR 427 Battery Manufacturing 40 CFR 461 Builder's Paper and Board Mills 40 CFR 431 Canned and Preserved Fruits and Vegetables 40 CFR 407 Canned and Preserved Seafood Processing 40 CFR 408 Carbon Black Manufacturing 40 CFR 458 Cement Manufacturing 40 CFR 411 Coal Mining 40 CFR 434 Coil Coating 40 CFR 465 Copper Forming 40 CFR 468 Dairy Products Processing 40 CFR 405 Electrical and Electronic Components I and II 40 CFR 469 Electroplating 40 CFR 413 Explosives Manufacturing 40 CFR 457 Feedlots 40 CFR 412 Ferroalloy Manufacturing 40 CFR 424 Fertilizer Manufacturing 40 CFR 418 Glass Manufacturing 40 CFR 426 Grain Mills 40 CFR 406 Gum and Wood Chemicals Manufacturing 40 CFR 454 Hospital 40 CFR 460 Ink Formulating 40 CFR 447 Inorganic Chemicals Manufacture (1 and U) 40 CFR 415 Iron and Steel 40 CFR 420 Leather Tanning and Finishing 40 CFR 425 Meat Products 40 CFR 432 Metal Finishing 40 CFR 433 Metal Molding and Casting 40 CFR 464 Mineral Mining and Processing 40 CFR 436 Nonferrous Metals Forming 40 CFR 471 Nonferrous Metals Manufacturing I 40 CFR 421 Nonferrous Metals Manufacturing II 40 CFR 421 Ore Mining and Dressing 40 CFR 440 Organic Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers 40 CFR 414 Paint Formulating 40 CFR 446 Paving and Roofing Materials 40 CFR 443 Pesticide Chemicals 40 CFR 455 Petroleum Refining 40 CFR 419 Pharmaceutical 40 CFR 439 Phosphate Manufacturing 40 CFR 422 Photographic 40 CFR 459 Plastics Molding and Forming 40 CFR 463 Porcelain Enameling 40 CFR 466 Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard 40 CFR 430 
and 431 Rubber Manufacturing 40 CFR 428 Soap and Detergent Manufacturing 40 CFR 417 Steam Electric 40 CFR 423 Sugar Processing 40 CFR 409 Textile Mills 40 CFR 410 Timber Products 40 CFR 429  
(Code 1997, § 86-283; Ord. No. 721, 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-270. - Industrial user election. 
    An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation specified in subsection 44-260(b)(2), to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the total phenols limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the total phenols limitation, upon election, upon election: 
2-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 
4-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol ..... 1.0 mg/l 
2,4-Dichlorophenol ..... 5.5 mg/l 
2,4-Dinitrophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 
4-Methylphenol ..... 5.0 mg/l 
4-Nitrophenol ..... 15.0 mg/l 
Phenol ..... 14.0 mg/l 
    Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters. 
(Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-271. - Interim discharge limitations. 
    No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants: 
a.  Any fats, oils or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour period. 
b.  Any total suspended soils (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
c.  Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
d.  Any phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. 
(2)  Noncompartible pollutants: 
Cadmium (Cd) ..... 1.0 mg/l 
(Ord. No. 821, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 44-272. - Water supply and sewage disposal system; acquisition and construction of additions, extensions and improvements. 
(a)  Definitions. Whenever used in this section, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
"Authority" means the Michigan Finance Authority. 
"Authorized officers" means the mayor, the city manager, the city clerk and the city treasurer of the issuer. 
"Bonds" means the Series 2012 Bonds, together with any additional bonds heretofore or hereafter issued of equal standing with the Series 2012 Bonds. 
"Engineers" means Anderson, Eckstein, Westrick, Inc., consulting engineers of Shelby Township, Michigan. 
"Issuer" means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, County of Wayne, State of Michigan. 
"Junior lien bonds" means the Series 2012 Bonds, and any additional bonds that are of equal standing with the Series 2012 Bonds, and junior in standing to the senior lien bonds. 
"MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
"Outstanding bonds" means the issuer's water supply and sewage disposal system revenue bonds, Series 2003, dated June 1, 2003, in the outstanding principal amount of $3,975,000.00. 
"Prior ordinances" means, collectively, the ordinances adopted by the city council authorizing the issuance of the outstanding bonds, including Ordinance Nos. 545, 656, 657 and 783. 
"Project" means the acquisition, construction, furnishing and equipping of improvements to the sewage disposal system of the city's water supply and sewage disposal system, including sewer system rehabilitation, lining and replacement of existing sewer lines, together with all necessary appurtenances and attachments therefor, as described in the plans prepared by the engineers and approved herein. 
"Purchase contract" means the purchase contract to be entered into between the authority and the issuer relating to the purchase by the authority of the Series 2012 Bonds. 
"Revenues" and "net revenues" means the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the prior ordinances and the ordinance codified in this section, the proceeds of millage levied for water and sewer purposes pursuant to the city Charter and such other revenues which are or may be derived or specifically pledged to the operation of the system. 
"Senior lien bonds" means the outstanding bonds and any additional bonds issued pursuant to the prior ordinances that are of equal standing and priority of lien with the outstanding bonds. 
"Series 2012 Bonds" means the water supply and sewage disposal system junior lien revenue bond, Series 2012, in the principal amount of not to exceed $4,900,000.00 issued pursuant to this section. 
"Sufficient government obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
"Supplemental agreement" means the supplemental agreement among the issuer, the authority and MDEQ relating to the Series 2012 Bonds. 
"System" means the entire water supply and sewage disposal system of the issuer, including the project and all additions, extensions and improvements hereafter acquired. 
(b)  Necessity; approval of plans and specifications. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to acquire and construct the project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The project qualifies for the state revolving fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the authority, whereby bonds of the issuer are sold to the authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of 21/2 percent per annum. 
(c)  Costs; useful life. The cost of the project is estimated to be an amount not to exceed $4,900,000.00, including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in subsection (d) of this section, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the project is estimated to be not less than 22 years. 
(d)  Payment of cost; bonds authorized. 
(1)  To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the project, legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2012 Bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed $4,900,000.00, or such lesser amount as shall have been advanced to the issuer pursuant to the purchase contract and the supplemental agreement, and issue the Series 2012 Bonds pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining cost of the project, if any, shall be defrayed from issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use. 
(2)  Except as amended by or expressly provided to the contrary in this section, all of the provisions of the prior ordinances shall apply to the Series 2012 Bonds issued pursuant to the ordinance from which this section derives, the same as though each of said provisions were repeated in this section in detail; the purpose of this section being to authorize the issuance of additional revenue bonds of subordinate lien with respect to the outstanding bonds to finance the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the system, additional bonds of subordinate standing with the outstanding bonds for such purpose being authorized by the provisions of the prior ordinances, upon the conditions therein stated, which conditions have been fully met. 
(e)  Issuance of Series 2012 Bonds; details. 
(1)  The Series 2012 Bonds of the issuer, to be designated "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Junior Lien Revenue Bond, Series 2012", are authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed $4,900,000.00 as finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying part of the cost of the project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2012 Bonds. The Series 2012 Bonds shall be payable out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully in subsection (h) hereof, provided that the Series 2012 Bonds shall be subordinate to the prior lien with respect to the net revenues in favor of the outstanding bonds and of any additional bonds of equal standing with the outstanding bonds hereafter issued. The Series 2012 Bonds shall be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery, payable in principal installments as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2012 Bonds and approved by the authority and an authorized officer. Principal installments of the Series 2012 Bonds shall be payable on April 1 of the years 2014 through 2033, inclusive, or such other payment dates as hereinafter provided. Interest on the Series 2012 Bonds shall be payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing April 1, 2013 or on such other interest payment dates as hereinafter provided. Final determination of the principal amount of and interest on the Series 2012 Bonds and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2012 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of the purchase contract and each of the authorized officers is authorized and directed to execute and deliver the purchase contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above; provided, however, that the first principal installment shall be due no earlier than April 1, 2013 and the final principal installment shall be due no later than April 1, 2034 and that the total principal amount shall not exceed $4,900,000.00. 
(2)  The Series 2012 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of 21/2 percent per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the purchase contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and any authorized officers as shall be appropriate shall deliver the Series 2012 Bonds in accordance with the delivery instructions of the authority. 
(3)  The principal amount of the Series 2012 Bonds is expected to be drawn down by the issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the issuer. 
(4)  The Series 2012 Bonds shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2012 Bonds shall be payable as provided in the Series 2012 Bond form in this section. 
(5)  The Series 2012 Bonds shall be subject to optional redemption by the issuer with the prior written approval of the authority and on such terms as may be required by the authority. 
(6)  The city clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the city clerk. 
(7)  Upon payment by the issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2012 Bonds, the authority shall deliver the Series 2012 Bonds to the issuer for cancellation. 
(f)  Execution of Series 2012 Bonds. The Series 2012 Bonds shall be signed by the manual or facsimile signature of the mayor and countersigned by the manual or facsimile signature of the city clerk and shall have the corporate seal of the issuer or a facsimile thereof impressed thereon. The Series 2012 Bonds bearing the manual signatures of the mayor and the city clerk sold to the authority shall require no further authentication. 
(g)  Registration and transfer. 
(1)  Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The issuer shall not be required: (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2012 Bonds contained in subsection (m) of this section and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice; or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. The issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
(2)  The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept at its principal office sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer; and upon presentation for such purpose the transfer agent shall under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe transfer or cause to be transferred on said books bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
(3)  If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this section shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(h)  Payment of Series 2012 Bonds; security; priority of lien. Principal of and interest on the Series 2012 Bonds shall be payable from the net revenues. There is hereby recognized the statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues created by this section which shall be a lien that is junior and subordinate to the lien of the senior lien bonds created by the prior ordinances, to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under the prior ordinances or the ordinance from which this section derives, except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under the prior ordinances or this section. 
(i)  Management; fiscal year. The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring and constructing of the project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the issuer. The issuer may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system. The issuer may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall coincide with the issuer's fiscal year. 
(j)  Rates and charges; no free service. The rates and charges for service furnished by the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than cost, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(k)  Funds and accounts; flow of funds; junior lien bond and interest redemption fund. The funds and accounts established by the prior ordinances are hereby continued, provided that a junior lien bond and interest redemption fund shall be established as follows: 
(1)  There shall be established and maintained a separate depository fund designated "junior lien bond and interest redemption fund" (the "junior lien fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Series 2012 Bonds, and any bonds of equal standing with the Series 2012 Bonds. 
(2)  Out of the net revenues remaining in the receiving fund after provision has been made for the operation and maintenance fund and only after provision has been made for the redemption fund, there shall be set aside monthly in the junior lien fund a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the current principal of and interest on the Series 2012 Bonds, less any amount in the junior lien fund representing accrued interest on the Series 2012 Bonds. Commencing on October 1, 2012, the amount set aside each month for interest on the Series 2012 Bonds shall be one-sixth of the total amount of interest on the Series 2012 Bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month for principal on the Series 2012 Bonds, commencing April 1, 2013, shall be one-twelfth of the amounts of principal next coming due. If there is any deficiency in the amounts previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding months' requirements. 
(3)  No moneys shall be set aside and credited to the junior lien fund unless and until the issuer is current with respect to all required transfers to all other funds under the prior ordinances and there is no default in any payments or requirements under the prior ordinances. 
(4)  If for any reason there is a failure to make such quarterly deposit in the amounts required, then the entire amount of the deficiency shall be set aside and deposited in the junior lien bond redemption account out of the revenues first received thereafter which are not required by this section to be deposited in the operation and maintenance account or the bond and interest redemption fund or the junior lien bond redemption account, which amount shall be in addition to the regular monthly deposit required during such succeeding month or months. 
(l)  Bond proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of the Series 2012 Bonds as received by the issuer shall be deposited in a separate account in a bank or banks qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94 designated "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Junior Lien Revenue Bonds Construction Fund" (the "construction fund"). Moneys in the construction fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the project and any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. 
(m)  Bond form. The Series 2012 Bonds shall be in substantially the following form with such changes or completion as necessary or appropriate to give effect to the intent of this section: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE 
CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS 
WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
JUNIOR LIEN REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2012 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Finance Authority 
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: ______________________________________ Dollars ($___,000) 
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: _______________, 2012 
    The CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS, County of Wayne, State of Michigan (the "City"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, primarily out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the City's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Finance Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the City and the Authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the Authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid or reduced prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the City a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced, all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached hereto and made a part hereof, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $____________ is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.50%) per annum. Interest is first payable on April 1, 2013, and semiannually thereafter on the first day of April and October of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Bond, so long as the Authority is the owner of this Bond, (a) this Bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this Bond in immediately available funds by 12:00 noon at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; in the event that the Authority's Depository has not received the City's deposit by 12:00 noon on the scheduled day, the City shall immediately pay to the Authority as invoiced by the Authority an amount to recover the Authority's administrative costs and lost investment earnings attributable to that late payment; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this Bond shall be given by the City and received by the Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the Authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined by the Authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share (as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the City, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created which is junior in standing and priority of lien as to the prior lien of the City's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003 (the "Outstanding Bonds") of the City and of any additional bonds of the City of equal standing and priority of lien with the Outstanding Bonds. 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinances Nos. 545, 656, 657, 783 and ___ duly adopted by the City Council of the City (the "Ordinances"), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing improvements to the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the City. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the Ordinances. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, solely and only from the Net Revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of this bond and any bonds of equal standing with this bond, the Outstanding Bonds and any additional bonds of equal standing with the Outstanding Bonds, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including, except for bonds of this issue, a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System as are required by the Ordinance and the Prior Ordinances. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as may be required by the Authority. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, County of Wayne, State of Michigan, by its City Council has caused this bond to be executed with the manual or facsimile signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and the corporate seal of the City to be impressed or imprinted hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS 
By_________________________________ 
  Its Mayor 
(Seal) 
Countersigned: 
By__________________________________________ 
  Its City Clerk 
DEQ Project No.: 5365-01 
DEQ Approved Amt:   $____________ 
SCHEDULE A 
    Based on the schedule provided below unless revised as provided in this paragraph, repayment of the principal of the bond shall be made until the full amount advanced to the City is repaid. In the event the Order of Approval issued by the Department of Environmental Quality (the "Order"), approves a principal amount of assistance less than the amount of the bond delivered to the Authority, the Authority shall only disburse principal up to the amount stated in the Order. In the event (1) that the payment schedule approved by the City and described below provides for payment of a total principal amount greater than the amount of assistance approved by the Order or (2) that less than the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order is disbursed to the City by the Authority, or (3) that any portion of the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order and disbursed to the City is forgiven pursuant to the Order, the Authority shall prepare a new payment schedule which shall be effective upon receipt by the City. 
Maturity Date Principal Amount April 1, 2014 $195,000 April 1, 2015 195,000 April 1, 2016 200,000 April 1, 2017 210,000 April 1, 2018 215,000 April 1, 2019 220,000 April 1, 2020 225,000 April 1, 2021 230,000 April 1, 2022 235,000 April 1, 2023 240,000 April 1, 2024 245,000 April 1, 2025 250,000 April 1, 2026 255,000 April 1, 2027 260,000 April 1, 2028 265,000 April 1, 2029 275,000 April 1, 2030 285,000 April 1, 2031 290,000 April 1, 2032 300,000 April 1, 2033 310,000  
    Interest on the bond shall accrue on that portion of principal disbursed by the Authority to the City which has not been forgiven pursuant to the Order from the date such portion is disbursed, until paid, at the rate of 2.50% per annum, payable April 1, 2013, and semi-annually thereafter. 
    The City agrees that it will deposit with The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository") payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this Bond in immediately available funds by 12:00 noon at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise. In the event that the Authority's Depository has not received the City's deposit by 12:00 noon on the scheduled day, the City shall immediately pay to the Authority as invoiced by the Authority an amount to recover the Authority's administrative costs and lost investment earnings attributable to that late payment. 
(n)  Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
(1)  The holder or holders of the bonds representing in the aggregate not less than 20 percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
(2)  If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest upon the Series 2012 Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
(3)  The holder or holders of the Series 2012 Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Series 2012 Bonds and the security therefor. 
(o)  Additional bonds. The issuer may issue additional bonds of equal standing with the Series 2012 Bonds for the following purposes and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  To complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the issuer, it shall be the duty of the issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(2)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the system or for subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the system and for the purpose of refunding part or all of the junior lien bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional junior lien bonds. Junior lien bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subsection (2) unless the adjusted net revenues of the system for the then last two preceding 12-month operating years or the adjusted net revenues for the last preceding 12-month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least 100 percent of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding senior lien bonds, junior lien bonds and on the additional bonds then being issued. If the additional junior lien bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding junior lien bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any junior lien bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional junior lien bonds. For purposes of this subsection (2) the issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than 16 months prior to the date of delivery of the additional junior lien bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than 28 months prior to the date of delivery of the additional junior lien bonds. Determination by the issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional junior lien bonds shall be conclusive. No additional junior lien bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues of the system shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subsection if the issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the operation and maintenance fund or the redemption fund. 
(3)  For refunding a part or all of the junior lien bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional junior lien bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the bond reserve account for such junior lien bonds. No additional junior lien bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
(p)  Negotiated sale; application to MDEQ and authority; execution of documents. The issuer determines that it is in the best interest of the issuer to negotiate the sale of the Series 2012 Bonds to the authority because the state revolving fund financing program provides significant interest savings to the issuer compared to competitive sale in the municipal bond market. The authorized officers are hereby authorized to make application to the authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2012 Bonds with the authority. The actions taken by the authorized officers with respect to the Series 2012 Bonds prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section are ratified and confirmed. The authorized officers are authorized to execute and deliver the purchase contract, the supplemental agreement and the issuer's certificate. Any authorized officers is further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2012 Bonds for the state revolving fund. Prior to the delivery of the Series 2012 Bonds to the authority, any authorized officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of the Series 2012 Bonds contained in subsection (m) of this section as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Act 227, Public Acts of Michigan 1985, as amended ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. 
(q)  Covenant regarding tax exempt status of the bonds. The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exemption of the interest on the Series 2012 Bonds from general federal income taxation (as opposed to any alternative minimum or other indirect taxation) under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Series 2012 Bonds proceeds and moneys deemed to be bond proceeds. 
(r)  Approval of bond counsel. The representation of the issuer by Miller, Canfield, Paddock and Stone, P.L.C. ("Miller Canfield"), as bond counsel is hereby approved, notwithstanding the representation by Miller Canfield of the authority in connection with the state revolving fund program which may include advising the authority with respect to this borrowing. 
(s)  Approval of bond details. The authorized officers are each hereby authorized to adjust the final bond details set forth herein to the extent necessary or convenient to complete the transaction authorized herein, and in pursuance of the foregoing is authorized to exercise the authority and make the determinations authorized pursuant to Section 7a(1)(c) of Act 94, including but not limited to, determinations regarding interest rates, prices, discounts, maturities, principal amounts, denominations, dates of issuance, interest payment dates, redemption rights, the place of delivery and payment, and other matters, provided that the principal amount of Series 2012 Bonds issued shall not exceed the principal amount authorized in this section, the interest rate per annum on the Series 2012 Bonds shall not exceed 21/2 percent per annum, and the Series 2012 Bonds shall mature in not more than 20 annual installments. 
(t)  Savings clause. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or part thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this section are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
(u)  Severability; paragraph headings; and conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this section shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this section. The paragraph headings in this section are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this section. 
(v)  Publication and recordation. The ordinance codified in this section shall be published in full in the Grosse Pointe News, a newspaper of general circulation in the issuer qualified under state law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the ordinance book of the issuer and such record authenticated by the signatures of the mayor and the city clerk. 
(w)  Effective date. The ordinance codified in this section shall be effective upon its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 847, §§ 1-23, 7-16-2012) 
Sec. 44-273. - Issuance and sale of water supply and sewage disposal system revenue refunding bonds. 
(a)  Definitions. Whenever used in this section, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
"Authorized officers" means the mayor, city administrator, city clerk, and the city treasurer of the city, each individually an authorized officer. 
"Bonds" means the Series 2003 Bonds, the Series 2013 Bonds and any additional bonds of equal standing hereafter issued. 
"Escrow agent" means a bank or trust company qualified to serve and duly appointed by an authorized officer as escrow agent for the bonds. 
"Issuer" or "city" means the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, County of Wayne, Michigan. 
"Junior lien bond ordinance" means Ordinance No. 847 of the city. 
"Junior lien bonds" means the "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Junior Lien Revenue Bond, Series 2012", authorized pursuant to the junior lien bond ordinance. 
"Outstanding ordinances" means Ordinance Nos. 545, 656, 657 and 783 of the city. 
"Refunded bonds" means the portion of Series 2003 Bonds as shall be finally determined pursuant to the sale order referred to herein. 
"Reserve amount" means the lesser of: (i) the maximum annual debt service due on the bonds in the current or any future year; (ii) 125 percent of the average annual debt service on the bonds; or (iii) ten percent of the principal amount of the outstanding bonds. 
"Revenues" and "net revenues" mean the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the outstanding ordinances and the ordinance from which this section derives. 
"Sale order" means the sales order to be executed by an authorized officer of the issuer respecting the sale of the Series 2013 Bonds. 
"Series 2003 Bonds" means the "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003", authorized pursuant to the outstanding ordinances. 
"Series 2013 Bonds" means the "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2013", authorized pursuant to this section. 
"Sufficient government obligations" means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
"System" means the entire water supply and sewage disposal system of the issuer, including all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
"Transfer agent" means a bank or trust company qualified to serve and duly appointed by an authorized officer as paying and transfer agent for the bonds. 
(b)  Necessity; public purpose; estimated cost. It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to refund all or part of the refunded bonds. The estimated cost of refunding the refunded bonds, including legal and financing expenses, in an amount of not to exceed $3,500,000.00, is hereby approved. 
(c)  Payment of cost; bonds authorized. To pay the costs associated with the refunding of the refunded bonds, including legal, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2013 Bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed $3,500,000.00, as finally determined in the sale order and issue the Series 2013 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining costs, if any, shall be defrayed from system funds on hand and legally available for such use, including moneys in the bond and interest redemption fund established for the refunded bonds. 
(d)  Issuance of Series 2013 Bonds; bond details. 
(1)  The Series 2013 Bonds shall be designated "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2013", shall be payable solely and only out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully herein, shall consist of bonds in the minimum denomination of $100,000.00 or integral multiples of $5,000.00 in excess thereof, dated as of the date of delivery or such other date as shall be determined in the sale order, numbered in order of authentication, and shall mature on November 1st in the years 2014 to 2022, inclusive, in such amounts as shall be determined in the sale order. 
(2)  The Series 2013 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates determined on the sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding four percent per annum, payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, commencing November 1, 2013, or such date as determined in the sale order, by check by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity which is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer maintained by the transfer agent. The date of determination of registered owner for purposes of payment of interest as provided in this paragraph may be changed by the issuer to conform to market practice in the future. The principal of the Series 2013 Bonds shall be payable at the principal corporate trust office of the transfer agent. 
(3)  The Series 2013 Bonds shall not be subject to optional redemption prior to maturity. 
(e)  Execution of bonds. The Series 2013 Bonds shall be executed in the name of the issuer with the manual or facsimile signatures of the mayor and the city clerk and shall have a facsimile of the issuer's seal printed on them. No bond signed by facsimile signature shall be valid until authenticated by an authorized signer of the transfer agent. The Series 2013 Bonds shall be delivered by the transfer agent to the purchaser thereof in accordance with instructions from an authorized officer upon payment of the purchase price for the Series 2013 Bonds in accordance with the bid therefor when accepted. Executed blank bonds for registration and issuance to transferees shall simultaneously, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, be delivered to the transfer agent for safekeeping. 
(f)  Registration and transfer. 
(1)  Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer agent shall not be required: (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of bonds contained herein and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice; or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. 
(2)  The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Series 2013 Bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer; and, upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
(3)  If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this section shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(4)  The Series 2013 Bonds may be issued in book-entry-only form through the Depository Trust Company in New York, New York ("DTC") and any authorized officer of the city is authorized to execute such custodial or other agreement with DTC as may be necessary to accomplish the issuance of the Series 2013 Bonds in book-entry-only form and to make such changes in the bond form with the parameters of this section as may be required to accomplish the foregoing. 
(g)  Payment of Series 2013 Bonds. The Series 2013 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely and only from the net revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby recognized a statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or, until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. The statutory first lien referred to herein shall be of equal standing and priority with the issuer's outstanding Series 2003 Bonds not being refunded by this issue and shall be senior in standing and priority with the issuer's junior lien bonds. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this section except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this section. 
(h)  Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
(1)  The holder or holders of the Series 2013 Bonds representing in the aggregate not less than 20 percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
(2)  If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the Series 2013 Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
(3)  The holder or holders of the Series 2013 Bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Series 2013 Bonds and the security therefor. 
(i)  Management; fiscal year. The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring of the project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the city council. The city council may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system. The city council may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall coincide with the issuer's fiscal year. 
(j)  No free service or use. No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than the reasonable cost and value thereof, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(k)  Fixing and revising rates; rate covenant. The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. The rates presently in effect in the city are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law and this section. In addition, the rates shall be set from time to time so that there shall be produced net revenues in an amount not less than 110 percent of the principal of and interest on the bonds coming due in each fiscal year. The rates shall be reviewed not less than once a year and shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(l)  Bond reserve account. The reserve account in the bond and interest redemption fund, as established by the outstanding ordinances shall be adjusted in such amounts, so that upon issuance of the Series 2013 Bonds, the bond reserve account shall total a sum equal to the reserve amount. If it is necessary to increase the amount in the bond reserve account, the city shall deposit a sum from the moneys on hand in the system prior to or concurrently with the delivery of the bonds so that the bond reserve account is fully funded as of the delivery of the bonds. 
(m)  Bond proceeds; escrow fund. From the proceeds of the sale of the Series 2013 Bonds there shall be immediately deposited in the redemption fund an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Series 2013 Bonds. Certain of the proceeds of the Series 2013 Bonds along with moneys on hand in the bond and interest redemption fund for the refunded bonds, if any, shall be deposited in an escrow fund or funds (the "escrow fund") consisting of cash and investments in direct obligations of or obligations of the principal of and interest on which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America or other obligations the principal of and interest on which are fully secured by the foregoing not redeemable at the option of the issuer in amounts fully sufficient to pay the principal and interest on the refunded bonds upon call for redemption. The escrow fund shall be held by the escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement (the "escrow agreement") which shall irrevocably direct the escrow agent to take all necessary steps to pay the principal of and interest on the refunded bonds when due and to call the refunded bonds for redemption on the first call date, as specified by the issuer. The amounts held in the escrow fund shall be such that the cash and investments and income received thereon will be sufficient without reinvestment to pay the principal of and interest on the refunded bonds when due at maturity or by call for redemption as required by the sale order. The remaining proceeds of the Series 2013 Bonds shall be used to pay the costs of issuance of the Series 2013 Bonds. Any proceeds in excess of the proceeds deposited in the escrow fund or required to pay costs of issuance shall be deposited in the bond and interest redemption fund and used to pay interest on the Series 2013 Bonds on the next available interest payment date. The authorized officers are each authorized to select and appoint an escrow agent, and negotiate and enter into an escrow agreement on behalf of the issuer. 
(n)  Bond form. The Series 2013 Bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE 
CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS 
WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
REVENUE REFUNDING BOND, SERIES 2013 
Interest 
Rate Maturity 
Date Date of 
Original 
Issue CUSIP  November 1, 20__  ___________, 2013 REGISTERED OWNER: PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: DOLLARS  
    The City of Grosse Pointe Woods, County of Wayne, State of Michigan (the "Issuer"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, solely and only out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the Issuer's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System (hereinafter defined) the Principal Amount shown above in lawful money of the United States of America to the Registered Owner shown above, or registered assigns, on the Maturity Date shown above, with interest thereon (computed on the basis of a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) from the Date of Original Issue shown above or such later date to which interest has been paid, until paid, at the Interest Rate per annum shown above, payable on ________ 1, 2013, and semiannually thereafter. Principal of this bond is payable upon surrender of this bond at the corporate trust office of __________________________, __________, Michigan (the "Transfer Agent") or such other Transfer Agent as the Issuer may hereafter designate by notice mailed to the registered owner not less than 60 days prior to any interest payment date. Interest on this bond is payable by check or draft mailed by the Transfer Agent to the person or entity who is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner of record, at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the Issuer kept by the Transfer Agent. For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the Issuer has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System of the Issuer, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory first lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. 
    This bond is one of a series of bonds of even Date of Original Issue aggregating the principal sum of $_________, issued pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 545, 656, 657, 783 and ___ of the Issuer, duly adopted by the City Council of the Issuer (together, the "Ordinances"), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying the cost of refunding certain of the Issuer's outstanding Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue and Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2003. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of equal standing as to the Net Revenues may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the Ordinances. The bonds of this issue are of equal standing and priority of lien as to the Net Revenues with the Issuer's Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System Revenue Bonds, Series 2003 which are not being refunded by this issue (the "Outstanding Bonds"). 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of the Issuer and does not constitute an indebtedness of the Issuer within any constitutional, statutory or charter debt limitation of the Issuer but is payable solely and only, both as to principal and interest, from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    Bonds of this issue shall not be subject to optional redemption prior to maturity. 
    The Issuer has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest on and the principal of the bonds of this issue, the Outstanding Bonds and any additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to create and maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System as are required by the Ordinance. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the Issuer kept for that purpose at the office of the Transfer Agent by the registered owner hereof in person, or by the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the Transfer Agent duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new registered bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinances, and upon the payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the Transfer Agent's Certificate of Authentication on this bond has been executed by the Transfer Agent. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Grosse Pointe Woods, County of Wayne, State of Michigan, by its City Council, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and a facsimile of its corporate seal to be printed on this bond, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
  CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS 
 By: _______________________ 
Robert E. Novitke 
Mayor 
(Seal) 
Countersigned: 
___________________ 
 Lisa Kay Hathaway 
 City Clerk 
Certificate of Authentication 
This bond is one of the bonds described in the within-mentioned Ordinances. 
____________________________ ____________, Michigan 
Transfer Agent By: _______________________ 
Authorized Signatory Date of Registration: __________________  
(o)  Adjustment of bond terms. The authorized officers are each hereby authorized to adjust the final bond details as set forth herein to the extent necessary or convenient to complete the sale of the Series 2013 Bonds and in pursuance of the forgoing is each authorized to exercise the authority and make the determinations pursuant to Sections 7a(1)(c) of Act 94, including but not limited to, determinations regarding interest rates, prices, discounts, maturities, principal amounts, denominations, date of issuance, interest payment dates, redemption rights and other matters within the parameters established by this section. 
(p)  Authorization for negotiated sale. The city has considered the option of selling the Series 2013 Bonds through a competitive sale and a negotiated sale and determines that a negotiated sale of the Series 2013 Bonds will allow more flexibility in accessing the municipal bond market, and to price and sell the Series 2013 Bonds at the time that is expected to best achieve the most advantageous interest rates and costs to the city, and will provide the city with greater flexibility in structuring bond maturities and adjust terms for the Series 2013 Bonds. 
(q)  Selection of purchaser; bond purchase agreement and award. The authorized officers are each hereby authorized on behalf of the city to select a purchaser and/or a placement agent for the bonds, to negotiate and execute a bond purchase agreement with the purchaser, if necessary, to execute a sale order evidencing the final terms for the Series 2013 Bonds, and to take all other necessary actions required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the Series 2013 Bonds within the parameters authorized in this section, provided that the Series 2013 Bonds shall be sold at a price not less than 99.0 percent of par and the refunding shall result in a net present value savings to the city. 
(r)  Tax covenant; qualified tax-exempt obligations. The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the Series 2013 Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditures and investment of bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be Series 2013 Bonds proceeds. The Series 2013 Bonds are hereby designated as "qualified tax exempt obligations" for the purpose of deduction of interest expense by financial institutions. 
(s)  Other matters. The authorized officers are each authorized and directed to take the following actions, if necessary: (a) approve the circulation of a preliminary official statement describing the Series 2013 Bonds and to deem the preliminary official statement "final" for purposes of Rule 15c2-12 of the SEC; (b) solicit bids for and approve the purchase of a municipal bond insurance policy for the Series 2013 Bonds; (c) apply for ratings on the Series 2013 Bonds; (d) enter into a continuing disclosure undertaking for the benefit of the holders and beneficial owners of the Series 2013 Bonds in accordance with the requirements of Rule 15c2-12; and (e) do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the Series 2013 Bonds. 
(t)  Appointment of bond counsel. The representation of the city by Miller, Canfield, Paddock and Stone, P.L.C. as bond counsel is hereby approved, notwithstanding its periodic representation in unrelated matters of parties to the transaction. 
(u)  Appointment of financial advisor. The city hereby appoints Bendzinski & Co., Municipal Financial Advisors, as its registered municipal advisor with respect to the Series 2013 Bonds. 
(v)  Savings clause. The outstanding ordinances shall continue in effect, except as specifically supplemented or altered herein. 
(w)  Severability; paragraph headings; and conflict. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this section shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this section. The paragraph headings in this section are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be part of this section. 
(x)  Publication and recordation. The ordinance codified in this section shall be published in full in the Grosse Pointe News, a newspaper of general circulation in the city, qualified under state law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the ordinance book of the issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the mayor and city clerk. 
(y)  Effective date. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 6 of Act 94, ordinance codified in this section shall be approved on the date of first reading and accordingly ordinance codified in this section shall immediately be effective upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 851, §§ 1-25, 1-28-2013) 
Secs. 44-274-44-286. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CATCHBASIN COVERS 

Sec. 44-287. - Statement of purpose. 
    The city council, in order to reduce the sudden inflow of rainwater into the combined stormwater sewer system and treatment facility known as the Milk River Drain during rainstorms so as to reduce combined sewer overloading and the overflow of the Milk River Drainage system, does hereby adopt the rules and regulations of this article requiring the use of restricted catchbasin covers as ordered by the director of public works or his authorized deputy and the city engineer. 
(Code 1997, § 86-291; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 44-288. - Restricted catchbasin cover. 
    On and after March 1, 1998, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any owner of property within the city to permit, allow or maintain the use of any catchbasin cover other than that ordered by the director of public works or his authorized deputy and the city engineer. Every day of noncompliance will be deemed a separate violation. Noncompliance during an appeal shall not be deemed a violation. 
(Code 1997, § 86-292; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 44-289. - Inspection. 
    Agents of the city shall have the right to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection of any connection to the city sewer system and determining the type of restricted catchbasin cover required. 
(Code 1997, § 86-293; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 44-290. - Written notice. 
    The director of public works, after consultation with the city engineer, shall notify the owner, in writing, of the type of restricted catchbasin cover required. A copy of such written notice shall be recorded in a record to be kept by the department of public works. 
(Code 1997, § 86-294; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 44-291. - Right of appeal. 
    Any property owner, including abutting property owners affected by water runoff resulting from use of a restricted catchbasin cover, may appeal a decision of the director of public works or his authorized deputy. Such appeal shall be filed within 15 days of the date of the written notice required by section 44-290 and shall be in writing addressed to the city administrator, and such appeal shall state the reason the property owner or abutting owner believes the order should be modified. The appeal shall be reviewed by the city administrator who may confirm the decision of the director of public works or his authorized deputy, or who may modify such order. The city administrator shall make his decision, in writing, within 15 days of the date of filing of the appeal and shall provide a copy of such decision to the person filing the appeal. If the property owner or abutting owner is dissatisfied with the decision of the city administrator, the property owner or abutting owner may appeal such matter to the city council by filing a written appeal within 15 days of the date of the decision of the city administrator and by paying an appeal fee as currently established or hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the city. The city council shall hear the property owner and/or abutting owner, the director of public works or his authorized deputy, and consider any comments or report by the city engineer, and shall confirm the action of the director of public works or his authorized deputy or the city administrator or modify such order. 
(Code 1997, § 86-295; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 11-3-1997) 
Chapter 46 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Care of trees and shrubs along highways, MCL 247.241 et seq.; municipal forests, MCL 324.52701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND ASH TREES 

Sec. 46-19. - Spraying recommended. 
    It is hereby recommended that every person who owns or has under such person's control any elm trees located within the corporate limits of the city have such trees properly treated each year with an insecticide spray or chemical injection. The type of spray or injection to be used shall be one approved by the city administrator and a list of such will be available in the administrator's office. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-1; Code 1997, § 90-31) 
Sec. 46-20. - Certain trees declared nuisance. 
    Trees or parts thereof of the species and varieties of elm in a dead or dying condition are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for the person owning real property or a tenant on such property whereon such dead or dying elm tree is situated to possess or keep such dead or dying elm tree. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-2; Code 1997, § 90-32) 
Sec. 46-21. - Removal of nuisance-Required. 
    Trees or parts thereof of the species and varieties of elm in a dead or dying condition shall be removed and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the city administrator. The owner or tenant of any real property whereon such dead or dying elm tree is located shall cause such dead tree or dead parts thereof to be removed from such property within 15 days from the date of receipt of a written notice to that effect from the city. Any stumps remaining after the removal of such trees shall be ground or chipped to at least six inches below the existing natural grade. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-3; Code 1997, § 90-33) 
Sec. 46-22. - Same-Costs. 
    The owner of the property upon which such dead or dying elm trees are located shall be responsible for any costs incurred in cutting and removing such trees or parts thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-4; Code 1997, § 90-34) 
Sec. 46-23. - Same-Trees on public property. 
    Dead or dying trees, including elm, located upon public lands within the city shall be removed at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-5; Code 1997, § 90-35) 
Sec. 46-24. - Same-Service of notice. 
    Service of a notice of removal as required by section 46-21 shall be made upon the owner of such property upon which such dead or dying elm tree is located by first class mail addressed to such owner at the owner's last known address as shown in the records of the office of the city assessor. Service of such notice of removal may also be made upon the tenants or occupants of such property by first class mail addressed to such occupants or tenants at the property address. Service may also be made by personal delivery of such notice of removal to the owner or occupant or tenant of such property. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-6; Code 1997, § 90-36) 
Sec. 46-25. - Same-Modification of notice. 
    Any property owner receiving a notice of removal may elect to have such elm trees or parts thereof tested for Dutch elm disease (Ceratocystis ulmi) at the owner's expense. Such testing shall be performed by a person acceptable to the city administrator. If such testing discloses that the tree or trees or parts thereof are not infected by Dutch elm disease (Ceratocystis ulmi), the city administrator may permit the owner to remove or cause the removal of only the dead or dying portion of such trees. Removal of dead or dying portions of such trees must be accomplished within 15 days from the date of the testing report. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-7; Code 1997, § 90-37) 
Sec. 46-26. - Same-Extension of time. 
    Upon application of a property owner who has received notice to remove a dead or dying elm tree under the provisions of this article, the city administrator may extend the last date for removal of such trees under the following conditions: 
(1)  The city administrator may extend the last date for removal of such tree upon a satisfactory showing by the owner that such trees have been girdled and the owner has executed a contract for the removal of such trees. 
(2)  The last date for removal of such trees may be extended no more than 15 days. 
(3)  The total time from the date of notice to the date of removal shall not exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-8; Code 1997, § 90-38) 
Sec. 46-27. - Possession, sale, gift and storage of elm wood prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of elm tree logs or wood and cut branches of elm trees to possess, sell, give away or transport the same except for the purpose of disposal thereof at a lawful disposal site or for the purpose of causing the same to be destroyed by burning at a lawful disposal facility. No person shall possess or store elm logs or elm wood upon property owned by such person or under such person's control for a period greater than 72 hours unless the elm logs or elm wood shall have been debarked and the bark shall have been removed from the property and disposed of at a lawful disposal site or incinerated. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-9; Code 1997, § 90-39) 
Sec. 46-28. - Notification of utility companies. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of public services to notify utility companies of involvement with any overhead wires interfering with the removal of dead or dying trees or parts thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-10; Code 1997, § 90-40) 
Sec. 46-29. - Enforcement of article. 
    The city administrator and such employees of the city as designated by the city administrator shall have the authority to enter upon any private lands within the city for the purpose of inspecting and determining whether any tree located thereon is an elm tree in a dead or dying condition when they have reasonable cause to believe that such conditions may prevail, and if so, to place a distinguishing mark thereon by blaze or otherwise. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-11; Code 1997, § 90-41) 
Sec. 46-30. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5-12; Code 1997, § 90-42) 
Sec. 46-31. - Ash trees included. 
    Sections 46-19 through 46-30, inclusive, shall also apply to dead or dying Ash trees. 
(Ord. No. 806, § 90-43, 10-17-2005) 
Sec. 46-32. - Amendments. 
    This chapter may be amended to include other trees by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 806, § 90-44, 10-17-2005) 
Secs. 46-33-46-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES 

Sec. 46-53. - Scope of article. 
    The terms of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated, shall apply to public streets, alleys, highways, easements, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 90-66; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City forester means the person specifically designated by the city administrator to act in that capacity. In the absence of a city forester, the city administrator, or the administrator's designated agent, shall act in that capacity. 
    Emergency means the occurrence or happening of an event which could not be expected or prevented by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight and which endangers or may endanger the overhead line of the public utilities and the public health and safety. 
    Park means all public parks having individual names and all areas owned by the city or to which the public has free access. 
    Public utility means any person, organization, firm or corporation, public or private, duly authorized to supply electric, gas, telephone, telegraph or water service to or for the general benefit of the public. 
    Right-of-way means any public street, highway, alley or avenue of the city. 
    Trees and shrubs include all woody vegetation. 
(Code 1997, § 90-67; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-55. - Applicability. 
    The terms of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated, shall apply to public streets, alleys, highways, easements, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 90-68; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-56. - Enforcement; authority of city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article. The administrator shall have supervisory control over all trees, shrubs and plants in streets, alleys, parks and public places of the city, and shall be empowered to plant, prune, spray, cultivate and preserve all trees and shrubs within the confines of the streets, alleys, parks and public places of the city, except such streets and highways under the jurisdiction and control of the state highway department or the board of county road commissioners. The city administrator may designate a person to act as city forester consistent with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1997, § 90-69; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-57. - Planting, spraying, pruning, and cutting requirements. 
    No person shall plant, spray, prune, cut, perform surgery on, remove or otherwise destroy any tree, shrub, or other plant in a street right-of-way, in a city park, or on other city-owned land at any time without first obtaining the written permission of the city administrator or the administrator's designated representative. The city administrator's authority over the planting of trees, shrubs and other plants shall include, but not be limited to, the setting of specifications of the type of tree, shrub, or other plant to be planted, the location of the planting, and the responsibility of the applicant to water and otherwise maintain the tree or shrub until such time that the city is prepared to water and otherwise maintain the tree, shrub or other plant. The city administrator's decisions as to species of trees to be planted shall be consistent with the provisions of section 46-58 and with the community tree commission recommendations made pursuant to section 46-59. Appeals of the city administrator's decision shall be made to the city council with notification of the appeal to the community tree commission prior to any hearing. 
(Code 1997, § 90-70; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-58. - Planting of types of trees prohibited. 
(a)  The following types of trees shall not be planted in a street right-of-way, in a city park or on other city-owned land: 
(1)  American Elm (except Princeton, Valley Forge and New Harmony Cultivars). 
(2)  Ash. 
(3)  Black Locust. 
(4)  Box Elder. 
(5)  Bradford Pear. 
(6)  Catalpa. 
(7)  Chestnut. 
(8)  Cottonwood. 
(9)  Domestic fruit. 
(10)  Hawthorne. 
(11)  Horsechestnut, except Baumann Cultivar. 
(12)  Pin Oak. 
(13)  Poplar. 
(14)  Siberian Elm. 
(15)  Silver Maple. 
(16)  Sugar Maple (prohibited in street right-of-way only). 
(17)  Thorney Honeylocust. 
(18)  Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus). 
(19)  Walnut. 
(20)  Willow. 
(b)  In addition, no street right-of way planting of any one species of tree shall cause the total inventory of that species of tree to total more than one-third the total number of trees in the street right-of-way in the block where the planting is to take place. 
(c)  Any application for an exception to this section's tree planting prohibitions shall be approved or disapproved by the city administrator following a hearing with any appeals as provided for under section 46-57. 
(d)  The list of prohibited trees may be amended by council resolution. 
(Code 1997, § 90-71; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-59. - Community tree commission tree planting recommendations. 
    The community tree commission shall prepare and update from time to time a list of trees recommended and not recommended for planting. The list shall be divided into three parts: the first applicable to recommended plantings on private property, the second applicable for planting on public property, and the third part of the list shall identify the species the planting of which is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of section 46-58. The list and each update to the list shall be acted on by resolution of the city council. Upon the list's approval by the city council, the list shall be published and a complete copy of the list will be available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Code 1997, § 90-72; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-60. - Spacing of trees planted in right-of-way. 
(a)  In all future planting of shade trees in the right-of-way, such trees shall be spaced not less than 40 feet from an existing tree in the right-of-way unless the existing tree has been approved for removal within a period of two years from the date of planting of the new tree, and except that in unusual cases any owner of a single lot may, in order to provide a shade or ornamental tree in front of such owner's lot, secure special permission from the city administrator to have a tree planted closer than 40 feet from an existing tree, but in no case shall such planting be less than 30 feet from any existing tree in the right-of-way. 
(b)  No tree shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk less than 21/2 feet from the sidewalk. Trees on private property adjacent to the sidewalk shall be planted not less than three feet therefrom. No trees shall be planted where the distance between the back of the curb and the sidewalk is less than four feet six inches in width. No trees shall be planted closer to the intersection of any two or more streets than 25 feet from the point of intersection of two right-of-way lines. 
(Code 1997, § 90-73; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-61. - Use as anchor; attaching materials to. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tree as an anchor, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any trees in any right-of-way or park. 
(Code 1997, § 90-74; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-62. - Excavations and driveways near trees. 
    Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within six feet of any tree without permission from the city administrator or the administrator's appointed representative. Any person authorized to make such excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good substantial frame box to be approved by the director of public services, and all building material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree. 
(Code 1997, § 90-75; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-63. - Duties of owners of trees overhanging public ways. 
    Every owner of any tree, shrub or plant overhanging the streets or rights-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of ten feet above the surface of the street, alley or right-of-way. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. 
(Code 1997, § 90-76; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-64. - Right of city to trim. 
    Upon the failure of the property owner to do so after adequate notice, the city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or interferes with any public utility wires or equipment necessary to serve public safety communication systems or street lighting or traffic control systems. Such trimming is to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way, and the cost thereof to be borne by the owner of the property affected. 
(Code 1997, § 90-77; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-65. - Height limitations at street intersections. 
    All shrubs or plants located on private property on the triangle formed by two right-of-way lines at the intersection of two streets, and extending for a distance of 25 feet each way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines on any corner lot within the city shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than 30 inches, measured from the property grade line established between the sidewalk and the front main building line to the top of such shrub or plant, in order that the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed. Trees may be planted and maintained on private property in such area, provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of ten feet above the roadway surface. 
(Code 1997, § 90-78; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-66. - Protection of trees on public property. 
(a)  No person shall place on public property any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree which is subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire, or permit any fire or the heat therefrom to injure any portion of any tree on public property. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree, provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the use of city-approved chemical control of trees and brush growth. No electrical wires or installation, or any other lines or wires shall be attached to any tree in any manner that shall cause damage thereto. Any person having under his care, custody or control facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree subject to this article shall, after notice thereof by the director of public services, promptly abate such interference in such a manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of any tree by the department of public services. No paint latex, oil, etc., shall be allowed on any part of any tree, excluding wound dressings. 
(Code 1997, § 90-79; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-67. - Damage from leaking gas. 
    Gas pipes or mains within any public right-of-way or on any public property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. If a leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and main, and the leak shall be repaired within 24 hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired, and the cost of the work, including the cost of removal and the replacement of any trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the damage. 
(Code 1997, § 90-80; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-68. - Chemical control and trimming by public utilities. 
    The city clerk shall, upon request of any interested public utility, issue an annual permit and shall annually thereafter renew such permit granting permission to such public utility to chemically control, trim and keep trimmed all trees and shrubs intruding into the airspace over or growing within the confine of the streets, alleys, parks, rights-of -way and public places of the city in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines and equipment of such public utility safe and accessible and clear of all tree growth which endangers or may endanger such overhead lines or equipment and the public health and safety. Such chemical control and trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the director of public services; however, such utility shall be responsible for damage to trees resulting from any act committed by the utility or its representative or agent. Such permit, as provided for in this section, shall require reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder. Provided, however, that in the event of an emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of such utility, prior notice of commencing work under such permit shall not be required. 
(Code 1997, § 90-81; Ord. No. 796, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 46-69. - Removal of trees. 
(a)  All dead or dying trees afflicted with any fatal communicable disease and located in a public area shall be removed by order of the city administrator. 
(b)  Where an owner of property requests the removal of a living tree, the city administrator is authorized to require, as a condition precedent to granting of approval for such removal, that such property owner assume all or any part of the costs of removing such tree, and also to further require that such tree be replaced at some other location in the immediate vicinity by planting another tree of a type permitted under this article. 
(c)  The city administrator is hereby authorized to direct the removal of any undesirable species of tree, as set out in section 46-58, growing in any right-of-way, park or public place in the city. 
(d)  The city administrator is hereby authorized to direct the removal of any trees or shrubs growing in any right-of-way, park or public place in the city when such trees or shrubs are interfering with fire hydrants, sewers and water mains, visibility at street intersections, traffic control devices or construction affecting the public health and safety within such right-of-way. 
(Code 1997, § 90-82) 
Secs. 46-70-46-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS, BRUSH AND GRASS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Control of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 46-97. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means and includes the dense, wild and unkempt growth of bushes or shrubs or trees growing in thick profusion as well as a pile of lopped or broken branches or brushwood. 
    Grass means and includes common grasses and turf, groundcovers intended to perform functions similar to grasses and turf, but does not include ornamental grasses clearly used for traditional landscaping purposes. 
    Owner means and includes the person or entity shown as the owner on the city tax rolls or other city records, an agent of the owner, an occupant or tenant, a land contract vendor or vendee, a person or entity claiming a possessory interest in the property, or a mortgagee if foreclosure proceedings are pending or completed. 
    Weeds means and includes Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), dodders (any species of brassica or sinapes), wild carrot (daucus carots), bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia eletior 1), poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernis), milkweed (asclepias cornutus), oxeye daisies, or other similar or like weeds or plants which constitute a common nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 90-106; Ord. No. 817, § 90-106, 6-4-2007) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-98. - Brush and grass nuisance. 
    All weeds, brush and grass which are of the height of six inches or more growing or lying upon any property are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of the owner of such land to cause the weeds, brush, or grass to be cut, destroyed or removed. If the owner fails or neglects to cut, destroy or remove the weeds, brush or grass, the owner shall be issued a municipal civil infraction. Issuance of a citation does not prevent the city from taking immediate steps to abate the nuisance in accordance with this article or other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 8-9-3; Ord. No. 816, § 90-107; Ord. No. 817, § 90-107, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 46-99. - Authority for city to cut weeds, brush, or grass. 
    If the owner of any parcel of property within the city fails or neglects to cut the weeds, brush or grass growing upon the property and the weeds, brush or grass attains the height of six inches or more, the city shall have the authority to and may enter upon the property, or hire a private contractor to enter upon the property to abate the nuisance. The costs incurred by the city plus a 30 percent administrative fee shall be billed to the owner. The fee may be modified by council resolution. Upon the failure of the owner to reimburse the city within 30 days, the city assessor shall add the charges to the tax rolls for the property. 
(Code 1975, § 8-9-4; Ord. No. 816, § 90-108; Ord. No. 817, § 90-108, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 46-100. - Notice of duty. 
    The city clerk shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which states that weeds, brush or grass not cut or removed in accordance with this article will be cut by the city when they attain a height of six inches or more. The initial notice will be published simultaneously with a summary of this article, and will thereafter be published annually during the month of March. The building department shall also post a notice on the property requiring abatement of the nuisance within 48 hours of posting containing the same information as the published notice and directing the owner to abate the nuisance within 48 hours of posting the property. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 90-109; Ord. No. 817, § 90-109, 6-4-2007) 
Chapter 48 - WATERWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; local regulation, MCL 324.80110 et seq.; wetlands protection, MCL 324.30301 et seq. 

Sec. 48-1. - Operating season, hours of park facilities. 
    The operating season and daily hours during which the lake front park will be open and available for use of the watercraft storage, mooring and harbor facilities shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-2. - Application; waiting list; watercraft storage. 
(a)  An individual filing a waiting list or watercraft storage application must, at the time of filing, be a city resident as defined by section 30-58. Fulltime employees eligible for park pass privileges may submit an application based on the harbor rules and regulations. Residents have priority with respect to any watercraft storage application, priority on the waiting list and any transfers subject to the provisions of any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(b)  Waiting list application forms and watercraft storage application/agreement forms shall be provided by the parks and recreation division and shall be filed with the recreation supervisor or his designated representative. This representative shall mark the applications with the time and date as applications are filed. 
(c)  Applications shall be considered for watercrafts not exceeding 28 feet in total length. The length of the watercraft shall be determined by the procedure listed in section 48-6. 
(d)  In the event a waiting list exists, only one application shall be considered from any one family or any one resident address. If no waiting list exists, then the recreation supervisor has the discretion to issue a family or resident a second permit for the remainder of any one season, based on application approval and payment. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-2, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-3. - Fees; waiting list; watercraft storage. 
(a)  Waiting list applicants shall be required to pay to the city a nonrefundable fee, as established by the city council by resolution from time to time, as a requirement to get placement on the waiting list. This fee will not be credited to the watercraft storage fees. 
(b)  The annual watercraft storage fees shall be established by the city council by resolution from time to time. 
(c)  Watercraft storage application/agreements filed prior to April 1 shall pay a nonrefundable deposit in the amount of 33 1/3 percent of the annual storage space fee at the time of filing. The balance of the storage fee shall be paid by April 1. Application/agreements filed April 1 or later shall be required to pay the full storage fee. Application/agreements filed June 1 or later shall be prorated on a daily basis. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-3, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-4. - Watercraft-Storage permits. 
(a)  Once watercraft storage application/agreements have been approved, watercraft storage permits will be issued indicating the appropriate storage space to which the applicant has been assigned. The assigned space shall only be used by the boat described on the permit. 
(b)  To receive approval, the following paperwork must be filed with the application/agreement: 
(1)  A copy of the manufacturer's specification sheet indicating the watercraft LOA (length overall) for the watercraft described in the application/agreement. 
(2)  A copy of the current state registration. The name and address shown on the registration must be the name of the individual filing the application/agreement. 
(3)  Verification of an insurance policy, in the name and address of the individual applying for the application/agreement, which shows at least $100,000.00 in liability insurance for the registered watercraft. Any increases in liability insurance may be adopted by the council by resolution. 
(4)  Proof of city residency, or employment if applicable. 
(5)  At the request of the recreation supervisor, a photograph of the boat, showing its length and any appendages. 
(c)  Watercraft storage permits shall be issued only for the watercraft described in the application/agreement. In addition, all paperwork must be in the name and address of the applicant. The applicant may be required to provide additional documentation to verify eligibility. 
(d)  In the event that a new watercraft will be stored in the space, all proper paperwork must be submitted to the lake front park office and at such time, a new permit will be issued if all rules, regulations and ordinances have been complied with. 
(e)  The recreation supervisor may change the space assignment when, in his judgement, such action is required. If such action is necessary during the boating season, the watercraft owner will be notified in writing indicating the change and the effective date of the reassignment. The watercraft owner will have five working days following the effective date to move the watercraft to the new space. Failure to move within the required time constitutes revocation of any existing permit. If the reassignment occurs during the winter months, the new space assignment will be indicated on the watercraft storage application/agreement. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-4, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-5. - Same-Ownership. 
(a)  If the applicant owns a watercraft at the time of filing the wait list application, the watercraft shall be described by indicating the manufacturer, model, type, length, and width on the application. 
(b)  If the applicant will be acquiring the watercraft after filing the watercraft storage application/agreement, the information required by section 48-4 shall be furnished to the city before a watercraft storage permit may be issued. 
(c)  If a waiting list applicant is due for a space assignment before owning a boat, the applicant may make payment for the space with the intention of purchasing a boat. The applicant will have until April 1 of the following year to purchase a watercraft for placement in the space. 
(d)  Should the applicant purchase or become the owner of a watercraft other than that described in the application and permit, an amended application shall be filed and a new permit may be issued, provided such watercraft complies with the provisions of this chapter, the proper permit fees are paid and the original permit surrendered. 
(e)  An applicant for a watercraft storage space shall be required to own the watercraft placed in the space in the seasons following the season in which the applicant is assigned. 
(f)  Storage space is nontransferable, except to a spouse. In the event of the death of a permit holder, the space is automatically transferred to a surviving spouse, but other heirs must reapply and are subject to all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-5, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-6. - Determination of watercraft length. 
(a)  The length of a watercraft permitted in the lake front park marina shall be determined on the basis of the LOA as it appears on the manufacturer's specification sheet or the actual LOA as determined by the recreation supervisor (including any appendages), whichever is longer. The length of the watercraft shall be determined by the length indicated on the state registration in addition to the hand measurements of any appendages, such as outboard motors, swim platform, bowsprit, or pulpit that are not included in the measurement on the registration. 
(b)  Any watercraft, which exceeds 28 feet as defined by this chapter, shall not be permitted to obtain a storage space within the lake front park. 
(c)  Any watercraft, which exceeds 28 feet as defined by this chapter, and has been assigned to a storage space prior to the 2005 season, shall only be allowed to remain in the lake front park marina if the boat can be assigned to a space that will not jeopardize the safety of other watercraft within the marina. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-6, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-7. - Renewal applications. 
    Renewal application forms for watercraft storage spaces shall be mailed to eligible residents on or about November 1 of each year and shall be returned and filed with the city by December 1 of each year, along with a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of 33 1/3 percent of the annual storage space fee. The balance of the storage space fee shall be due and payable to the city on or before April 1 of each year. Late payment of either the deposit or other fees subjects the applicant or permit holder to cancellation of the application, or nonrenewal or revocation of the permit. Late fees for both the initial deposit and the April 1 payment are set at $75.00 per payment. These dates and late fees may be modified by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 809, § 94-7, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-8. - Priority in the issuance of permits. 
    So as to give all bona fide residents of the city a reasonable opportunity to avail themselves of watercraft storage and mooring facilities at the lake front park, the following procedure shall be followed in the issuance of permits under this chapter: 
(1)  Permit holders for the immediately preceding year shall have the privilege of renewing an application/agreement for the successive year before wait list applicants are assigned. In order for a previous permit holder to renew the application/agreement, the appropriate deposit amount must be paid by December 1 and the application/agreement must be submitted along with a current copy of the state registration and a current copy of liability insurance showing coverage of $100,000.00 in liability by December 1. 
(2)  Once previous permit holders have paid deposits for the upcoming season, applications will be issued to wait list applicants according to the date and time of filing to the extent that spaces are available. The recreation supervisor or his designated representative shall assign spaces to the applicants. 
(3)  Failure to take advantage of such space by the waiting list applicant shall constitute a forfeiture of priority privilege and the waiting list application shall be removed from the record. The applicant may reapply to be placed back on the waiting list. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(2-9-6), 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 809, § 94-8, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-9. - Waiting list for watercraft storage spaces. 
(a)  Upon completion of a wait list application, a receipted copy of the application shall be forwarded to the applicant indicating the date and time of filing. This date and time shall be referenced when assigning storage spaces so that the most recent applicant shall be eligible for a space once a suitable space opens. The recreation supervisor or his designated representative shall maintain a roster of all waiting list applicants for storage spaces, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant. 
(2)  Description of the watercraft. 
(3)  Date and time of filing the application. 
(b)  As storage spaces become available for wait list applicants, those applicants shall be notified in writing by certified mail. Failure to take advantage of such notice within ten working days after receiving personal notification of the availability of such storage space shall constitute a forfeiture of priority privileges and the waiting list application shall be removed from the records. 
(c)  If there are not sufficient spaces in which to assign all waiting list applicants, such waiting list applications shall remain on file and retain their priority for any spaces which may become available. 
(d)  Any waiting list applicant who has been removed from eligibility for a watercraft storage permit by reason of forfeiting the applicant's priority position may file a new waiting list application which will place such applicant on the bottom of the waiting list for future consideration. The recreation supervisor or his designated representative shall keep the waiting list available for public inspection upon request of any resident. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-9, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-10. - Cancellation of permit. 
(a)  If a watercraft owner wishes to cancel his or her watercraft storage space at any time after payment has been made to the city, such owner must notify the division of parks and recreation by submitting a written notice indicating the date of cancellation. The watercraft owner will forfeit the watercraft storage space and any renewal for the following seasons. 
(b)  Any watercraft storage space fees paid by the watercraft owner who cancels the watercraft storage space shall be forfeited to the city; however, if the city is able to rent the storage space for the remainder of the season, the fees paid by the subsequent renter will determine the amount to be refunded to the previous renter, less a fee of $75.00 for administrative costs. The fee may be changed by council resolution. 
(c)  To again be eligible for a watercraft storage space, such owner shall be required to apply to be placed upon the waiting list, if any, and pay the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-10, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-11. - Disposition of revenue. 
    All fees collected shall be kept in a separate account and shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Improvements, maintenance and repair of dockage and mooring facilities and adjacent areas, administrative costs and park staff payroll. 
(2)  Any surplus to be transferred to the account or accounts from which the original appropriation was made for construction of such facilities. 
(3)  A policy is hereby established that the permit fees shall, from time to time, be reviewed and revised by the city council so as to provide sufficient funds to amortize the cost of such improvements, construction of watercraft storage and mooring facilities, within the life thereof, as shall be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 684, § 1(2-9-8), 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 3-4-1996; Ord. No. 809, § 94-11, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-12. - Use of city-owned watercraft launching equipment; permit. 
(a)  Watercraft owners may use the launching equipment provided by the city at the lake front park, in accordance with the terms of this chapter and applicable state rules and regulation. 
(b)  Any watercraft entering the park on a trailer shall be required to obtain a watercraft launching ramp permit. Daily and season passes shall be available for purchase at the front gate and such fees shall be determined from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  Any watercraft owner who has been issued a watercraft storage permit is entitled to use the launching equipment for that permitted boat without purchasing a launching permit. 
(d)  The term "watercraft," as used in this section, shall include any watercraft carried upon a trailer. Sailboards, surfboards, kayaks and similar watercraft shall not required a launching permit if not transported upon a trailer. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-9; Ord. No. 809, § 94-12, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-13. - Use of watercraft space. 
    The space assigned shall only be used by the watercraft described in the application and upon which the permit was issued under this chapter; provided, that the recreation supervisor may change the space when, in his judgment, such action is required. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-10; Ord. No. 809, § 94-13, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-14. - Launching and removal of watercrafts. 
    All watercrafts shall be launched and removed by the owner or the owner's agent at the owner's own risk and responsibility, and no city employee shall assist in any such operations. No watercraft shall be permitted to be launched prior to May 1 and all watercrafts must be removed from the storage spaces prior to November 1 of any year, unless a written wavier is signed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-12; Ord. No. 809, § 94-15, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-15. - Watercraft safety inspection. 
    The recreation supervisor or his designated representative shall have the authority to require watercraft owners using the docking facilities at the lake front park to have their watercraft inspected and approved for safety equipment and conditions by the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary. Should any watercraft owner fail upon request of the recreation supervisor or his designated representative to secure a safety inspection by the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, such failure shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the watercraft dock permit of such owner. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-16; Ord. No. 809, § 94-16, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-16. - Rejection of applications. 
    An application for a watercraft storage permit shall be rejected where the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations, or does not qualify; or where the applicant's permit has been previously revoked. In the latter case, such application may be reinstated upon approval of the city council upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-17; Ord. No. 809, § 94-17, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-17. - Revocation or suspension of permit; appeals. 
    Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for violation of the provisions of this chapter or chapter 30, upon recommendation of the recreation supervisor, and by order of the city administrator. Such revocation or suspension shall become effective upon notice in writing, with reasons therefor stated, mailed to or served upon the holder of the permit. Appeal to the city council may be had from such notice of suspension or revocation upon application, in writing, by the aggrieved party, filed with the city administrator within five days after receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation. The city council shall hear such appeal and make the determination thereon, which shall be final. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-18; Ord. No. 809, § 94-18, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-18. - Removal of watercraft by city; recovery of expenses. 
    Any watercraft not removed from its mooring facilities by the owner prior to November 1 shall be removed and placed in storage by the recreation supervisor or his designated representative in the name of the owner. The expense of such removal and storage is the responsibility of the watercraft owner, and any expenses incurred by the city in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be recovered by the city from the owner. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9-19; Ord. No. 809, § 94-19, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 48-19. - Adoption of harbor rules and regulations by reference. 
    In addition to this chapter, the council may adopt, by resolution, harbor rules and regulations. All persons entering the park are subject to this chapter and the harbor rules and regulations. All applicants and permit holders are required to comply at all times with both this chapter and the harbor rules and regulations. In the event of inconsistency between this chapter and the harbor rules and regulations, this chapter controls. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 94-20, 3-20-2006) 
Chapter 50 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to the words as indicated. See the diagrams following this section for illustrations. 
    Alley means a way open to public travel intended for secondary access to premises and less than 30 feet wide. 
    Alterations, structural and alterations, occupancy, mean any change in the location or use of a building, or any change or modification in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, hoists, girders and similar components, or any substantial changes in the roof or exterior walls, or any change in the type of occupancy, the consummated act of which may also be referred to in this chapter as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Architectural features means the features of a building including cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys and decorative ornaments. 
    Automobile wash establishment means a building, or portion thereof, where automobiles or other vehicles are washed with or without the use of a chain conveyor and blower and having, as optional equipment, steam cleaning devices, and where a charge is made or intended to be made for the washing of the vehicle or the use of the facility. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is wholly or partly below the average grade of the ground level adjoining the building is a basement when the height from the grade up to the first floor tier of floor beams or joists is less than the height from the grade level down to the floor; provided, however, that, if the height from the grade level to the first tier of floor beams or joists is five feet or more, such basement shall be considered a story. 
    Billboard means any display sign that contains a message unrelated to or not advertising a business transacted or goods sold or produced on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Block means that property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets. 
    Board of appeals means the city board of appeals as designated in article II, division 5 of this chapter. 
    Boat means any vessel or craft designed for or intended to be used upon water for the conveyance of persons or freight. 
    Boat trailer means any wheeled conveyance, not self-propelled, designed for or used to transport any boat. 
    Building means a structure, temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, intended or used for shelter or enclosure of persons or personal property of any kind. If any portion of a building is completely separated from every other portion of the building by division walls without any openings, each portion shall be deemed a separate building. The term "building" includes the phrase "structure or any part of a structure." 
    Building, accessory, means a detached building that is not intended for human habitation, but the use of which is subordinate and incidental to the principal use and is located on the same lot, including but not limited to garages, carports, storage buildings and sheds, gazebos, pool houses and similar structures. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or the building inspector's authorized representative. 
    Building line means the line formed at the outer surface of a building or structure or enclosure wall with the finish grade or surface ground level. 
    Building, main and building, principal, mean a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Building permit means the written authority issued by the building inspector permitting the construction, removal, moving, alteration or use of a building in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
    Camper means any equipment designed for temporary living quarters and constructed so as to be capable of being carried upon or towed by any motor vehicle. 
    Carryout restaurant means any establishment the principal business of which is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and the design or method of operation which includes both the following characteristics: 
(1)  Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers. 
(2)  The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within the restaurant building, within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is posted as being prohibited and such prohibition is strictly enforced by the restaurateur. 
    Commercial vehicle means any truck used for commercial purposes, any stake truck, dump truck, highway tractor-trailer truck, semitrailer, utility trailer, storage container, construction vehicle or equipment or other vehicle with mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, plows or other similar equipment. A pickup truck, car, van, or SUV type vehicle is also deemed a commercial vehicle if such vehicle exhibits one of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Commercial license plates (see section 50-521). 
(2)  An advertising sign or lettering, business logo, business address, telephone number, or internet address on the exterior of the vehicle or mounted or placed inside the vehicle so as to be plainly visible from the exterior thereof in such fashion as to convey or attempt to convey an advertising message to the public. 
(3)  Substantial exterior commercial advertising such as "wrapped" vehicles. 
    Commission and planning commission mean the city planning commission. 
    Convalescent home and nursing home mean a home for the care of the aged or the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering serious bodily disorders, wherein three or more persons are cared for. A convalescent or nursing home shall also conform to and qualify for license under applicable state laws, even though state law may provide for different size regulations. 
    Court means an open unoccupied space other than a yard, bounded on at least two sides by a building. A court extending to the front lot line or front yard, or to the rear lot line or rear yard, is an outer court. Any other court is an inner court. 
    District means a portion of the city within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-thru facility means the use of land, buildings, or structures, or parts thereof, to provide or dispense products or services, either wholly or in part, through an attendant or window or automated machine, to persons remaining in motor vehicles that are in a designated stacking lane. A drive-thru facility may be permitted only as an accessory use in combination with a bank or financial institution. 
    Dwelling means any house, building, structure, tent, shelter, trailer or vehicle, a portion thereof, which is occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence, living or sleeping place of one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. In case of mixed occupancy, where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling, that part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling for the purpose of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions relative to dwellings. Garage space, whether in an attached garage or in a detached garage, shall not be deemed a part of a dwelling. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means a building used for and as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and each having their own cooking facilities therein, including apartment houses, townhouses and apartment hotels. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a dwelling occupied by one family, and so designed and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations for one family only. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a dwelling occupied by two families, and so designed and arranged so as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations for two families only. 
    Dwelling, two-family income, means a private dwelling, 11/2 stories or more in height, having one heating plant, a single entrance and the appearance of a single dwelling, but containing separate living apartments for two families. 
    Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof having cooking facilities, which is occupied wholly as the home, residence or sleeping place of one family, either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a travel trailer, mobile home, motor home, automobile chassis, tent or other portable building be considered a dwelling in single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential areas. In cases of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purpose of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions thereof relative to dwellings. 
(1)  One-bedroom unit means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than two rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(2)  Two-bedroom unit means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than three rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Three- or more bedroom unit means a dwelling unit consisting of four or more rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(4)  Efficiency unit means a dwelling unit consisting of one room, exclusive of any bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal room. 
    Erected means built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities, or municipal departments or commissions, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith (but not including buildings) reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions for the public health, safety or general welfare. 
    Family means both a domestic family or a functional family defined as follows: 
(1)  Domestic family means an individual or group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, with not more than one additional unrelated person who are domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit; or 
(2)  Functional family means the functional equivalent of a domestic family shall be composed of persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render a domestic family a cohesive unit. A functional family shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization, or group where the common living arrangement or the basis for the establishment of the functional family is likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration. 
There shall be a rebuttable presumption enforceable by the building official that the number of persons who may reside as a functional family shall be limited to four persons. In addition, any person desiring to qualify as a functional family must first provide information to the building official and obtain a permit showing compliance with the requirements to qualify as a functional family. 
    Fast food restaurant means any establishment the principal business of which is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carryout with consumption off the premises, and the design or principal method of operation which includes both of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers. 
(2)  The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is posted as being prohibited and such prohibition is strictly enforced by the restaurateur. 
    Floor area, gross, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building, which is what this normally is referred to as, shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher. Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor area. Areas of basements, utility rooms, breezeways, unfinished attics, porches (enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages are not included. 
    Floor area, usable, means that portion of the floor area, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls, used for or intended to be used for services to the public or customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures or equipment used for display or sale of goods or merchandise, but not including areas used or intended to be used for utility or mechanical equipment rooms or sanitary facilities. In the case of a half story, the usable floor area shall be considered to be only that portion having a clear height above it of four feet or more. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building, or a portion of a principal building, designated or used primarily by the occupants of the principal building for storage of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, bicycles, lawn equipment and similar personal property. 
    Garage, public, means a space or structure, other than a private or community garage, for the storage, care, repair, refinishing or servicing of motor vehicles, except that a structure or room used solely for the display and sale of such vehicles, in which they are not operated under their own power, and in connection with which there is no repair, maintenance, servicing, refinishing or storage of vehicles other than those displayed, shall not be considered a garage. 
    Greenbelt means an area of land which is planted and maintained in accordance with section 50-532. 
    Gross leasable area (GLA) means the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
    Height of building means the vertical distance from the finished grade level adjoining the building to the highest point on the ridge of the roof. 
    Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, including use of a single-family residence to give instruction in a craft or fine art, not involving employees other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which does not endanger the health, safety and welfare of any other persons residing in that area by reason of noise, noxious odors, unsanitary or unsightly conditions, fire hazards and the like, involved in or resulting from such occupation, profession or hobby; provided that no article or services are sold or offered for sale on the premises, and that such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or construction features, equipment, machinery, outdoor storage or signs not customarily in residential areas. 
    Hotel means a building occupied as a temporary abiding place for individuals, who are lodged with or without meals in rooms, in which provision is not made for cooking on any individual plan and in which there are more than ten sleeping rooms. 
    House trailer and travel trailer mean any wheeled vehicle, not self-propelled, designed for or used as temporary living quarters, including a folding structure designed for travel or vacation use. 
    Impervious surface means any material which prevents, impedes or slows infiltration or absorption of stormwater directly into the ground at the rate of absorption of vegetation bearing soils, including asphalt, concrete, gravel, stone, and other surfaces. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same parcel of lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot means a piece or parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, or by any use other than a building permitted in this chapter, and including the open spaces required. A lot of record is a lot the dimensions of which are shown on a plat on file with the county register of deeds, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such lot held in ownership of record separate from the remainder thereof. Where one lot and a part of a lot of record are adjacent and held in one ownership, they shall be considered to be a single lot of record. 
    Lot area means the total area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures and above ground and permanent swimming pools. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the center of the front street lot line to the center of the rear lot line. 
    Lot, double-frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two, more or less, parallel streets. In the case of a row of double-frontage lots, one street will be designated as the front street for all lots in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If there are existing buildings in the same block fronting on one or both of the streets, the required minimum front yard setback shall be observed on those streets where the majority of the buildings presently front. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot with only one lot line fronting on a street. 
    Lot lines. 
(1)  Front lot line, in the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, means the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purposes of this chapter, provided it is so designated on the application for a certificate of compliance. 
(2)  Rear lot line means that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be that line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a lot, the dimension and configuration of which are shown on a map recorded in the office of the register of deeds for the county, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is attested to by a professional engineer or land surveyor, so registered and licensed in the state, and likewise so recorded on a file with the county. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the building line, or setback line, intersects the side lot lines. 
    Mixed use means a use that allows a combination of different compatible uses, such as commercial, office, retail and residential, in a single building or group of buildings. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semidetached or detached temporary rental units having a separate entrance and containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Such unit without kitchenette or kitchen shall contain not less than 350 square feet of floor space, and each unit with permitted kitchens or kitchenettes shall contain not less than a total of 450 square feet of floor space in each rental unit. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or the effective date of amendments to this chapter, and which does not conform to the provisions (e.g., setbacks, height, lot coverage or parking) of this chapter in the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or the effective date of amendments to this chapter, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Occupied includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented, leased or intended to be inhabited; not necessarily for dwelling purposes. 
    Open porch means a structure attached to a dwelling when it meets the following specifications: 
(1)  There shall be no enclosing walls above railing height other than the wall of the dwelling to which the structure is attached. 
(2)  The space between the top of the railing and the bottom of the roof beam of the structure shall be open and unobstructed, except that insect screening may be provided in such open area. 
(3)  There shall not be any insulation installed, mounted or placed on any wall of the structure except the wall of the dwelling to which such structure is attached. 
(4)  There shall be no vertical framing in the structure other than supporting columns and screen frames. 
(5)  The height of any railing shall be limited to a maximum of 36 inches from the floor of the structure. 
(6)  There shall be no connection to the internal heating system of the dwelling to which the structure is attached and no installation of space heating units in the structure, including the wall of the dwelling to which the structure is attached, so as to provide heat to any area of the structure. 
    Owner means any person or entity, other than the lienholder, who has any property interest in or title to any vehicle, boat, boat trailer, commercial vehicle, utility trailer, travel trailer, house trailer, pickup camper or recreational vehicle. 
    Parking space means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle, but not less than nine feet by 19 feet, together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting ingress and egress of a motor vehicle. If the structure for which the parking space is required is situated on a lot that is 40 feet or less in width, the area of the lot required for driveway purposes may be utilized for parking spaces without regard to providing a driveway for ingress and egress. 
    Private school means any school other than a public school. 
    Property owner means any person who has the possession of or title to real property located in the city. In the case of corporations, any director or officer of such corporations shall be a responsible person under the terms of this division. 
    Public utility means any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, under municipal or other governmental regulation, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, water, communication or transportation. 
    Recreational vehicle means any self-propelled motor vehicle containing temporary living quarters, sleeping accommodations or equipment. 
    Separate ownership means ownership of a parcel of property wherein the owner does not own adjoining vacant property. Ownership of a property may include dual or multiple ownership by a partnership, corporation or other group. The owner of any number of contiguous lots of record may designate such lots as a single lot of record for the purpose of this chapter, and in such case the outside perimeter of the group of lots of record shall constitute the front, rear and side lot lines thereof. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance required to exist between the front line of the building, excluding steps or unenclosed porches, and the front lot line. The required setback area is that area encompassed by the respective lot lines and setback lines. 
    Solar energy system means an accessory to a main structure, or accessory structure, or use, which is comprised of a combination of solar collector(s) and ancillary solar equipment used to generate electricity primarily for consumption on the property on which the system is located. A solar energy system can include a photovoltaic or solar thermal system that uses the sun's energy to produce electricity or heat. 
    Solar panel means a grouping, module, or array of photovoltaic cells that produce electricity from sunlight. 
    State licensed residential facilities means structures constructed for residential purposes that are licensed by the state under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act No. 218 of 1979 (MCL 400.701 et seq.), or Public Act No. 116 of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et seq.), and provides residential services to six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervised care. 
    Storage container means any container, whether wheeled or not, designed for storage of any materials, product, merchandise, or other personal or business property. 
    Stored and storage mean the keeping or standing in any particular place or area, not within a fully enclosed garage, within the city limits, for a period of time exceeding 72 hours. 
    Story means is construed as being no more than ten feet in height using a vertical line extending from floor to ceiling. A half-story shall be construed as an area for finished or unfinished rooms under a sloping roof that does not exceed one-half of the floor area of the story immediately below. That portion of any structure below the ground, in whole or in part, in which living or sleeping quarters are provided, shall be considered to be a story in determining the height of the structure. 
    Street means any thoroughfare or way, other than a public alley, dedicated to the use of the public and open to public travel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle, place, court or terrace, or by any similar designation. 
    Structure means anything erected which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having permanent location on the ground. 
    Swimming pool means any structure or container located above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than 24 inches, intended for swimming or bathing. 
    Tent means a shelter of canvas or similar material or the like, supported by air pressure or by poles and fastened by cords or pegs driven into the ground. 
    Travel trailer means a nonmotorized towable vehicle primarily designed for travel or recreational usage, which may also contain facilities for overnight lodging. This term also includes folding campers and truck-mounted campers. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used, or for which they are occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory, means a use normally incidental to and subordinate to the principal use of the premises. 
    Utility trailer means any wheeled conveyance, not self-propelled, designed for use by being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Yard means an open space at grade line between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for the certain architectural features specified in section 50-233. Yard measurements shall be the minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest line of the main building or of an accessory building attached thereto. 
  
CORNER, INTERIOR AND DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS   
NONCONFORMING USE   
YARD REQUIREMENTS   
LOT TERMS   
BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS   

(Code 1975, § 5-1-1; Code 1997, § 98-1; Ord. No. 768, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 814, § 98-1, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 850, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 856, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 50-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building or land, or part thereof, shall be used, altered, constructed or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-1; Code 1997, § 98-2) 
Secs. 50-3-50-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-23. - Building permit required; approval. 
(a)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered and no land shall be used until a permit shall have been obtained by the owner of the building or land from the building inspector or administrative official. No such permit shall be issued to erect or alter a building or structure, or to make a use of land or make any changes of use thereof, unless the building or land is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In C districts, no permit shall be issued for a new building, for alteration of an old building, or changes in use, until the plans have formally been approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-1; Code 1997, § 98-431) 
Sec. 50-24. - Application for building permit; existing permits. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan and plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions or survey of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected and such other information as the building inspector shall find necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Satisfactory evidence of ownership of the entire lot shall accompany all applications for permits under the provisions of this chapter. A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. Nothing contained in this section shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued, or for which plans are on file at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and for the erection for which a permit is issued within one month after the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and prosecuted within three months following the date of the issuance of such permit, and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within six months following the date of the issuance of such permit, and which entire building shall have been completed according to such plans, as filed as provided in this subsection, within one year from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. If work under a permit is not started within six months of the date of the permit, the permit shall be voided. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-2; Code 1997, § 98-432) 
Sec. 50-25. - Fee for building permit. 
    Before any building permit shall be issued, an inspection fee shall be paid in an amount fixed by a schedule established by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-3; Code 1997, § 98-433) 
Sec. 50-26. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the holder of every building permit to notify the building inspector, in writing, of the time when such building will be ready for inspection. Two such inspections shall be requested on all buildings. The first of these inspections shall be requested when excavation for foundations has been completed, and the second inspection shall be requested when the building is completed. In the case of sheds and garages having an area of less than 800 square feet, only one inspection by the building inspector shall be required, which inspection shall be requested as soon as wall studs are in place. Failure to notify the building inspector of the time for such inspection shall automatically cancel the permit, and before reissuing such permit the building inspector may require the payment of a second fee. A notice calling the attention of the holders of permits to the requirements of this section shall be printed on all permits issued. The building inspector shall inspect the downspouts to determine that they are disconnected from the sewer system and are in compliance with section 44-230. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-4; Code 1997, § 98-434; Ord. No. 763, § 1, 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 50-27. - Certificate of occupancy and compliance required. 
    No land or building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector stating that the land or building, or proposed use of a building or land, complies with all the building and health laws and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-5; Code 1997, § 98-435) 
Sec. 50-28. - Application for certificate of occupancy and compliance; issuance. 
    Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or alteration of such building or the use of land shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A record of all such certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. No fee shall be charged for an original certificate applied for coincident with the application for a permit for all other certificates. For copies of any original certificates, there shall be a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. No permit for the excavation for or the alteration of any building, or for any use of land, shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy and compliance. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-6; Code 1997, § 98-436) 
Sec. 50-29. - Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use of buildings. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall be required for each nonconforming use of buildings existing prior to the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Application for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or lessee of the building occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use upon such application. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-7; Code 1997, § 98-437) 
Sec. 50-30. - Responsibility for administration and enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a building inspector or administrative official. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-8; Code 1997, § 98-438) 
Sec. 50-31. - Performance guarantees. 
    Where, in this chapter, there is delegated to the city council the board of appeals or the city planning commission the function of establishing certain physical site improvements as a contingency to securing a zoning amendment, special approval or variance, the city council, board of appeals or planning commission may, to ensure strict compliance with any regulation contained or required as a condition of the issuance of a permit, require the permittee to furnish a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond to be deposited with the city clerk, in an amount determined by the city council, board of appeals or planning commission to be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance under this chapter; provided, however, that in fixing the amount of such cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond, the city council, board of appeals or planning commission shall take into account the size and scope of the proposed improvement project, current prevailing cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator, estimated expenses to compel the operator to comply by court decree, and such other factors and conditions as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in the light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The city may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee before the date on which the city is prepared to issue the permit. The city shall establish procedures under which a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made as work progresses. This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-9; Code 1997, § 98-439) 
State Law reference- Performance guarantee, MCL 125.3505. 
Sec. 50-32. - Special land use approval. 
    Special land uses shall be approved in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Filing of application. The owner of any interest in land for which special land use approval is sought, or the designated agent of the owner, shall file the application for special land use with the administrative official designated under the terms of section 50-30. 
(2)  Approval required prior to issuance of building permit. The city council shall approve all special land use applications in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section before a building permit is issued. 
(3)  Application forms and documentation. The application for special land use approval shall be made on such forms as shall be provided by the city council and provided by the administrative official designated under the terms of section 50-30 and shall be accompanied by the necessary fees and documents as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Review and report by administrative official. The application for special land use approval shall be submitted to the administrative official, who shall prepare a report on whether the proposal meets all applicable requirements of this chapter and any additional requirements recommended by the administrative official based on the standards set forth in this chapter. The administrative official shall forward the report, together with the application, within 45 days of receiving the completed application. 
(5)  Notice of planning commission hearing. The planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing on the special land use within 45 days of receiving the completed application, and shall provide notice of such date in accordance with the notice requirements in this chapter. 
(6)  Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission shall, within a reasonable time following the date at which the application for special land use approval was considered, pass a resolution setting forth its findings regarding the standards set forth in this chapter, and shall recommend to the city council approval, approval with conditions or disapproval, with its reasons. 
(7)  Review of recommendations and public hearing by council. The city council shall review the application for special land use approval, together with the administrative official's report and planning commission's recommendations thereon. If a variance is also requested in conjunction with a special land use application, the planning commission shall first issue its recommendation on the special land use application only. The zoning board of appeals shall then address the variance request. The city council will then address the special land use application. The city council shall hear any person wishing to express an opinion on the application for special land use approval at its next regular meeting following the city council's formal receipt of the application from the planning commission, provided such regular meeting provides adequate time to notify adjacent property owners and publish a notice of public hearing pursuant to requirements for such notice as set forth in this section. (See MCL 125.3502) 
(8)  Determination by council; modifications; issuance of building permit. 
a.  The city council shall make the final determination on the application for special land use approval. Such determination shall be based solely on the requirements and standards of this chapter. Approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval shall be made by resolution setting forth the city council's findings regarding the pertinent requirements and standards. 
b.  If the special land use is approved by the city council, the applicant may then submit the written approval to the building inspector, who will then issue a building permit if all other requirements have been met. If approval is denied, the city council may by resolution require that a revised special land use application be resubmitted for review and approval in accordance with the process outlined in this section. If, in the judgment of the city council, the special land use application can be approved if minor modifications are made, the city council may by resolution issue a conditional approval in writing and provide for resubmission of a revised special land use application to the building inspector, who shall issue a building permit upon determination that all appropriate modifications have been made in accordance with city council stipulations, and that all other requirements have been met. 
(9)  Record of actions and notification of applicant. Each action taken with reference to special land use review and approval shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the planning commission and city council, and the grounds for the action taken upon each special land use submitted for review and approval shall also be recorded in the minutes and transmitted in writing to the applicant. 
(10)  Maintenance of site design. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for which special land use approval is required to maintain the property in accordance with the approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is razed, or until new zoning regulations supersede the regulations based upon which the special land use approval was granted, or until a new special land use approval has been obtained as a basis for modifying the use of site design. Any property owner who fails to so maintain a special land use as approved shall be deemed in violation of the use provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate to such a use violation. All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for a special land use approval shall become, with any changes ordered by the city council, a part of the conditions of any approval issued by the city council pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-10; Code 1997, § 98-440) 
Sec. 50-33. - Hearing fee for proposed construction in R-3 or C.F. district or special land use applications. 
    All applicants for proposed construction in a planned multiple-family residential development district or a community facilities district and applicants for special land uses shall pay to the city a hearing notice fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for the notice of publication for such hearing. Payment shall be made at the time the application for such hearing is made. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-20; Code 1997, § 98-21) 
Sec. 50-34. - Site plan review required; exceptions. 
    Site plan review is required for special land use applications, and for new construction and remodeling of or additions to existing structures within the city, except for development, renovation, or construction of a single family home or a two family duplex on a single lot. If required, a site plan shall be filed with the building official and approved in accordance with the provisions of this section and sections 50-35-50-42 prior to issuance of a building permit. All site plans shall be reviewed by the planning commission. In addition, site plans are subject to review by the city council or zoning board of appeals if the site plan involves: 
(1)  Use within a community facility district; 
(2)  A request for a special land use; 
(3)  A request for a variance; 
(4)  Or as otherwise required as a condition of approval by chapter 50, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 98-442, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-35. - Application for review. 
    The owner or designated agent of the owner shall file an application for the site plan review with the building official on forms provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by the required plans, documents, fees and costs. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-2; Ord. No. 810, § 98-443, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-36. - Submission of plans; approval by the building official. 
(a)  Preapplication procedure. Prior to submission of a formal application, the applicant shall meet with the building official to determine the project's complexity. The project's complexity will determine the level of information required on the application. A major project requires completion of a full application with all information required by this article. A minor project requires completion of a partial application including information as required by the building official. The building official has discretion to determine whether the application involves a major or minor project, based on the standards and requirements set forth in this article. The building official's determination on this issue is appealable to the planning commission. The planning commission may still require additional information for minor projects in its discretion. 
(b)  Application review. The application for site plan approval, plus 14 copies of the site plan, shall be submitted to the building official in accordance with the requirements in this article at least 14 days prior to the next scheduled planning commission meeting. The building official shall review the site plan and supporting documents and, if the application is complete, place the item on the planning commission agenda. The building official shall furnish a written report and recommendation concerning the proposed site plan to the planning commission. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-3; Ord. No. 810, § 98-444, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-37. - Review by planning commission. 
    The planning commission shall review the site plan together with the supporting documents and the report from the building official at a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting to be held within 45 days of receiving the completed application. The planning commission shall then adopt a resolution or vote on a motion setting forth its findings based upon the requirements for such project as contained in this Code. If further review is required by the city council or zoning board of appeals as provided for in this chapter, the planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval with its reasons. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-4; Ord. No. 810, § 98-445, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 829, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 50-38. - Review and determination by council. 
    If required by this chapter, the city council or zoning board of appeals, after the planning commission review, shall review the application for site plan approval together with the report of the building official and the planning commission's recommendations, and shall make a final determination on the application for site plan approval. By resolution, the city council may grant approval, grant approval with conditions, or disapprove the site plan. The resolution shall set forth the findings of the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-5; Ord. No. 810, § 98-446, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-39. - Issuance of building permit; time limit for commencement of construction. 
    Upon final approval of the site plan, a building permit may be obtained, subject to the review and approval of the engineering and construction plans and payment of the applicable fees. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other city, state or federal permits prior to the issuance of a building permit. If construction is not commenced within one year of the site plan approval, construction may not begin until the site plan is again reviewed by the planning commission. The applicant may apply for and obtain a 60-day extension of the one-year limitation from the planning commission by providing reasonable evidence as to the cause of delay and that such project is likely to be able to proceed within the additional 60-day extension period. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-6; Ord. No. 810, § 98-447, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-40. - Preparation and contents of site plan. 
    Each site plan application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Preparation; preparer's seal. The site plan shall be prepared by, and carry the seal of, a registered architect or professional engineer who prepared the plan, in the event the proposed costs of the project exceeds $10,000.00. 
(2)  Legal description, address and zoning information. The site plan shall contain the legal description of the property, the property address, the property owner's name, and the zoning classification of the particular site and all adjacent properties. 
(3)  Title block. The site plan shall also contain a title block that includes the applicant's name, the project name, the preparer's name, the drawing scale and the date of the original drawing and any revisions. 
(4)  Scale; general location map. The site plan shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals ten feet for sites of less than five acres, and one inch equals 100 feet for sites of five acres of more, and shall contain a north arrow and size in acres. A general location map at a scale of four inches equals one mile, giving the site location, is also required. 
(5)  Existing and proposed topography. Existing and proposed topography drawn to at least two-foot contour intervals shall be shown on plans for sites of one acre or more. Topography on the site plan and within 100 feet of the site shall be included, referenced to a USGS benchmark. 
(6)  Existing and proposed vegetation. Indications of trees and shrubs shall be used on the site plan where the trees and shrubs exist or where such vegetation will be planted. All such trees and shrubs shall be labeled as to size and whether existing or proposed. 
(7)  Material samples. The application shall include a list of primary materials (ex., brick, stone, roofing, paint chips) to be used on the projects exterior and the applicant shall bring representative material samples to the planning commission meeting. 
(8)  Additional dimensional information. The following additional information shall be required (all dimensional) for all site plans: 
a.  Dimensioned floor plans. 
b.  A survey showing existing lot lines, structures, parking areas and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
c.  Dimensions and centerline of existing and proposed roads and right-of-ways. 
d.  Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes, where required. 
e.  Proposed location of access drives and on-site driveways. 
f.  Loading and unloading areas. 
g.  Location of existing and proposed interior sidewalks and sidewalks in the right-of-way. 
h.  Exterior lighting locations, and light pole detail and specifications; provided that the building official or planning commission may also require a more detailed lighting plan and/or photometric studies to assure adequate protection of surrounding properties. 
i.  All utilities serving the area located on the site. 
j.  Trash receptacle location and method of screening, including information detailing specific material samples that compliment the proposed construction. 
k.  Transformer pad locations, mechanical equipment location, and method of screening. 
l.  Location of front, side and rear setbacks, height restriction, and yard dimensions. 
m.  Dimensioned parking spaces and parking coverage, preliminary drainage plan, drives and method of paving, and cross sections and details of all curbs and ramps. 
n.  Location of lawns and landmark trees, hardscape and landscape areas, including specific plant materials proposed. A landmark tree is any tree that has a trunk over 12 inches in diameter as measured from 41/2 feet from the average ground level. 
o.  Greenbelt, wall or berm locations and cross sections. 
p.  All existing and proposed easements. 
q.  Designation of fire lanes and fire hydrant locations. 
r.  Building elevations including location, height and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings and structures, including color renderings. 
s.  Location, size, height and lighting of all proposed signs. 
t.  Swimming pool fencing details, including height and type of fence, if applicable. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-7; Ord. No. 810, § 98-448, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-41. - Standards for approval. 
    The planning commission shall approve a site plan if the site plan meets all applicable standards set forth in this Code. If such site plan does not comply with such provisions, the plan may be approved by the zoning board of appeals by granting a waiver or variance of such deficiency and upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals or the city council that the site design will be in compliance with the standards found in the zoning enabling act and this section. The planning commission may, as a basis for making such findings, require whatever site plan modifications it deems necessary, including the provision of additional site design amenities not specifically required by this Code, in order to protect natural resources and the health, safety and welfare and the social and economic well-being of the people. In addition, the planning commission shall use the following criteria in evaluating the site plan: 
(1)  Adequacy of information. The site plan shall include all required information in sufficiently complete and understandable form to provide an accurate description of the proposed uses and structures. 
(2)  Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and type of plot, the character of the adjoining property and the type and size of buildings. The site plan shall be so developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for the uses permitted. 
(3)  Preservation of natural areas. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal. Appropriate provisions shall be made for either the preservation of landmark trees or alternative measures to assure future plantings within the city. 
(4)  Privacy. The site design shall provide reasonable visual and sound privacy for dwelling units located within the project and adjacent to the project. Fences, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants. 
(5)  Emergency vehicle access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicles access by some practicable means to all sides. 
(6)  Ingress and egress. Every structure or dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate and safe means of ingress and egress via public streets and walkways. 
(7)  Separation of vehicle and pedestrian circulation. The site plan shall provide a pedestrian circulation system which is insulated as completely as is reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system. 
(8)  Arrangement of streets and pedestrian ways. 
a.  The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the pattern of existing or planned streets and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. The width of streets and drives shall be appropriate for the volume of traffic they will carry. 
b.  In order to achieve adequate and safe traffic circulation, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may require dedication of a public right-of-way through the site, prior to site plan approval. The planning commission may also recommend and the city council may require that marginal access drives be constructed to serve adjacent buildings, parking areas and loading zones, and thereby reduce the number of outlets onto major thoroughfares or roads. If such marginal access drive is required, the city council may require the deposit of a performance guarantee with the city clerk to ensure completion of the drive. 
(9)  Drainage. Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that the removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made for the construction of sewer facilities, including grading, gutters, piping and treatment of turf to handle stormwater and prevent erosion and the formation of dust. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not create puddles in paved areas. 
(10)  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed so that it is shielded from adjacent properties and so that it does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets. 
(11)  Public services. The scale and design of the proposed development shall facilitate the adequate provision of services currently furnished or as may be required of the city, including fire and police protection, stormwater removal, sanitary sewage removal and treatment, traffic control and administrative services. 
(12)  Landscaping, fences and walls. The site plan shall provide for landscaping consistent with the quality and character of landscaping on nearby properties. Visually unattractive structures (ex., transformers, generators, utility cabinets, mechanical equipment and similar structures or equipment) shall be screened with either landscaping, fencing or walls. The planning commission may require additional landscaping fences or walls in accordance with the standards and intent of this article. 
(13)  Exterior building treatment. The exterior building materials and treatment shall be of finished quality, consistent with the quality of exterior treatment on surrounding buildings and the design standards ordinance. Examples of finished quality exterior materials include brick, wood siding and glass. Examples of materials not considered finished quality in commercial office and residential areas include painted cement block. 
(14)  Trash receptacles. Any trash receptacles shall be appropriately screened and utilize quality materials that complement the proposed site and adjacent properties. 
(Code 1975, § 5-21-8; Ord. No. 810, § 98-449, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-42. - Fees, recoverable costs; lien. 
(a)  Application fee. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable $350.00 fee at the time the application is submitted. 
(b)  Cost recovery. This section only applies if the preapplication process determines that review costs to the city are likely to involve outside consultant fees and costs. Fees for review of site plans, applications for special land use approval, and for certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the city in advance of the review or issuance of the permits, certificates or approvals. The amount of the fees shall be established and revised by the city council from time to time by resolution, and shall include the cost of inspection and supervision for the enforcement of this chapter. All fees shall be paid to the general fund of the city. 
(1)  Every application for approval of a site plan or a special land use permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and filing fee established by the city council, plus a deposit for the estimated recoverable costs to be incurred by the city in processing the application, as shall be fixed from time to time by administrative order of the city manager. The owner of the property subject of the application and, if different, the applicant shall sign the application. Both shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fee and the city's recoverable costs. By signing the application, the owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and costs and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection of any unpaid fee and costs, plus the costs of collection. 
(2)  The term "recoverable costs" means the costs incurred by the city in processing an application for a special use permit approval or approval of a site plan or PUD, and shall be deemed to consist at least of the following items of direct and indirect expenses: 
a.  Legal publication (direct cost); 
b.  Document preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by administrative order of the city administrator at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and indirect cost of such service); 
c.  Copy reproduction (direct cost); 
d.  Document recordation (direct cost); 
e.  Professional and technical consultant services such as engineers, architects, and community planners (direct cost); 
f.  Legal review, consultation, and advice (direct cost); 
g.  Inspection fees (direct costs); 
h.  Conduct of any planning commission hearings (direct cost), including recording secretarial services and court reporter, if required. 
(3)  At the request of an applicant for a special use permit, or for approval of a site plan, made before any engineering review, the building inspector will obtain a nonbinding estimate of the city's consulting engineers' or community planners' fees. During the review and process, the applicant's deposit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section will be adjusted upward or downward, as warranted, to accurately reflect the actual costs incurred by the city in processing the permit. The city shall give the applicant timely notice of any additions required to maintain a reasonable deposit balance. The city shall also notify an applicant when the processing costs surpass $5,000.00, and shall thereafter notify the applicant when such costs surpass each $500.00 increment greater than $5,000.00. The failure of the city to notify any applicant shall not relieve the applicant of the duty to pay all such costs and shall not prevent the city from assessing and collecting all its recoverable costs. 
(4)  No application for a special use permit or for approval of site plan shall be considered complete unless all fees, deposits and costs due pursuant to this section have been paid. Every permit and approval issued pursuant to this Code, whether or not expressly so stated, shall be deemed to be conditioned on payment of fees and deposits as required by this section. The failure to fully pay any such amount when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or deposit relates. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 98-450, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-43. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  When public notice is required by this chapter, before a public hearing or other decision, a notice shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Publication. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(2)  Mail/personal delivery. Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of all property for which approval is being considered, to the owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the city. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four such units or spatial areas, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. This notice shall be given not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing schedule. 
(3)  Contents. The notice shall contain: 
a.  A description of the nature of the request to be heard. 
b.  A description of the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. 
c.  A statement of when and where the request will be considered. 
d.  A statement of when and where written comments will be received, and where the request is available for inspection. 
(b)  If the nature of the proposed amendment is to rezone an individual property or several adjacent properties, then notice shall be provided as described above. However, if 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, then notice shall be provided under MCL 125.3202(3). 
Secs. 50-44-50-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 50-55. - Violations by architects or contractors. 
    It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having charge of the establishment of any use of land or the erecting, altering changing or remodeling of any building or structure, including tents and trailer coaches, before beginning or undertaking any such work, to see that a proper permit has been granted therefor and that such work does not conflict with and is not in violation of the terms of this chapter. Any such architect, builder, contractor, subcontractor or other person doing or performing any such work of erecting, repairing, altering, changing or remodeling without such a permit having been issued, or in violation of or in conflict with the terms of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of violation of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the person for whom such buildings are erected, repaired, altered, changed or remodeled or the use of land established in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter for such violation. 
(Code 1975, § 5-16-1; Code 1997, § 98-471) 
Sec. 50-56. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 5-16-2; Code 1997, § 98-472) 
Secs. 50-57-50-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION 

Sec. 50-86. - Interpretation. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter impose requirements of lower heights of buildings or a less percentage of lot that may be occupied or require wider or larger courts or deeper yards than are imposed or required by existing provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Where, however, the provisions of the state housing code or other ordinances or regulations of the city impose requirements for lower heights of buildings or less percentage of lot that may be occupied or require wider or larger courts or deeper yards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of the state housing code or other ordinances or regulations shall govern. 
(Code 1975, § 5-17-1; Code 1997, § 98-491) 
Sec. 50-87. - Easements, covenants and similar agreements. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1975, § 5-17-2; Code 1997, § 98-492) 
Sec. 50-88. - Conditional zoning approval. 
(a)  The city council shall have the authority when acting upon a petitioner's request to rezone property to require that the petitioner meet conditions precedent to such final rezoning, which conditions shall be designed to protect natural resources and the health, safety, welfare and social and economic well-being of those who will use the land under consideration and the landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed parcel under consideration for rezoning and the community as a whole. 
(b)  Prior to the city council granting a petition to conditionally rezone any property, the following conditions shall have been met: 
(1)  Submission of site plan. The petitioner shall have submitted to the planning commission a site plan in accordance with sections 50-34-50-42. 
(2)  Submission of environmental impact statement. The petitioner shall also submit to the planning commission as part of the request for conditional rezoning an environmental impact statement addressing the impact of expected changes in motor vehicle traffic patterns associated with the proposed development, and any expected impact upon city services, including water, sewer, fire and police factors. 
(3)  Hearing by planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing upon the request for conditional rezoning after providing notice of public hearing as required by this chapter. The petitioner shall pay to the city a hearing fee of $165.00. This fee may be modified by a resolution of the city council as adopted from time to time. 
(4)  Report by planning commission. The city planning commission, after conducting a public hearing on the request for conditional rezoning, shall report its findings to the city council. Such report may contain recommendations or conditions to be incorporated in any approval of the proposed development granted to the petitioner so as to ensure that the proposed development will meet the intent of the zoning regulations. 
(5)  Posting of bond. The city council, as a precondition to approval of conditional rezoning, may require the posting of a surety bond, either cash, a letter of credit, or a commercial surety bond, in the minimum amount of ten percent of the costs of the project as estimated by the city engineer, exclusive of land acquisition costs, as recommended by the planning commission. Such bond shall remain in effect for one year after the completion of the project. It shall be a condition of such bond that the petitioner shall complete such project in accordance with the site plan approval submitted to obtain the conditional rezoning of the property. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the bond is posted, if required by the city council. 
(6)  Issuance of building permit; release of bond. Each such action taken by the city council in granting conditional rezoning shall be recorded in the minutes of the city council. Upon the issuance of a building permit for such proposed project, the property shall be deemed to have been rezoned. Should the petitioner fail to obtain a building permit for such project within 12 months from the date of the approval of the conditional rezoning, the rezoning shall be deemed void and of no effect. Upon the department of public safety advising the city administrator that the project has been substantially completed within a period of 12 months in accordance with the approved site plans and conditions for such project, the city administrator shall cause the surety bond to be released and returned to the petitioner. 
(7)  Extension of time for obtaining building permit. Should the petitioner fail to obtain a building permit for such project within 12 months of receiving approval for the conditional rezoning, the city council, upon application of the petitioner and the conducting of a public hearing with notice as required by this chapter, may extend such time for periods not to exceed six months each. 
(Code 1975, § 5-17-3; Ord. No. 810, § 98-493, 8-7-2006) 
Secs. 50-89-50-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinance adoption procedure, MCL 125.3401 et seq. 

Sec. 50-120. - Authority of council; procedure; protests. 
    The council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law and after report by the planning commission, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations established in this chapter or subsequently established. If a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change is presented, duly signed by the owners of 20 percent of the area of land included in the proposed change, or by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change, not counting publicly owned land, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of five members of the council, regardless of how many members are present at the time the vote is taken. 
(Code 1975, § 5-18-1; Code 1997, § 98-511; Ord. No. 829, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 50-121. - Hearing fee for rezoning requests. 
    A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city by the petitioner at the time any request for rezoning of property is filed with the planning commission. Such fee shall be used to pay the costs of legal publication required and is only refundable if such petition for rezoning is withdrawn prior to publication costs being incurred by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 5-15-11; Code 1997, § 98-441) 
Secs. 50-122-50-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, MCL 125.3601 et seq. 

Sec. 50-141. - Created. 
    There is hereby established a board of appeals on zoning, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided by law in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The term "board", as used in this division, shall mean the board of appeals. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-1; Code 1997, § 98-401) 
Sec. 50-142. - Membership. 
    The council shall be the board of appeals on zoning. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-2; Code 1997, § 98-402) 
Sec. 50-143. - Secretary. 
    The clerk shall be the secretary of the board of appeals. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board of appeals, and in the mayor's absence the mayor pro tem shall act as such. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-3; Code 1997, § 98-403) 
Sec. 50-144. - Meetings and records. 
    Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or, in the chairperson's absence, the vice-chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the clerk and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-4; Code 1997, § 98-404) 
Sec. 50-145. - Appeals generally. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative official charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The board shall also hear and decide all matters referred to the board or upon which the board is required to pass under the provisions of this chapter. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the board is required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance except that a concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance. 
(b)  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector or administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the building inspector and with the board, not later than ten days after the date of the decision that is appealed from a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed from is taken. 
(c)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such officer, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on good cause shown. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-5; Code 1997, § 98-405; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 8-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-146. - Appeal hearings. 
    Upon receipt of an appeal to the board of appeals and the payment to the city of the required appeal fee, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing on such appeal at the next regular city council meeting. The clerk shall give notice in accordance with the notice requirements found in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-6; Code 1997, § 98-406) 
Sec. 50-147. - Fees for appeals. 
(a)  A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city at the time the notice of appeal is filed for all board of appeals hearings. 
(b)  Such appeal fee may be waived by the board of appeals upon request of a petitioner and the filing of an affidavit showing that the petitioner meets the standard of a low income person or family as established by the federal government. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-7; Code 1997, § 98-407) 
Sec. 50-148. - Powers. 
(a)  The board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made, subject to the conditions and limitations of this section, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The decision of such board shall not become final until the expiration of five days from the date of entry of such order, unless the board shall find that the effect of such order is necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. 
(c)  The board of appeals may, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and vary the application of the regulations established in this chapter in harmony with their general purpose and intent, as follows: 
(1)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the map fixing the several zoning districts accompanying and made a part of this chapter, in those cases where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map. 
(2)  In those cases where a district boundary line divides a lot of record, permit the extension of a use permitted on the less restricted portion of such lot to that portion of the lot which lies in the more restricted district, provided that such extension shall be made for a distance not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district boundary line in any case. 
(3)  Permit variation in the use and location of buildings on any lot abutting a different zoning district, provided that the use or location shall not have an undesirable effect upon the more restricted district, and provided further that the yard requirement may not be less than the average of the requirements for the two districts, and provided further that the variation shall not extend more than 50 feet into the more restricted district. 
(4)  Permit, upon application and proper showing, a variance so as to authorize the use of property for a gasoline service station which is situated a lesser distance than 1,000 feet from an existing gasoline service station, only when such action will not prejudice the public health, welfare and safety of the city. 
(5)  Permit variations in the requirements for outer courts in dwellings, and permit such variation or modification of yard, lot area, and percentage of lot coverage requirements of this chapter as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a parcel of land which is of such size, shape or dimension, or which has such peculiar or exceptional geographical or topographical conditions, that it cannot be appropriately improved without such variation or modification, provided that the purpose and spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(6)  Permit the erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing building, of a public service corporation, to be used for public utility purposes, in any permitted district, to a greater height or of larger area than the district requirements established in this chapter, and permit the location in any use district of a public utility building, structure or use, provided the board of appeals shall find such use, height, area, building or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience and service, and provided further that such building, structure or use is designed, erected and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the general architecture and plan of such district. 
(7)  Permit the erection of a building to its full height or use, as originally planned, when foundations and structural members are designed to carry such buildings higher. 
(8)  Permit a partial or complete exception to the loading space provisions of section 50-529 where, after investigation by the board, it is found that the volume of vehicular service will not require compliance with such provisions and will not cause undue interference with the public use of the streets or alleys or imperil the public safety, and where such modification or exception will not be inconsistent with the purpose and spirit of this chapter. 
(9)  Permit a variation or modification in the required location of off-street parking facilities or in the amount of off-street parking facilities required, or both, if after investigation by the board it is found that such variation is necessary to secure an appropriate development of a specific parcel of land which has such peculiar or exceptional geographical conditions, or is of such size, shape or dimension, that it cannot be reasonably developed in accordance with the provisions of section 50-530, and that any variation will not be inconsistent with the spirit and purpose of this chapter, with public safety and with substantial justice. 
(10)  Permit a variation, modification or exception in the required regulations specified in article V of this chapter if after investigation by the board it is found that such variation, modification or exception is necessary because of peculiar existing conditions and that such variation, modification or exception will not be inconsistent with the purpose and spirit of this chapter. 
(11)  Permit additional garage space for buildings having ten rooms or more when evidence is presented proving need for the additional space. 
(12)  Permit open parking lots in R-1 and R-2 districts for the periodic storage of self-propelled passenger vehicles for periods less than one day, when the space used for parking is adjacent to business and further complies with article V of this chapter and such use is not injurious to the surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(13)  The board of appeals may, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and vary the application of the regulations established in this chapter upon written application when unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty is found by a majority of the board of appeals, as defined in section 50-149. 
(14)  Permit a variation and modification of front and rear yard minimum requirements where the plat of any subdivision provides for lots of 100 feet or less in depth and where the architectural design and layout of the building structures require such variation and modification to preserve the architectural appointments, design and development of the subdivision, provided that the area of the lot shall be not less than 6,000 square feet and that the area of the dwelling and accessory buildings shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area. Before any building permit is issued the planning commission shall approve the plot plan therefor or shall have approved a general plan of the subdivision development and building locations thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 5-14-8; Code 1997, § 98-408; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 829, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 50-149. - Variance standards. 
(a)  Dimensional or nonuse variances. The zoning board of appeals may grant a dimensional or nonuse variance only upon a finding that compliance with the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or other dimensional provisions would create a practical difficulty. A finding of practical difficulty, based on competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record, shall require the petitioner to demonstrate that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  That strict compliance with the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, and other similar items would unreasonably prevent the petitioner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with said restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. 
(2)  That a variance would do substantial justice to the petitioner as well as to other petitioners in the zoning district; or whether a lesser relaxation of the restrictions would give substantial relief to the petitioner and be more consistent with justice to others (i.e., are there other more reasonable alternatives); 
(3)  That the plight of the petitioner is due to unique circumstances of the property; 
(4)  That the petitioner's problem is not self-created. 
(5)  That the spirit of this chapter will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)  Use variances. The zoning board of appeals may grant a use variance only upon a finding that there is an unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the requirements of this chapter. A finding of unnecessary hardship, based on competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record, shall require the petitioner to demonstrate that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The property cannot reasonably be used in a manner consistent with existing zoning; 
(2)  That the plight of the petitioner is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to general neighborhood conditions; 
(3)  That the use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character of the area and locality; 
(4)  That the problem is not self-created; 
(5)  That the spirit of this chapter will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals may consider evidence from a variety of sources in making its determination. 
(Ord. No. 829, 7-6-2009) 
Secs. 50-150-50-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-180. - Districts enumerated. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1 (A through E) One-Family Residential Districts R-2 Two-Family Residential District R-3 Planned Multiple-Family Residential Development District R-4 High Density Multiple Dwelling District C.F. Community Facilities District C Commercial Business District C-2 High Intensity City Center District RO-1 Restricted Office District P-1 Vehicular Parking District  
(Code 1975, § 5-2-1; Code 1997, § 98-51) 
Sec. 50-181. - Boundaries of districts established. 
    The boundaries of the districts enumerated in section 50-180, shown upon the map attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, as revised, and on file in the office of the city clerk, and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established, such map being designated as the zoning map, and such map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matter and information set forth by the map were all fully described in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-2-2; Code 1997, § 98-52) 
Sec. 50-182. - Minimum size of dwellings. 
    No dwelling shall hereafter be erected or altered having a ground floor area of less than the minimum provided in this section. 
(1)  No dwelling shall be erected or altered on lots or parcels of record having a width of less than 40 feet. 
(2)  For dwellings erected or altered on lots having a width of between 40 feet and 49 feet, the ground floor area for a one-story or a one and one-half-story building shall not be less than 840 square feet; and, if two stories in height, the ground floor area shall be not less than 575 square feet and the floor area shall not be less than 1,150 square feet. 
(3)  Two-family dwellings shall have a minimum floor area for each living quarter of not less than 1,000 square feet. 
The ground floor area of any dwelling shall not include the area of breezeways, utility rooms, unenclosed porches or attached garages. 
(Code 1975, § 5-2-3; Code 1997, § 98-53) 
Sec. 50-183. - Residential building heights. 
    In all new residential home construction and additions to existing residential homes, the building height shall not exceed 30 feet as measured from the finished grade level adjoining the building to the highest point on the ridge of the roof and 24 feet to the eave measured from the finished grade level adjoining the building. 
(Code 1997, § 98-54; Ord. No. 771, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 50-184. - Zoning districts of vacated streets or alleys. 
    Whenever the city council vacates an alley or street within the city, such vacated parcel of real estate shall be deemed to fall within the zoning district or districts of the real property to which the vacated street or alley accrues by reason of being vacated. 
(Code 1997, § 98-532; Ord. No. 677, § 1, 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 50-185. - Prohibited uses. 
    Each district, as created in this article, shall be subject to the regulations contained in this article and chapter 50 Zoning. Uses in each of the enumerated districts that are contrary to federal, state or local laws or ordinances of Grosse Pointe Woods, are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 846, 5-7-2012) 
Secs. 50-186-50-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-207. - Purpose. 
    The R-1 (A through E) one-family residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related educational, cultural and religious uses where found appropriate and harmonious with the residential environment. For this single-family residential district, in promoting the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent of this division is to: 
(1)  Encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or maintenance of single-family dwellings in the district. 
(3)  Encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Discourage any land use that would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create requirements and costs for public services, such as fire and police protection, water supply and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family dwellings. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4-1; Code 1997, § 98-71) 
Sec. 50-208. - Permitted uses. 
    In all R-1 (A through E) districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this division, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Municipally owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(3)  The following special uses, which may be permitted upon approval of the planning commission after a public hearing with notice and review as required by this chapter, and upon a determination that such use is necessary for the public convenience, safety and public welfare and in accord with the spirit and purpose of this chapter. In giving such approval, the planning commission may, in addition to other conditions allowable by law, impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that the contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected, and also may require the dedication of lands for street and alley purposes which in the commission's opinion is necessary to provide adequately for vehicular traffic movement and off-street parking. 
a.  Municipal buildings and uses, including pumping stations, sewage treatment plants and other such pertinent facilities. 
b.  Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings, for use incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and uses are permitted as provided for in this chapter and section 50-526 (accessory buildings). Accessory buildings shall not be used for a temporary or permanent dwelling, lodging or sleeping unless expressly permitted by this chapter or this Code, and shall not be used for any business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(6)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities, which shall be provided as specified in section 50-530 and article V of this chapter. 
(7)  Mixed occupancy. In residential homes on lots abutting Mack Avenue, a mixed occupancy shall be permitted involving the use of the property as a residence and one of the following uses by the resident occupant: a physician's office, a dentist's office, a lawyer's office or a real estate broker's office, provided that parking requirements for such mixed occupancy shall comply with section 50-530. 
(8)  Storage of boats, recreational vehicles, trailers. Storage of boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, campers, travel trailers, house trailers, and noncommercial utility trailers are only permitted if such vehicles or equipment are unoccupied and parked in a fully enclosed garage and comply with subsection (5) of this section. Overnight parking, other than in a fully enclosed garage, of unoccupied boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, campers, travel trailers, house trailers, and noncommercial utility trailers are permitted for temporary periods not to exceed 72 hours, provided notification is provided to the public safety department as follows: 
The owner or representative of the vehicles or equipment must apply for and receive a temporary permit from the public safety department by telephone or in person, so that the public safety department has notice of when the 72 hour period begins. No more than three temporary permits are allowed per owner per calendar year. In addition to the three temporary permits allowed for all owners, owners of recreational vehicles, mobile homes, campers, travel trailers, and house trailers are permitted to load and unload their vehicles or trailers for periods not to exceed 24 hours ("24 hour provisioning period") provided that at least 48 hours elapse between the loading and unloading of the vehicles or trailers. 
(9)  Covering of automobiles and other vehicles. Any automobile or other vehicle that is fully or partially covered by a tarp, car cover, or similar material, whether licensed or unlicensed, is prohibited, unless parked in a fully enclosed garage. 
(10)  Nonconforming uses. Storage of property as listed in subsections (8) and (9) of this section, which existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived is rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter, and any storage which is rendered nonconforming as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter. However, any resident holding a current and valid license or permit for the storage of property covered under subsection (8) of this section, which was issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and which relates to the specific property listed on the license shall have until one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to comply with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4-2; Code 1997, § 98-72; Ord. No. 788, § 1, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 814, § 98-72, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 50-209. - Lot and building regulations. 
(a)  Measurement of lot width. For purposes of this section, the lot width shall represent a width measured at the front building setback line. The lot width requirement shall not apply to any lot, which is narrower in width or lesser in area than the specifications provided in this section if such lot was of record at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Increased front yard required for certain lots. Where at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or at the time of passage of amendments thereto, more than 50 percent of the lots on one side of a street, between two intersecting streets within any R-1 (A through E) district, are occupied by dwellings having a front yard of greater depth than required in the schedule of regulations in subsection (f) of this section, any building thereafter erected on any one of such lots shall have a front yard at least equal in depth to the average front yard of such existing dwellings, but this shall not require a greater depth than 60 feet or more than one-third the depth of the lot. Dwelling units, excepting in the instance of R-1E districts, may penetrate into the minimum front yard a distance of three feet; provided, however, that not more than one-third of the dwellings in any one block shall so penetrate, and in no instance shall two adjacent dwelling units so penetrate. 
(c)  Side yard for corner lots. In all residential use districts, the width of the side yard abutting upon a side street or major thoroughfare shall not be less than the total of the two required side yards of the district. The opposite side yard of such corner lot shall not be less than the least side yard requirement of the applicable district. 
(d)  Exception to rear yard requirement. In those instances where the lot is 105 feet or less in depth due to the street patterns established by the master thoroughfare plan, the rear yard may be decreased to a 24-foot depth. 
(e)  Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area shall be as provided in the schedule of regulations in subsection (f) of this section. (See also section 50-182.) 
(f)  Schedule of regulations. 
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS LIMITING HEIGHT AND BULK OF 
BUILDINGS, LAND USE AND AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES 
Minimum Size Lot per 
UnitMaximum Height 

of Building Minimum Yard Setback(feet) Use District Area (square feet) Width (feet) (a) In Stories In Feet Front (b) LeastOne TotalTwo Rear (d) Minimum Floor Area per Unit (square feet) (e) Total Minimum Area, Floors per Unit (square feet) R-1A 13,000 90 21/2 30 40 10 25 28 1,400 1,960 R-1B 8,500 75 21/2 30 30 8 20 28 1,300 1,820 R-1C 7,200 60 2 30 30 6 16 28 1,200 1,680 R-1D 6,200 55 2 30 30 6 16 28 1,100 1,150 R-1E 5,000 50 2 30 25 5 15 28 1,000 1,150  
The maximum percentage of lot coverage permissible in all residential districts shall be 35 percent. 
(g)  Exception to lot coverage requirement. On lots of record having less than 4,000 square feet in area, the allowable percentage of lot coverage shall be increased by one percent for each 100 square feet by which the area of a lot is less than 4,000 square feet, with a maximum coverage in any such case not in excess of 45 percent. 
(h)  Attached garages. For purposes of this section, an attached garage shall be considered a part of the dwelling for yard purposes, but shall not be considered a part of the dwelling in computing the minimum floor area per unit. 
(i)  Impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces, excluding structures, shall not exceed 30 percent coverage of a lot's surface. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4-3; Code 1997, § 98-73; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 766, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 50-210. - Reduction of side yard for certain lots. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided in this division, where more than 50 percent of the lots on one side of a street, between two intersecting streets within any R-1 (A through E) district, are occupied by dwellings having side yards of lesser width than required in the schedule of regulations in section 50-209(f), any building thereafter erected on any one of such lots may have side yards equal in width to the average side yards of such existing dwellings. These reduced side yards shall be arrived at by averaging the total side yards of each existing dwelling, provided that in no instance shall the smaller side yard of any such dwelling be less than four feet, nor shall the sum of both side yards be less than 12 feet. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4-4; Code 1997, § 98-74) 
Sec. 50-211. - Municipal and public utility uses. 
    Land use and area for building structures that are permitted uses when approved by the planning commission under the provisions of section 50-208(3) are as follows: 
(1)  Height of buildings. No such building hereafter erected or altered shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as provided for in article V of this chapter. 
(2)  Front yard. A minimum front yard of 75 feet shall be provided between the front property line and the furthermost front part of the building or any projection. 
(3)  Side yard; minimum distance between buildings. A minimum side yard shall be provided. In all cases of buildings erected for the purpose of public assembly (municipal buildings and other similar or like structures where numerous persons assemble and meet), including those located upon corner lots or parcels of property adjacent to two or more streets, there shall be on each side of every building site a side yard, the minimum width of which shall be 75 feet. All pumping stations, sewage treatment plants and other pertinent facilities, public utility buildings, electric transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity, which are not classified as buildings for public assembly shall have a side yard on each side of every building site of a minimum width of 35 feet. If there is more than one building structure erected or proposed to be erected upon the building site owned, leased or occupied by a common owner, lessee or occupant, a minimum space of 20 feet shall be provided between building structures. No building structure, or addition or alteration thereto, shall be permitted to encroach upon the minimum front, side or rear yard requirements provided for in this section. 
(4)  Rear yard. A minimum rear yard of 75 feet shall be provided. 
(5)  Measurement of yards. The minimum yard space as required in this section shall be measured from the property lines, as shown on the plot plan, to the wall of the building structure, which shall be deemed and considered, for the purpose of this chapter, to include all porches, projections, roof extensions or other similar or like structures which are incorporated in and made a part of the building structure. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4-5; Code 1997, § 98-75) 
Sec. 50-212. - Exception to rear yard requirement. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, construction upon lots #189, #204, #205, #232, #223 and #222, all of which face on Fairford Road, and lots #227 and #228 facing Ballantyne Court, all in Fairholme #4, a subdivision of part of Private Claims 393 and 621, shall be permitted within 24 feet of the rear line of such lots. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4-6; Code 1997, § 98-76) 
Secs. 50-213-50-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-233. - Purpose. 
    The R-2 two-family residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for single-family and two-family dwellings based upon a plan to make the most appropriate use of land within neighborhoods or on major thoroughfares. The specific intent of this division is to ensure that only such residential uses as can be properly designed and built will be allowed in this district so as not to overcrowd the land, cause parking or traffic congestion, or have injurious effects on adjacent single-family residential dwellings. The intent of this division is to: 
(1)  Encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(2)  Prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or maintenance of single-family and two-family dwellings in the district. 
(3)  Encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Discourage any land use that would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create requirements and costs for public services, such as fire and police protection, water supply and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-1; Code 1997, § 98-101) 
Sec. 50-234. - Permitted uses. 
    In all R-2 districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 districts. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Two-family income dwellings. 
(4)  Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this section. 
(5)  One nonilluminated sign pertaining to the sale, lease or use of a lot or building upon which the sign is situated or placed, provided that such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-2; Code 1997, § 98-102) 
Sec. 50-235. - Building height. 
    No building hereafter erected or altered in R-2 districts shall exceed 35 feet in height or 11/2 stories, except as provided in sections 50-534 and 50-535. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-3; Code 1997, § 98-103) 
Sec. 50-236. - Lot area and width. 
    Two-family dwellings or two-family income dwellings in R-2 districts, together with accessory buildings, hereafter erected, shall be located only on lots having not less than 5,000 square feet of area and with an average width of not less than 50 feet; provided, however, that any lot of record prior to the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived with less area than specified in this section may be used for a one-family dwelling. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-4; Code 1997, § 98-104) 
Sec. 50-237. - Lot coverage. 
    In R-2 districts, each one-family or two-family dwelling, together with its accessory buildings, hereafter erected on any lot, shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of such lot; provided, however, that for lots less than 4,000 square feet in area, used for a one-family dwelling, the allowable percentage of lot coverage shall be increased by one percent for each 100 square feet by which the area of a lot is less than 4,000 square feet, with a maximum coverage in any case not in excess of 45 percent. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-5; Code 1997, § 98-105) 
Sec. 50-238. - Front yard. 
    Each lot in R-2 districts shall have a front yard not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-6; Code 1997, § 98-106) 
Sec. 50-239. - Side yards. 
    In R-2 districts, each building site or plot shall be provided with a total side yard space of not less than 16 feet, with a minimum of five feet for any one side yard, provided that in no event shall any building structure in this zone be erected nearer than 16 feet to any existing building structure. Side yards so provided shall be without obstructions of any kind from the front lot line to the extreme rear portion of the dwelling. In no event shall the minimum side yard requirement provided in this section be used in common or in connection with the side yard provisions made for an adjoining structure. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-7; Code 1997, § 98-107) 
Sec. 50-240. - Rear yard. 
    In R-2 districts, there shall be on every lot a rear yard the minimum depth of which shall not be less than one-third the total of the depth of the lot figured from the extreme rear portion of the dwelling. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-8; Code 1997, § 98-108) 
Sec. 50-241. - Off-street parking facilities. 
    Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in the R-2 district as specified in section 50-530. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-9; Code 1997, § 98-109) 
Sec. 50-242. - Change in exterior appearance of duplexes and condominiums. 
    Any proposed repair, remodeling, renovating or repainting of a duplex housing unit or condominium unit which would result in a contrasting appearance of the exterior of such unit shall not be permitted. Any proposed repair, remodeling, renovating or repainting of a duplex housing unit or condominium unit shall be submitted to the city building inspector for approval of such repair, remodeling or repainting. For purposes of this section, the term "duplex" shall mean any building containing two residential units separated by a common wall. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-10; Code 1997, § 98-110) 
Sec. 50-243. - Minimum floor area of dwelling units. 
    Each dwelling unit erected or altered in an R-2 district shall contain not less than 1,000 square feet of usable floor area as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5-11; Code 1997, § 98-111) 
Secs. 50-244-50-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-3 PLANNED MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-265. - Purpose. 
    The R-3 planned multiple-family residential development district is designed to permit residential use of land with various types of multiple dwellings and related uses. These areas would be located near major streets for good accessibility and be designed to complement adjacent single-family areas. Various types and sizes of residential accommodations for ownership or rental would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the community without causing excessive demands on existing community facilities, utilities or services. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-1; Code 1997, § 98-131) 
Sec. 50-266. - Character of district. 
    For purposes of this division, planned multiple-family residential development is defined as a residential development consisting of one or more buildings, each of which is so designed and arranged so as to provide a minimum of three single-family residential dwelling units therein. Such development may also provide for accessory buildings, structures, facilities and appurtenances which are necessary for the operation and maintenance of such development, and available for the use, benefit and enjoyment of all the occupants of the residential dwelling units comprising the development. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-2; Code 1997, § 98-132) 
Sec. 50-267. - Boundaries. 
    The location of R-3 districts shall be as shown on the city zoning map. See section 50-181. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-3; Code 1997, § 98-133) 
Sec. 50-268. - Permitted uses. 
    No building shall be erected or land used in the R-3 district except for the following purposes and uses, unless otherwise provided in this division: 
(1)  Planned multiple-family residential development consisting of buildings used for residential purposes. 
(2)  Accessory buildings, structures, facilities and appurtenances which are necessary for operation and maintenance and used for the enjoyment of such planned multiple-family residential development. 
(3)  Required off-street parking facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-4; Code 1997, § 98-134) 
Sec. 50-269. - Building height; maximum total floor space. 
    No specific building height limits exist for the R-3 district. However, total floor space of multiple-dwelling buildings on a lot or parcel shall not exceed 40 percent of the total lot or parcel area, less all dedicated public rights-of-way (e.g., a floor area ratio of 0.4). 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-5; Code 1997, § 98-135) 
Sec. 50-270. - Total lot area. 
    Each and every lot or parcel of land in an R-3 multi-family district shall contain a minimum of 21/2 acres of land area. Contiguous land located beyond the city boundary may be included in such computation. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-6; Code 1997, § 98-136) 
Sec. 50-271. - 
Apartment minimum lot size per unit 3,000 sq. ft. 3,600 sq. ft. 
Townhouse minimum lot size per unit 5,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.

All dwelling units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-7; Code 1997, § 98-137) 
Sec. 50-272. - Lot coverage. 
    In an R-3 district, no building or structure hereafter erected or altered, together with any accessory building, shall cover more than 25 percent of the lot area or parcel of land area. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-8; Code 1997, § 98-138) 
Sec. 50-273. - Other lot requirements. 
    Planned multiple-family residential development buildings or structures in an R-3 district shall only be erected upon a land area complying with the provisions of this chapter, and the property to be used for such purpose shall have at least one property line abutting upon either Vernier Road or Mack Avenue. The building site shall be planned, laid out and designed so that ingress and egress thereto shall be directly from or to such street. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-9; Code 1997, § 98-139) 
Sec. 50-274. - Minimum floor area of dwelling units. 
    Minimum usable floor area for each multiple dwelling permitted in the R-3 district shall be as follows: 
Area in square feet Dwelling Unit Type Apartment Townhouse One-bedroom unit 750 - Two-bedroom unit 950 1,600 Three- or more bedroom unit 1,150 1,800  
(Code 1975, § 5-6-10; Code 1997, § 98-140) 
Sec. 50-275. - Basement living units prohibited. 
    No living units shall be permitted in a planned multiple-family residential development where the floors thereof are below the property grade. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-11; Code 1997, § 98-141) 
Sec. 50-276. - Yards. 
    The minimum front, side and rear yard setback from any property lines in the R-3 district shall be not less than the height of the building, provided that no yard setback shall be less than 50 feet. No off-street parking shall be permitted in any required front, side or rear yard space. Access aisles leading from parking areas and entrances to buildings may be located in required yard spaces providing they are located at least 20 feet from any adjacent residentially zoned or used property. All required yard spaces not used for necessary access aisles shall be maintained as landscaped open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any sign, building, paving or any other use or activity incompatible with the single-family residential uses. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-12; Code 1997, § 98-142) 
Sec. 50-277. - Off-street parking facilities. 
    In an R-3 district, two off-street parking spaces are required for each one-bedroom dwelling unit, and one parking space is required for each additional bedroom, two of which must be within an enclosed garage structure (see also section 50-530(8)a.2. of the table. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-13; Code 1997, § 98-143) 
Sec. 50-278. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    The entire area of the site in an R-3 district shall be treated so as to service the needs of the residents occupying the planned multiple-family residential development. Any accessory buildings, uses or services shall be developed solely for the use of residents therein. Uses considered as accessory uses for purposes of this division include but are not necessarily limited to the following: swimming pools, cabanas, garden and patio areas, pavilions, recreation areas and other similar uses. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-14; Code 1997, § 98-144) 
Sec. 50-279. - Minimum distance between buildings. 
    Where more than one residential building or structure is to be erected as part of the planned multiple-family residential development upon any building site, there shall be a minimum distance between any two structures of 50 feet plus one foot for each two feet, or part thereof, of the total combined height of the two structures. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-15; Code 1997, § 98-145) 
Sec. 50-280. - Screening wall. 
    Those sides of the R-3 district which abut upon other residential zoning or use districts along a common boundary or area or side yard or rear yard shall have constructed along such common boundary or area or side yard or rear yard a solid ornamental brick wall of a minimum height of five feet, and to a greater height, but not to exceed eight feet, when authorized by the council. Any wall constructed as provided in this section shall be considered an exception to the requirements of other provisions of this chapter, and such provisions shall not be deemed applicable to any such wall so constructed under this section. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-16; Code 1997, § 98-146) 
Sec. 50-281. - Approval by planning commission. 
(a)  No recommendation for approval of an application for the construction of a planned multiple-family residential development in an R-3 district shall be authorized unless it has been found by the planning commission, after a review of the site plan and exterior elevations of the proposed buildings and structures, that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Exterior architectural elevations of the proposed buildings and structures shall be designed so as to not be at variance with the architectural style of any adjacent residential buildings. The planning commission, in reviewing exterior elevations, shall be concerned with the following details in establishing similarity with adjacent residential buildings: 
a.  Height of structure. 
b.  Building material. 
c.  Adherence to the design standards ordinance. 
d.  Front, side and rear elevations. 
e.  Architectural treatment of off-street parking facilities and accessory buildings and uses. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans and specifications for the construction, together with a plot plan showing the location of all buildings and structures with reference to the side, front and all rear property lines of the property involved. Such plot plan shall have measurements deemed necessary and indicated thereon. 
(3)  A detailed plan for the landscaping of the front, side and rear yards shall be filed with the application. 
(b)  More specifically, the planning commission shall determine that: 
(1)  The vehicular transportation system shall provide for circulation throughout the site and for efficient ingress and egress to all parts of the site by fire and safety equipment. 
(2)  Pedestrian walkway systems shall be provided to connect the areas of the site, and to connect, as needed, the site with schools and shopping areas and other public gathering areas. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided as deemed necessary by the planning commission for separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Recreation and open space areas shall be provided as appropriate. 
(4)  The site plan shall comply with district requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard space, maximum lot coverage and all other requirements as set forth in the regulations for the R-3 district classification. 
(5)  The requirements for greenbelt, fencing, walls and other protective barriers shall be complied with as provided in section 50-532 and article V of this chapter. 
(6)  The site plan shall provide for adequate storage space for the use therein, including, where necessary, storage space for recreational vehicles. 
(c)  The planning commission shall examine the application for the construction of a planned multiple-family residential development and accompanying documents and, if need be, require alterations and changes therein in order to ensure that the use of the property will not be injurious or detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood and that there is compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-17; Code 1997, § 98-147) 
Sec. 50-282. - Approval by council. 
(a)  No building permit for any building or structure in an R-3 district shall be authorized unless it has been approved by the city council, after holding a public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given in compliance with section 502 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3502), as being essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare, not injurious to the surrounding neighborhood, and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to the approval by the council, a detailed prospectus containing the methods of financing the project and the provisions of the master deed pertaining to the ownership, operation, control and management of the proposed planned multiple-family residential development shall be filed with the application. 
(c)  The filing of a good and sufficient surety bond in an amount to be determined by the council shall also be filed with the application. Such bond shall guarantee the construction and completion of the project in accordance with the plans and specifications and plot plan, as filed with and approved by the planning commission and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (See also section 50-31, pertaining to performance guarantees.) 
(d)  Any applicant seeking a hearing under the provisions of this section shall pay to the city a hearing notice fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Payment shall be made at the time application for a hearing is made. The hearing notice shall be sent as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6-18; Code 1997, § 98-148) 
Secs. 50-283-50-312. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-4 HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-313. - Purpose. 
    The R-4 high density multiple dwelling district is intended to be that district permitting primarily multiple dwellings and mixed use buildings. In order to promote such development insofar as it is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. Due to the traffic volume generated by such residential development, this district shall abut upon a major thoroughfare and have adequate area for suitable setbacks from adjacent single-family residential districts. 
(Code 1975, § 5-10-1; Code 1997, § 98-271) 
Sec. 50-314. - Permitted uses. 
    In all R-4 districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this article, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 (A through E) and R-2 districts. 
(2)  Multiple dwellings. 
(Code 1975, § 5-10-2; Code 1997, § 98-272) 
Sec. 50-315. - Regulations for types of uses permitted in R-1 or R-2 district. 
(a)  Uses permitted in R-1 districts. A land use in R-4 districts of a type regulated by the provisions of article III of this chapter, pertaining to R-1A through R-1E one-family residential districts, must comply with all the regulations and requirements of article III, division 2 of this chapter. 
(b)  Uses permitted in R-2 district. A land use in R-4 districts of a type regulated by the provisions of article III of this chapter, pertaining to the R-2 two-family residential district, must comply with all of the regulations and requirements of article III, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-10-3; Code 1997, § 98-273) 
Sec. 50-316. - Multiple dwellings generally. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this section, a multiple dwelling shall be deemed to mean a residential building structure which is designed, arranged and laid out for not less than three or more than 12 household units, each of which shall be provided with its own individual bathroom and kitchen facilities, and to be occupied by one family as permanent occupants, as distinguished from transient or temporary occupants. 
(b)  Height. A multiple dwelling shall not exceed two stories in height, with a maximum height of 35 feet. 
(c)  Front yard. A front yard with a minimum depth of 25 feet, measured from the front main building wall, including enclosed porches or vestibules, to the front lot line, shall be provided. 
(d)  Side yards. Side yards of combined minimum width of 27 feet shall be provided, measured from the side lot line to the side wall of the building, exclusive of projections, one of which side yards shall be not less than 12 feet in width. 
(e)  Rear yard. A rear yard of a minimum depth of 15 feet between the rear wall of the building, including porches or other projections, and the rear property line, must be provided. Where the rear yard abuts upon a public alley for the entire length of the rear yard, the rear yard depth may be reduced by not more than five feet. 
(f)  Off-street parking. 
(1)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on or in the immediate vicinity of the building site when approved by the planning commission, which shall make available to the occupants of the multiple dwelling parking spaces of a number not less than 11/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit of the multiple dwelling. The rear yard space required in this section may be used for such off-street parking facilities. 
(2)  The property owner shall be required to submit a plot plan of the parking area at the time of filing the application for the building permit, which plot plan must have previously received the approval of the planning commission. Where an off-street parking lot is to be provided for the use of the occupants of any multiple dwelling and the parking lot is not a part of the building site but is situated in the vicinity of the building site, the property owner shall be required to execute and record a good and sufficient conveyance restricting the use of such property so designated as an off-site parking lot, as described in such conveyance, for the sole and only purpose of providing parking for the occupants of such multiple dwelling so long as such multiple dwelling shall be occupied for such purposes. 
(3)  The planning commission may permit a portion of the front yard or the side yards to be used if, upon application, the planning commission shall determine that such use will not be injurious to the occupants of the multiple dwelling building or to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(g)  Lot coverage. Not more than 30 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by any multiple building structure. 
(h)  Minimum floor area. A minimum of 572 square feet of floor area, exclusive of entrance halls, shall be provided for a one-bedroom unit, and a minimum of 748 square feet of floor area, exclusive of entrance halls, shall be provided for a two-bedroom unit. 
(i)  Basement living units prohibited. No living units shall be permitted in a multiple dwelling where the floors thereof are below the property grade. 
(j)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses, which are integral to the operation of the multiple dwelling, are permitted: 
(1)  Garden and patio areas. 
(2)  Other related uses provided for the comfort and accommodation of the occupants of the multiple dwelling, other than garages or carports for housing motor vehicles. 
(k)  Design standards. Multiple dwellings shall conform to the design standards ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 5-10-4; Code 1997, § 98-274) 
Sec. 50-317. - High-rise multiple dwellings and mixed uses. 
    The following shall apply to high-rise multiple dwellings and mixed uses in the R-4 district: 
(1)  Building height. Building height shall be regulated by a floor area ratio of one. 
(2)  Yards; minimum distance between buildings. The minimum front, side and rear yard setback from any property line shall be not less than 11/2 times the height of the building, provided that no yard setback shall be less than 50 feet. The area within setbacks greater than 50 feet, when adjacent to a public street, may be used for off-street parking and vehicle access drives, provided that setbacks which abut a single-family residential district and setbacks not used for off-street parking and vehicle access drives shall be maintained as landscaped open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any sign, building, paving or any other use or activity incompatible with the single-family residential uses. Where two or more multiple-family structures are erected on the same lot or parcel, the minimum distance between any two structures shall be 50 feet plus one foot for each two feet or part thereof of the total combined height of the two structures. 
(3)  Off-street parking. Outdoor or indoor off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards in section 50-530(8)a.2. 
(4)  Lot coverage. Not more than 40 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by any multiple dwelling or mixed use structure. 
(5)  Minimum floor area of dwelling units. The minimum usable floor area for each multiple dwelling unit in the R-4 district shall be as follows: 
a.  Efficiency and one-bedroom unit: 750 square feet. 
b.  Two-bedroom unit: 950 square feet. 
c.  Three- or more bedroom unit: 1,150 square feet. 
(6)  Commercial uses. Commercial uses are permitted on the first or second floors of a multistoried multiple dwelling residential building as are permitted in the C district. 
(7)  Design standards. High-rise multiple dwellings shall conform to the design standards ordinance. 
(8)  Floor area illustrations. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR)   
(Code 1975, § 5-10-5; Code 1997, § 98-275) 
Secs. 50-318-50-337. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - C.F. COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 835, adopted Oct. 4, 2010, amended div. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 6, §§ 50-338-50-340, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1975, §§ 5-7-1-5-7-3; Code 1997, §§ 98-171-98-173. 

Sec. 50-338. - Purpose. 
    The C.F. community facilities district as established in this division is intended to provide suitable locations for desirable and necessary public activities, schools, continuing care retirement community, and public and private nonprofit recreational areas which serve the residents of the city, and to limit the location, size and character of such uses so that the activity which they generate does not become a nuisance and will not overburden the facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 835, 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 50-339. - Permitted uses. 
    In all community facilities districts, no building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other than one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 (A through E) districts are permitted. 
(2)  Upon approval of the planning commission, after a public hearing with notice and site plan review as required by this chapter, any of the following existing uses may be expanded by the erection of additions to existing structures or by the erection of additional structures upon properties situated in community facilities districts as described in the zoning map as amended by this chapter and in accordance with the metes and bounds descriptions on file in the office of the division of safety inspection, and upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In giving such approval, the planning commission may impose, in addition to other conditions allowable by law, any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that the contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected, and also may require the dedication of lands for street and alley purposes which, in the commission's opinion, is necessary to provide adequately for vehicular traffic movement and off-street parking. 
a.  Churches and parish homes. 
b.  Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate or high schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 
c.  Nonprofit religious, educational, private, fraternal or philanthropic institutions. 
d.  Private noncommercial recreational areas, and institutional or community recreation centers. 
(Ord. No. 835, 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 50-340. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as special land uses in the community facilities district subject to the standards set forth for each use and in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 50-32. In the event any of the standards in this section conflict with other sections of the zoning ordinance, these standards shall prevail: 
(1)  Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC) subject to the following specific standards: 
a.  For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Accessory services. A program of resident services primarily for the benefit of the eligible residents of the CCRC. 
2.  Congregate care. A noninstitutional independent group living environment that combines private living quarters with centralized dining services, shared living spaces, and access to social and recreational activities. 
3.  Continuing Care Retirement Community (sometimes referred to herein as "CCRC"). Means a campus, or comparable coordinated complex which combines residential accommodations, with health facilities and services with the intention of allowing elderly persons and/or eligible residents to receive the appropriate care across a continuum, from independent living to licensed assisted living, licensed skilled nursing, memory care and hospice as their needs change, without having to leave the retirement community, and consisting at a minimum of independent living units, licensed assisted living facilities, and licensed skilled nursing care facilities, but may also include all normal and necessary support facilities associated therewith, including but not limited to, congregate dining provisions, recreational opportunities, personal care needs, the sale of accessory retail goods and services within the complex, nursing and other health care services, living accommodations for support staff, and other environmental settings and enhancements to meet all other reasonable needs of the residents. 
4.  CCRC resident. Any person who is either an elderly person or an eligible resident. 
5.  Coordinated units. A building or group of buildings under common or coordinated management or ownership which provide housing and associated services which assist the CCRC in providing independent lifestyles and services and living accommodations to eligible residents. 
6.  Elderly person. Any person having reached the age of 55 years. 
7.  Elderly household. Any household having at least one person 55 years or older. 
8.  Eligible resident. Any person other than an elderly person who requires or is in need of the facilities and/or services provided by a CCRC. 
9.  Mixed use building. A building containing any mix of services and accessory uses. 
b.  Building types permitted. A CCRC shall contain the following building types according to the following allocation based on a percentage of buildable area: 
Building Type Minimum Maximum Detached residential buildings 20% 50% Attached residential buildings 10% 50% Mixed-use buildings 10% 50%  
c.  Level of care provided. A CCRC shall contain the following levels of care according to the following allocations: 
Level of Care Minimum Maximum Independent Living 20% 75% Assisted Living 10% 50% Skilled Nursing 10% 50%  
d.  Accessory uses. A CCRC may contain any or all of the following accessory uses individually or in any combination, or in combination with other services offered within the CCRC, located in a mixed use building or as a separate structure: 
1.  Living quarters for support staff; 
2.  Dining rooms, coffee shops and related kitchen areas and facilities; 
3.  Living rooms, libraries, music rooms, auditoriums, greenhouses; 
4.  Lounges, card rooms, meeting rooms, chapel, and other social and recreational areas; 
5.  Administrative offices and educational uses; 
6.  Mail rooms and gift shops; 
7.  Medical and dental offices, diagnostic and treatment centers, wellness centers, exercise areas, swimming pool, spa, home health care centers; 
8.  Barbers, hairdressers, beauty salons; 
9.  ATM banking machines; 
10.  Home health care; 
11.  Adult and child care services; 
12.  Cleaning services; 
13.  Other uses, services and activities incidental to the operation of a CCRC. 
e.  Site plan objectives. 
1.  Site plan design that blends the proposed development into the existing fabric of Grosse Pointe Woods by using consistent street design standards, building placement and landscaping; 
2.  Minimization of traffic impacts and safe design of all ways, vehicular and pedestrian; 
3.  Site design that results in useable open spaces for residents; 
4.  Structure and site designs which meet the specific needs of the CCRC residents; 
5.  Site plan design which visually emphasizes building design, landscaped areas and minimizes the visual impact of parking areas; 
6.  Site and structure design shall provide suitable means of access and egress to dwellings for disabled persons; 
7.  Structures and landscaping shall be located on the site so as to provide for the reasonable privacy of residents adjacent to the CCRC. 
f.  Minimum project area. The minimum project area for a CCRC shall be 14.0 contiguous acres. 
g.  Yards. The following yards shall apply to buildings within a CCRC: 
Building Type Front Interior Side Exterior Side Rear Mixed Use 25 feet 20 feet 25 feet 30 feet Attached Residential 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 30 feet Detached Residential 25 feet 10 feet 25 feet 30 feet Accessory NA 5 feet 10 feet 5 feet Other 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 30 No mixed use building may be located within 100 feet of the property line of an adjacent residential use.  
h.  Open space. The following open spaces shall be provided within a CCRC: 
1.  A minimum of 25 percent of the site area exclusive of buildings, yards, roads or parking areas. 
2.  Open spaces shall be provided in well defined areas a minimum of 0.5 acres in area. 
3.  Open spaces may consist of greens, squares, plazas or playgrounds. 


i.  Lot coverage. All buildings or structures, together with any accessory buildings or structures, in a CCRC shall cover no more than 50 percent of the gross project area. 
j.  Interior roads. All roads within a CCRC shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, brick or stone. Concrete curbing is required on all roads unless it can be demonstrated that eliminating curbs will improve the stormwater management. In addition, all roads within a CCRC shall comply with the following standards: 
Street Type Road Width Parkway 1 Sidewalk Parking lanes 2 Two-way no parking 20 feet 9 feet both sides 5 feet both sides NA Two-way parking one side 20 feet 9 feet both sides 5 feet both sides 8 feet one side Two-way parking two sides 20 feet 8 feet two sides Two-way lane 18 feet NA NA NA One-way no parking 10 feet 9 feet both sides 5 feet both sides NA One-way parking one side 20 feet 9 feet both sides 5 feet both sides 8 feet one side One-way parking two sides 20 feet 9 feet both sides 5 feet both sides  
1  Parkway is that landscape area between the sidewalk and the street. 
2  Parking lane is a lane dedicated to on-street parking. 
k.  Parking and loading. 
1.  Parking for a CCRC shall be provided according to the following table: 
Use/Service Spaces Unit Single Family Residence 2 1 Dwelling unit Independent Living - Attached 1 1 Dwelling Unit Assisted Living 1 1 Unit Skilled Nursing 0.50 1 Bed Accessory 1 2 Employees on the largest shift  
2.  The planning commission may waive the construction of parking until it is demonstrated that it is actually needed. Parking areas shall be designated as either to be constructed at the time of building construction or at a future date when it is demonstrated that it is needed. 
3.  Parking lots shall be located in side and rear yards where ever possible. 
4.  Parking lots located in front yards shall be screened with dense landscaping or architectural elements consistent with the architecture of the facility, a minimum of three feet in height. Landscaping or architectural elements used to screen parking shall not obstruct the vision of pedestrians or drivers. 
5.  All parking areas shall be screened from view of adjacent residential uses with a continuous landscaping or architectural feature no less than four feet in height. 
6.  Interior landscaping areas equivalent to five percent of the vehicle use area shall be required in all parking lots of 20 spaces or more. One deciduous shade tree shall be required for each 150 square feet of required interior landscape area. The vehicle use area includes all areas used for vehicular circulation and parking. 
7.  Terminal landscape islands shall be provided at the end of each row of parking spaces to separate parking from adjacent drive aisles. Terminal islands shall be curbed, and shall be at least 144 square feet in area and 18 feet long for each single row of parking spaces. Each landscape island shall have a minimum of one shade tree. The planning commission may waive the requirement for terminal landscape islands in the interest of meeting barrier free requirements. 
8.  Interior landscape islands shall have a minimum area of 160 square feet and a minimum width of eight feet (measured from the back of curb). Each landscape island shall have a minimum of one deciduous shade tree. 
9.  Parking lot divider medians with a minimum width of eight feet (measured from the back of curb) may be used to meet interior landscape requirements and shall form a continuous strip between abutting rows of parking. One shade tree or two ornamental trees shall be required for each 25 lineal feet of divider median or fraction thereof. Shrubs may be planted to form a continuous hedge the full length of divider medians which separate parking areas from access drives. The use of bio retention areas is encouraged. 
10.  Two feet of interior landscape areas (except parking lot divider medians) may be part of each parking space required under this section. Wheel stops or curbing shall be installed to prevent vehicles from encroaching more than two feet into any interior landscaped area. If a landscape area is used for parking overhang, at least two feet of clear area planted with lawn or covered with mulch shall be provided where cars will overhang the curb to protect landscape plantings from damage. 
11.  Vehicle use areas, including service and loading areas shall be shown on the site plan, the adequacy and locations of such areas shall be approved by the planning commission, be screened from adjacent residential areas and from the public right-of-way. Such screening may be accomplished by a masonry wall, building wing wall, or densely planted landscape buffer, or other means acceptable to the planning commission. 
l.  Design standards. 
1.  Building height. The following maximum building heights shall apply to buildings within a CCRC: 
Building Type Max. Height (Ft 1 /Stories) Mixed Use The exterior wall height shall not exceed 36' from grade to the "top plate" The total exterior height of the building shall not exceed 45 feet from grade to the top of the ridge or highest point of the building. The total number of stories shall not exceed three (3) Attached Residential 30/ 2 Detached Residential 30/ 2 Accessory 15/1  
2.  Minimum unit size. The following minimum unit sizes shall apply to units within a CCRC: 
Unit Type Minimum Unit size Independent Living - Detached 1,000 s.f. Independent Living - Attached Apartment 525 s.f. Efficiency/Studio Apartment 400 s.f. Assisted Living 200 s.f. Nursing Home 200 s.f.  
3.  Massing and style. Building massing and style must be distinctively residential in character, drawing on the historical design elements that are contextually consistent with Early American or Colonial architecture. Historical and traditional design elements are encouraged. 
4.  Roofs. Preference shall be given to roof pitches consistent with single-family, residential design. Early American or Colonial styles are preferred. Material must be consistent with the architecture of the building. Composition shingle material is acceptable, providing that it is of high quality and provides architectural definition to the tab shingle to emulate traditional wood shingle styles. Tile, slate, or metal roofing is permitted, provided it is consistent with the architectural style of the building. The installation of chimneys on the roofs of all buildings is encouraged to convey the look and feel of residential use. 
5.  Facade element. Design of the facade shall be highly detailed and articulated to be compatible with the scale and sensitivity to the residential uses of the project. Facades should have a well defined foundation, a modulated wall element, and pitched roof or articulated cornice which defines the character of the building, and provides relation to the human scale of typical family residences. 
6.  Entrances. Building entrances must comply with all current accessibility regulations; however the use of ramps and lifts is discouraged. Buildings should be designed with entrances that are barrier-free for the intended uses. The use of sloping entry walks, covered entryways, porticos, arcades, and covered porches is encouraged. Where grade separation of an entrance is required because of site topography, accommodation should be provided in the architectural detail of the entry to allow barrier-free use by building residents and visitors. 
7.  Door and window openings. Doors and windows form the transition from public to private space, and should reflect residential detailing in design and placement. The use of cornices, architectural moldings, side lights, transom lights, and raised panels in doors is encouraged. Window openings should vary between buildings, but should not be unbroken and continuous in any circumstance. The use of opening sash windows with true divided lights, or detailing to convey the character of divided lights is encouraged. The use of shutters consistent with the architecture of a building is encouraged. A wide range of material for doors and windows is acceptable, except that the use of commercial, anodized or painted aluminum or steel storefront assemblies is discouraged. 
8.  Materials and design elements. Material chosen for exterior elements should be consistent with the intent and use of materials traditionally found in residential design in Early Colonial America. Siding materials such as clapboard and shingle are preferred, and the use of new materials which reduce maintenance, but emulate the look and feel of traditional materials is encouraged. The use of a variety of trim material to provide detail at the eaves, corners, gables, pediments, lintels, sills, quoins, and balustrades are encouraged. The use of bays, towers, cupolas, reverse gables, and dormers to provide unique character to a building and provide articulation of the facade is encouraged. The color palette chosen for any building should be consistent with traditional colonial colors. 
9.  Garages. Detached garages or carports may not be located within a front yard. Any structure with a front loaded attached garage including structures on culs-de-sac shall have the front yard setback lines staggered to achieve a differentiation with a minimum between adjacent buildings of three feet and a maximum of eight feet, no front yard shall be less than the minimum specified in this section. The attached garage may not occupy more than 60 percent of the length of the total building frontage. 
10.  Exterior lighting. The lighting of buildings and site areas shall be designed so the light does not directly shine onto adjoining properties or cause glare for motorists. The design and selection of light fixtures shall compliment the overall design of the campus and not cause the property to be overly lit. Lighting shall be coordinated with landscaping designs so trees and shrubs will not interfere with lighting as they grow, creating dark areas. The use of "green" technology is encouraged. 
11.  Signs. One externally illuminated ground sign is permitted at each entry to the campus provided that, the signs design is consistent to the overall design of the development, does not exceed 32 square feet in area and is no higher than seven feet above grade. The lettering and colors of the signs are subject to the requirements of section 32-29 of the Sign Code. Directory or directional signs are subject to the conditions of chapter 32 or the City Code. 
m.  Landscaping. 
1.  Front yards. Within front yards, the use of residential scaled features such as boxwood hedges, evergreen hedges, traditional style picket fences, stone walls, or iron picket fences and pilasters is encouraged. Fences or hedges shall not exceed three feet in height at the fronts of buildings. Fences and landscaping to screen service areas may exceed this height, consistent with the intent and use of the space. 
2.  Foundation plantings. Foundation plantings shall be provided along the front or sides of any buildings which face a public road and/or are adjacent to a parking lot or other area which provides access to the building(s) by the general public. Foundation planting areas shall be integrated into the sidewalk system (between the front and sides of the building and the parking area and/or associated driveways) adjacent to the building. Foundation planting areas shall contain a minimum of one ornamental tree and six shrubs per 30 lineal feet of applicable building frontage. Individual planting areas shall be a minimum of six feet in width. At the discretion of the planning commission, the minimum width requirements may be reduced. 
3.  Site landscaping. Inclusive of any landscape greenbelt and/or off-street parking area landscaping required by this section, at least ten percent of the site area, excluding existing public rights-of-way, shall be landscaped. Such site area landscaping may include a combination of the preservation of existing tree cover, planting of new trees and plant material, landscape plazas, gardens and building foundation planting beds. Site area landscaping shall be provided to screen potentially objectionable site features such as, but not limited to, retention/detention ponds, transformer pads, air conditioning units, storage, trash and loading areas. Sod/seed is permitted for balance of groundcover. 
n.  Regulatory flexibility. The planning commission may modify any of the standards of this section upon a finding that a modified standard is consistent with the intent of the ordinance and will protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 835, 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 50-341. - Lot and building regulations. 
(a)  Height of buildings. No building hereafter erected or altered in the community facilities district shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as provided for in article V of this chapter except as permitted in section 50-340. 
(b)  Front yard. In all community facilities districts, a minimum front yard of 75 feet shall be provided between the front property line and the furthermost front part of the building or any projection. 
(c)  Side yards; minimum distance between buildings. 
(1)  A minimum side yard shall be provided. 
(2)  In all cases of buildings erected for the purpose of public assembly (churches, public, parochial or other private elementary, intermediate or high schools, community recreation centers, municipal buildings, and other similar or like structures where numerous persons assemble and meet), including those located upon corner lots or parcels of property adjacent to two or more streets, there shall be on each side of every building site a side yard, the minimum width of which shall be 75 feet. All pumping stations, sewage treatment plants and other pertinent facilities, public utility buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations, when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity, which are not classified as buildings for public assembly shall have a side yard on each side of every building site of a minimum width of 35 feet. 
(3)  If there is more than one building structure erected or proposed to be erected upon the building site owned, leased or occupied by a common owner, lessee or occupant, a minimum space of 20 feet shall be provided between building structures. No building structure, or addition or alteration thereto, shall be permitted to encroach upon the minimum front, side or rear yard requirements provided for in this section. 
(d)  Rear yard. A minimum rear yard of 75 feet shall be provided. 
(e)  Measurement of yards. The minimum yard space, as required in this section, shall be measured from the property lines, as shown on the plot plan, to the wall of the building structure, which shall be deemed and considered, for the purposes of this division, to include all porches, projections, roof extensions or other similar or like structures which are incorporated in and made a part of the building structure. 
(Ord. No. 835, 10-4-2010) 
Secs. 50-342-50-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - C COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-369. - Purpose. 
    The C commercial business district is intended to be that permitting retail business and service uses which are needed to serve the nearby residential areas. In order to promote such business development insofar as it is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and merchants and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations and avoid the continuance of encouraging marginal strip business development along major streets. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-1; Code 1997, § 98-201) 
Sec. 50-370. - Permitted uses. 
    In all C districts, no building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other than one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 districts; provided, however, that there shall be no residential or living quarters erected, constructed, arranged or used as part of any building or structure erected, altered, arranged or designed for commercial purposes. 
(2)  Retail business for local or neighborhood needs to the following limited extent: 
a.  The sale and manufacture of baked goods, or the sale of confectionery, dairy products, delicatessen, fruits, vegetables, groceries, meats or food products; provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not be construed so as to permit the housing of live poultry or animals on the premises which are to be sold therefrom or which are to be slaughtered or processed into food or food products thereon. 
b.  The sale of dry goods and variety merchandise. 
c.  The sale of men's and boy's furnishings, shoes and hats, and women's ready-to-wear, furs, millinery, apparel and accessories. 
d.  The sale of china, floor coverings, hardware, household appliances, radios, paint, wallpaper, materials and objects for interior decorating, or furniture. 
e.  The sale of books, magazines, newspapers, cigars, drugs, flowers, gifts, music, photographic goods, sporting goods or stationery. 
f.  Restaurants, lunchrooms and cafeterias and places for the sale of soft drinks, juices, ice cream and nonalcoholic liquors, but excluding drive-thru facilities and places or businesses providing dancing or entertainment and places where food or beverages are dispensed to or served in automobiles parking on private property adjacent to and in connection with such establishments or are dispensed or served from an outside counter. A drive-thru facility may be permitted only as an accessory use in combination with a bank or financial institution. 
g.  Service establishments, barbershops, beauty shops, custom tailor shops, laundry agencies, self-service laundries or cleaning establishments, shoe repair, dry cleaning, and pressing and tailor shops in which only nonexplosive and nonflammable solvents are used and where no work is done on the premises for retail outlets elsewhere. 
h.  Medical clinics and centers, provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not be interpreted so as to permit sanitariums, hospitals, convalescent homes, resthomes, nursing homes or rooming houses or the like in C districts. 
The provisions of this subsection (2) shall not be construed or interpreted so as to permit the operation of a pawnshop, or of a business wherein the purchase, exchange or sale of used or secondhand clothing, wearing apparel or personal effects, or used or secondhand furniture or household effects, is conducted. This provision shall apply with like effect where such articles are handled upon consignment, or as the agent for the owner thereof. The prohibition relating to selling used or secondhand goods, clothes and materials shall not apply to antique stores or businesses selling no more than 25 percent of such goods. 
(3)  Business offices as follows: Real estate, insurance and other similar offices and the offices of the architectural, clerical, engineering, legal, dental, medical or other established recognized professions in which only such personnel are employed as are customarily required for the practice of such business or profession. 
(4)  Funeral homes or mortuaries. 
(5)  Automotive services as follows: Automobile sales and service buildings owned and operated by a duly authorized and franchised dealer in new automobiles, together with a space provided for the outside storage of used cars which have been acquired in connection with the operation of such automobile sales business, which outside storage space shall be immediately adjacent to the property used for automobile sales and service and shall be limited in area to a space not exceeding 50 percent of the ground floor area of the building structure used for automobile sales and services, but in no event shall such space exceed 50 percent of the Mack Avenue frontage occupied by such automobile sales and service business. Where public safety shall require, barriers shall be erected as may be directed by the department of public safety, and such property so used shall be properly graded, drained and surfaced with concrete or asphalt. No lighting system shall be permitted whereby overhead wires equipped with lighting fixtures or bulbs are strung over or across such property. No advertising of price or the like shall be placed upon any used car stored on such area, but one sign of not more than ten square feet in area shall be permitted to advertise the sale of used cars, provided that nothing in the provisions of this section shall be interpreted to permit or allow the operation of used car sales lots as such. 
(6)  Advertising billboards and poster boards designed to advertise the sale or lease of property upon which such sign shall be located, provided that not more than one such sign shall be permitted on any one parcel of property; and signboards attached to, erected upon or painted upon any building advertising the business conducted in such building or structure; provided that such advertising billboards, poster boards and signboards shall conform in size, location, structure requirements and other regulations and restrictions as contained in chapter 32, pertaining to signs, the provisions of which shall control. 
(7)  Miscellaneous business establishments as follows: Businesses which are not obnoxious or offensive to the locality by reason of the emission of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, waste, vibration or noise; provided that there is not in connection therewith any manufacturing, repairing, converting, altering, finishing or assembling except that which is incidental to such retail business for local or neighborhood service, and upon which not more than five mechanics or workers are customarily engaged. The limitation on the number of mechanics or workers employed shall not apply to auto salesrooms or service stations, it being the intent of this subsection to prohibit light or heavy manufacturing or industries of any description in C district. The provisions of this subsection shall not be interpreted so as to permit pool and billiard rooms, dancehalls, ice skating or roller rinks, or amusement enterprises. 
(8)  Material and supply businesses, providing the materials and supplies handled in the operation of the business are kept and stored within the building structure used for such business. 
(9)  Lodge rooms, club rooms, etc., where their use is primarily by the members of the organization owning the lodge room or club room; provided the premises shall not be leased or rented to private parties, groups or organizations where wrestling, boxing or other sport activities are to be engaged in or where intoxicating liquors and beverages are to be dispensed or consumed upon the premises in conjunction with such lease or rental. The provisions of this subsection shall not be interpreted so as to permit privately owned or operated community buildings, structures or premises primarily used for shortterm leasing or renting to private parties, groups or organizations for the purpose of conducting dances, entertainment or sports events. 
(10)  Equipment storage, provided that all equipment shall be placed and stored within the building structure used in connection with the business. 
(11)  Display of goods, provided that there shall be no display of goods in front of the building setback line except newspaper sales racks. 
(12)  Other main uses as follows: Any other neighborhood store, shop or service similar to the uses listed in this section in type of goods or services sold, in business hours, in the number of persons or cars to be attracted to the premises, and in effect upon the adjoining residence districts. 
(13)  Accessory uses, only to the extent necessary and normally accessory to the limited types of neighborhood service use permitted under this section. 
(14)  Outdoor patio areas for the sale and service of food and beverages; provided, however, that the sale and service of alcoholic liquors shall be in conformance with the rules of the state liquor control commission (LCC), and provided further, that such patio area shall be subject to site plan approval by the planning commission. In granting such site plan approval, the planning commission may require the installation of a fence or a greenbelt around the patio area, lighting, and compliance with the design standards ordinance. Tables, chairs, benches and umbrellas used or to be used in the patio area shall conform to such design criteria and shall be subject to the prior approval of the planning commission. The department of public safety shall review such site plan for traffic and pedestrian safety concerns and report to the planning commission prior to any approval of such plan being granted by the planning commission. The planning commission may reject any site plan found to be located close to residential property where sound levels may be intrusive. Rooftop patio areas shall not be permitted. 
(15)  Massage establishments. 
(16)  Two-story mixed use buildings. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-2; Code 1997, § 98-202; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 6-6-1994; Ord. No. 731, § 1, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 856, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 50-371. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as special land uses in the commercial business district subject to the standards set forth for each use and in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 50-32: 
(1)  Fast-food restaurants and carry-out restaurants provided that: 
a.  A five-foot-high ornamental brick wall on both sides shall be erected between such restaurant site and any adjacent residential zone, provided that if separated from the residential zone by a public alley the wall shall be located along the alley line nearest the restaurant, and provided further that no wall shall be required where the restaurant structure abuts the rear lot line or public alley. 
b.  Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a driving hazard on abutting streets, and which will not cause direct illumination on adjacent residential properties. 
c.  Entrances and exits to the restaurant shall be at least 50 feet from the intersection of any street right-of-way. 
d.  A license shall be obtained pursuant to section 10-465. 
(2)  Bowling alleys, subject to compliance with requirements of article III of chapter 10 as regards bowling activities. 
(3)  Gasoline service stations whereby such service stations also shall be permitted to do minor automotive repairs and installation, including installation of mufflers, provided that: 
a.  The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed so as to permit outside storage of automobiles or auto wash establishments, or muffler installations where such is the primary business activity. 
b.  A gasoline service station shall be located on a lot having a frontage along the principal street of not less than 140 feet and having a minimum area of not less than 14,000 square feet. 
c.  A gasoline service station building housing an office or facilities for servicing, greasing or washing motor vehicles shall be located not less than 25 feet from any side or rear lot line adjoining a residentially zoned district. 
d.  All driveways providing ingress to or egress from a gasoline service station shall be not more than 30 feet wide at the property line. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street. No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer than 20 feet to any corner or exterior lot line, as measured along the property line. No driveway shall be located nearer than 30 feet, as measured along the property line, to any other driveway giving access to or from the same gasoline service station. 
e.  A raised curb six inches in height shall be erected along all street lot lines, except for driveway openings. 
f.  The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a building, shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or a plant-mixed bituminous material, or, if any part of the lot is not so surfaced, then that area shall be landscaped and separated from all surface areas by a low barrier or curb. 
g.  All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than 15 feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 
h.  Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a driving hazard on abutting streets, and which will not cause direct illumination on adjacent residential properties. 
i.  Compliance with chapter 20, article III, division 3, pertaining to outside parking of motor vehicles at gasoline service stations and all other city codes, is required. 
(4)  Taverns where spirituous liquors and beverages are sold and served for consumption on the premises; provided that no dancing, or entertainment other than musical instruments, is permitted in the operation thereof. 
(5)  Businesses where packaged liquor or alcoholic liquors are sold for consumption off the premises, being SDD (specially designated distributor) and SDM (specially designated merchant) licenses issued by the state. No SDD or SDM use shall be approved within the commercial business district if such proposed use or establishment is within a 500-foot distance from an existing SDD or SDM establishment or within a 500-foot distance from a church or an elementary, junior or senior high school site. The distance required in this subsection shall be calculated in accordance with the applicable rules of the state liquor control commission. 
(6)  Residential or living quarters in conjunction with a physician's, dentist's or realtor's office or funeral home when such building meets the same yard requirements as required in R-1 districts, provided that parking requirements for such mixed occupancy shall comply with section 50-530. 
(7)  Three-story mixed use buildings provided that: 
a.  Where a three-story building abuts a residential use, or abuts an alley abutting a residential use, then the following setbacks are required for only that portion of the building that abuts those uses as illustrated in section 50-1. 
1.  For that portion of the building 28 feet or less in height, a 30-foot setback is required, as measured from the nearest lot line used as a residence. 
2.  For that portion of the building above 28 feet in height, a 40-foot setback is required, as measured from the nearest lot line used as a residence to any vertical portion of the building above 28 feet. 
3.  The width of any alley or landscape buffer shall be included in measuring any setback. 
b.  A ten-foot wide buffer is provided as illustrated in section 50-1, subject to: 
1.  Plantings at least six feet high, comprised of at least 50 percent evergreen, consistent with section 50-532, greenbelts. 
2.  The planning commission may also require a four-foot masonry wall. 
3.  The location of the buffer, and the location of the wall (if required) shall conform to illustration in section 50-1, unless the planning commission determines during site plan review that the purposes of this division would be better served by modification of this requirement. 
c.  All residential components of a mixed use building shall comply with the following minimum square footage requirements: 
1.  For a studio apartment: 750 square feet. 
2.  For a one bedroom: 1,000 square feet. 
3.  For a two bedroom: 1,200 square feet. 
4.  For a three bedroom: 1,350 square feet. 
d.  The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for any use or building in a mixed use area shall be calculated from, and not be reduced below, that required in the property's underlying use as set forth in section 50-530, off-street parking requirements, except as follows: 
Mixed Use Residences   Studio (minimum 750 square feet) 1 space per dwelling unit 1 bedroom (minimum 1,000 square feet) 1.50 spaces per dwelling unit 2 bedrooms (minimum 1,200 square feet) 1.75 spaces per dwelling unit 3 bedrooms (minimum 1,350 square feet) 2 spaces per dwelling unit  
The planning commission may consider and recommend, and the city council may approve, a total reduction of off-street parking, if a parking study, which details the combined uses and the customary operation of those uses, demonstrates that adequate parking is available. 
e.  Mixed use applications are subject to section 50-372 review of architectural plan and site plan and section 50-373 (design standards). 
f.  Mixed use buildings in the C commercial district require the ground floor to be nonresidential use and require any third story to be residential use. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-3; Code 1997, § 98-203; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-372. - Review of architectural plan and site plan. 
    Any person seeking approval of the issuance of a building permit for new construction in the C commercial district shall furnish to the building inspector a preliminary sketch drawn to architectural sale, showing the front, side and rear elevations, which sketch shall show the location and appearance of all roof-mounted air conditioning, heat and blower units. A site plan in accordance with sections 50-34-50-42 shall also be furnished. The building inspector shall review such sketch and site plan and refer them to the planning commission with the inspector's recommendation, prior to the approval and issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-4; Code 1997, § 98-204; Ord. No. 810, § 98-204, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-373. - Design standards. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  New construction, renovations, remodeling or exterior building alterations within all C commercial, C-2 high intensity city center, and RO-1 restricted office zoning districts shall be designed in conformance with approved design standards found in this section and on file with the building department. The purpose of these design standards is to promote a coordinated and complimentary use of design elements that result in a theme oriented, harmonious appearance and image for the commercial and high intensity residential areas of the city. 
(2)  To be in compliance with these standards, all designs as governed by this section shall contain a dominant use of assorted architectural design elements generally described as "Colonial," "Williamsburg Colonial," "Georgian Colonial," "Early American," "Classic" or "Traditional." Specific definitions and examples of these elements are included within this section, and in the "design standards" guidelines on file with the building department. The guidelines may be modified by planning commission resolution. 
(b)  Design components. 
(1)  The words "Colonial," "Williamsburg Colonial," "Georgian Colonial," "Early American," "Classic" or "Traditional" shall collectively refer to use of a pallet of materials, trim, shapes, forms, colors and details most commonly associated with the dominant architectural styles utilized during the early development of the east coast American towns and cities. Some examples of where these designs are commonly found and featured include Williamsburg, Virginia, Cape Cod, New England and Philadelphia. 
(2)  To more specifically define the assorted components that can be utilized to achieve this design style, the design standards guidelines include graphic examples of design elements, all of which are considered by definition of this section to be acceptable when collectively used within a total design. These elements shall be utilized in appropriate proportions and quantity to form an overall total design consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Colors utilized in all design components shall be consistent with the approved color chart on file with the building department and shall be utilized to produce a balanced, coordinated and complimentary total design solution. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-5; Code 1997, § 98-205) 
Sec. 50-374. - Change of appearance of building exterior in C, RO-1 or C-2 district. 
(a)  Approval required. All plans for new construction, renovations, remodeling or exterior building alterations within all C commercial district, the RO-1 restricted office district, and the C-2 high intensity city center district shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval prior to the issuance of any building, sign, or awning permit and any new certificate of occupancy as may be required. All plans will be submitted to the planning commission for review consistent with the design standards ordinance, unless otherwise exempt under subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Repair or maintenance. The following repairs or maintenance to the exterior appearance of any building or structure are examples of changes not requiring planning commission review if complaint with other provisions of this Code including the design standards ordinance and approved colors: 
(1)  Replacement of windows or doors. 
(2)  Painting or repainting of building exterior. 
(3)  Repaving or repairs of driveways, sidewalks or parking lots. 
(4)  Repair or replacement of damaged or worn building elements. 
(5)  Signs in compliance with chapter 32. 
(6)  Awnings or canopies in compliance with chapter 32. 
(7)  Replacement or addition of gutters or downspouts. 
(8)  Emergency repairs or replacement requiring immediate attention. 
(9)  Exterior building lighting fixtures. 
(10)  Reshingling or replacement of mansard roof covering or other roof covering. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-6; Code 1997, § 98-206) 
Sec. 50-375. - Denial of approval of exterior design. 
    If, in the opinion of the planning commission, the architectural appeal, finished exterior or functional design of the building or structure front shall be of extreme variance with the provisions of section 50-373, or with that of existing buildings or structures already constructed, which would result in a substantial depreciation of property or aesthetic values of the immediate and adjacent vicinity, the planning commission shall recommend the denial of any building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-7; Code 1997, § 98-207) 
Sec. 50-376. - Appeals. 
    Any person affected by the decision of the planning commission under this article shall have the right to file a claim with the board of appeals within ten days after the decision of the planning commission has been rendered. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-8; Code 1997, § 98-208) 
Sec. 50-377. - Building height. 
    No commercial or mercantile building in C districts shall be erected, reconstructed or remodeled so as to exceed two stories in height, with a maximum height of 28 feet, except as provided in sections 50-534 and 50-535. All one-story commercial or mercantile buildings shall have a minimum height of 16 feet at the front elevation, such height to be measured at the top of the coping. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-9; Code 1997, § 98-209) 
Sec. 50-378. - Front yard. 
    In C districts, no front yard shall be permitted where the property use is for the purposes specified in subsections 50-370(2), (3) or (6). Where the use of the property is for residential purposes, the regulations of article III, division 2 of this chapter shall control. Where the use of the property is such that a front yard is required for the proper use thereof, the owner thereof may make application, in writing, to the planning commission for permission to provide such a front yard and the planning commission shall have the authority to grant such permission, specifying the extent of such front yard so permitted and the limitations on the use thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-10; Code 1997, § 98-210) 
Sec. 50-379. - Side yard on interior lot line. 
    In C districts, side yards are not required along interior side lot lines if all walls abutting or facing such lot lines are of fireproof construction and wholly without windows or other openings; but if the side wall is not of fireproof construction a side yard shall be provided, and if of fireproof construction, but containing windows or other openings (other than emergency exits or vents), either a side yard or an outer court as specified in section 50-383 shall be provided. Where a side yard is provided, it shall have a width as prescribed for outer courts in section 50-384. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-11; Code 1997, § 98-211) 
Sec. 50-380. - Side yard on street side of corner lot. 
    In C districts, no side yard is required on the street side of corner lots. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-12; Code 1997, § 98-212) 
Sec. 50-381. - Rear yard on interior rear lot line. 
    In C districts, rear yards are not required along interior rear lot lines for buildings or parts of buildings not used as dwellings, if all walls abutting or facing such lot lines are of fireproof construction and wholly without windows or other openings; provided that in all cases where the rear wall is not of fireproof construction a rear yard shall be provided, and provided further that, in all cases where the rear wall is of fireproof construction and contains windows or other openings (other than emergency exits or vents), either a rear yard or an outer court as specified in section 50-383 shall be provided. Where a rear yard is provided it shall have a depth equal to the width required for outer courts in section 50-384. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-13; Code 1997, § 98-213) 
Sec. 50-382. - Rear yard abutting street. 
    In C districts, on any lot running through from street to street, a rear yard shall be provided on the rear street conforming to the requirements for front yards on that street. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-14; Code 1997, § 98-214) 
Sec. 50-383. - Outer courts generally. 
    When a side yard is not provided along an interior side lot line or a rear yard is not provided along an interior rear lot line in C districts, an outer court shall be provided opposite any windows or other openings (other than emergency exits or vents) which face such side or rear lot lines, extending from such opening outward to the front, rear or side of the building, and extending upward unobstructed from the lowest point of such window or other opening. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-15; Code 1997, § 98-215) 
Sec. 50-384. - Width of outer courts. 
    In C districts, the width of an outer court, measured to the lot line, shall be in proportion to the number of stories through which it extends, and shall be not less than five feet for one story, and eight feet for two stories, and two feet additional for each story in excess of two stories. Where such court serves a building or part of a building used as a dwelling, the full width prescribed in this section shall be provided at the lowest story used as a dwelling. The width of an outer court shall be measured to the lot line, except that, in the case of lots the side or rear lines of which abut a public alley, the established centerline of such alley may be taken as the point of measurement instead of the corresponding lot line. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-16; Code 1997, § 98-216) 
Sec. 50-385. - Inner courts. 
    In C districts, where inner courts are provided, they shall conform to the requirements of the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.). 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-17; Code 1997, § 98-217) 
Sec. 50-386. - Corner clearance for business uses. 
    In C districts, no business building or structure may be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways and a line joining points on such lines six feet distant from their point of intersection, or in the case of a rounded corner the point of intersection of their tangents. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-18; Code 1997, § 98-218) 
Sec. 50-387. - Off-street parking facilities. 
    Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in the C district specified in section 50-530. 
(Code 1975, § 5-8-19; Code 1997, § 98-219) 
Secs. 50-388-50-417. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - C-2 HIGH INTENSITY CITY CENTER DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-418. - Purpose. 
    The C-2 high intensity city center district is intended to provide for and encourage high intensity planned development which integrates in one building or in a complex of buildings commercial and office and residential uses to create a strong community focal point and to promote public welfare by enhancing the city's tax base. Pursuant to these purposes, C-2 district regulations permit high intensity commercial, office and residential land uses and prohibit, or restrict in area, low intensity uses. Because the purpose of the C-2 district is to encourage high intensity development, area, height and bulk regulations are limited to those which are absolutely necessary to protect adjacent single-family residential development. In order to further protect adjacent residential development, wall and plant material screens are required. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-1; Code 1997, § 98-241) 
Sec. 50-419. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by right in the C-2 high intensity city center district: 
(1)  Retail businesses. Retail businesses are permitted as follows: 
a.  The sale and manufacture of baked goods, and the sale of confectionery, dairy products, delicatessen, fruits, vegetables, groceries, meats and food products; provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not be construed so as to permit the housing of live poultry or animals on the premises which are to be sold therefrom or which are to be slaughtered or processed into food or food products thereon. 
b.  The sale of dry goods and variety merchandise. 
c.  The sale of men's and boy's furnishings, shoes and hats; and women's ready-to-wear, furs, millinery, apparel and accessories. 
d.  The sale of china, floor covering, hardware, household appliances, radios, paint, wallpaper, materials and objects for interior decorating, or furniture. 
e.  The sale of books, magazines, newspapers, cigars, drugs, flowers, gifts, music, photographic goods, sporting goods or stationery. 
f.  Restaurants, lunchrooms and cafeterias and places for the sale of soft drinks, juices, ice cream and nonalcoholic liquors, but excluding drive-thru facilities and places or businesses providing dancing or entertainment and places where food or beverages are dispensed to or served in automobiles parking on private property adjacent to and in connection with such establishments or are dispensed or served from an outside counter. A drive-thru facility may be permitted only as an accessory use in combination with a bank or financial institution. 
g.  Establishments that sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, provided a liquor license has been approved by the city and granted by the liquor control commission. No dancing is allowed unless the establishment receives approval for a dance permit from the city pursuant to section 4-31, and the liquor control commission. This subsection does not prohibit singing, piano playing or the playing of other types of musical instruments. 
h.  Businesses where packaged liquors or alcoholic liquors are sold for consumption off the premises, being SDD (specially designated distributor) and SDM (specially designated merchant) licenses issued by the state, shall be deemed to be a special use within the C-2 high intensity city center district and shall require approval of the planning commission of the city, after a public hearing. The planning commission shall not approve any SDD or SDM use within the C-2 high intensity city center district if such proposed use or establishment is within a 500-foot distance from an existing SDD or SDM establishment or within a 500-foot distance from a church or an elementary, junior or senior high school site. The distances required in this subsection shall be calculated in accordance with the applicable rules of the state liquor control commission (LCC). 
i.  Service establishments as follows: Barbershops, beauty shops, custom tailor shops, laundry agencies, self-service laundries or cleaning establishments, shoe repair, dry cleaning, and pressing and tailor shops in which only nonexplosive and nonflammable solvents are used and where no work is done on the premises for retail outlets elsewhere. 
j.  Medical clinics and centers, provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not be interpreted so as to permit sanitariums, hospitals, convalescent homes, resthomes, nursing homes or roominghouses or the like in the C-2 district. 
k.  Facilities for child care and preschool learning centers or similar facilities devoted to the training, care or the education of children. 
(2)  Business offices. Real estate, insurance and other similar offices and the offices of the architectural, clerical, engineering, legal, dental, medical or other established recognized professions in which only such personnel are employed as are customarily required for the practice of such business or profession. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-2; Code 1997, § 98-242; Ord. No. 812, § 98-242, 2-26-2007; Ord. No. 856, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 50-420. - Permitted special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as special land uses in the C-2 high intensity city center district subject to the standards set forth in section 50-421 and in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 50-422: 
(1)  High-rise residential structures, provided that: 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall have a private balcony of at least 100 square feet in area or ten percent of the entire floor area of the unit, whichever is less. 
b.  The minimum usable floor area of each multiple dwelling shall be: 
1.  Efficiency and one-bedroom unit: 750 square feet. 
2.  Two-bedroom unit: 950 square feet. 
3.  Three- or more bedroom unit: 1,150 square feet. 
(2)  Hotels and motels and uses accessory thereto. 
(3)  Motion picture theaters and uses accessory thereto. 
(4)  Hospitals and uses accessory thereto. 
(5)  Parking structures to serve uses permitted by right and special land uses. 
(6)  Transit facilities, including regional transit pickup stations and parking facilities for persons using regional transit services, but excluding maintenance garages and similar facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-3; Code 1997, § 98-243) 
Sec. 50-421. - Standards for approval of special land uses. 
    Special land uses in the C-2 district shall be approved pursuant to requirements set forth in section 50-32 only upon a finding by the city council that: 
(1)  The site plan for the proposed special land use conforms to all the requirements of this chapter, including the site plan standards set forth in sections 50-34-50-42; and 
(2)  The proposed special land use will be part of an overall project which includes substantial retail business or office development, and which conforms to the statement of purpose set forth in section 50-418. A necessary but not sufficient condition for a finding of conformity with the statement of purpose shall be a city council determination, based on facts presented by the applicant, that the applicant's proposed special land use will not result in or be likely to result in more than 15 percent of the replacement value of all nonmunicipal improvements in the C-2 district being exempt from property taxes. In making such a determination, the city council shall consider existing improvements and proposed improvements, which, in the judgment of the council, have a high possibility of being completed. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-4; Ord. No. 810, § 98-244, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-422. - Site plan approval standards. 
    Site plans for C-2 high intensity city center district uses shall conform to the standards set forth in sections 50-34-50-42. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-5; Code 1997, § 98-245; Ord. No. 810, § 98-245, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-423. - Building height and setbacks. 
(a)  No structure in the C-2 district shall exceed in height the lower of the following: 
(1)  One hundred feet. 
(2)  Twenty feet plus one foot for each foot of building setback from a single-family residential property line. 
(b)  No structure shall be of a height or location which would permit it to cast its shadow on any existing single-family residential structure for more than two hours on December 21. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-6; Code 1997, § 98-246) 
Sec. 50-424. - Corner clearance for business uses. 
    In the C-2 high intensity city center district, no business building or structure may be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways and a line joining points on such lines six feet distant from their point of intersection, or, in the case of a rounded corner, the point of intersection of their tangents. 
(Code 1975, § 5-9-7; Code 1997, § 98-247) 
Secs. 50-425-50-446. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - RO-1 RESTRICTED OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-447. - Purpose. 
    The RO-1 restricted office district is intended to permit those office and restricted business uses which will provide opportunities for local employment close to residential areas, thus reducing travel to and from work; which will provide clean, modern office buildings in landscaped settings; which will provide, adjacent to residential areas, appropriate districts for uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic, traffic congestion and parking problems; and which will promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the city's land use plan. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-1; Code 1997, § 98-3013; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-448. - Permitted uses. 
    In all RO-1 districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
(1)  Uses resulting from any of the following occupations: Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, banking, clerical, stenographic and drafting. This list of uses shall not be construed to eliminate offices of recognized manufacturers' agents; provided that no display shall be in an exterior show window, and that the total area devoted to display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 15 percent of the usable floor area of the establishment using the display of an actual product for sale as a sales procedure; provided further that there shall be no outdoor storage of goods or material, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale; provided further that there shall be no warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale; and provided further that there shall be no warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material beyond that normally incidental to the permitted office type uses listed in this subsection. 
(2)  Medical or dental centers, not including veterinary hospitals, but including veterinary practice limited to felines and not including any type of medical facility permitting overnight patients. 
(3)  Professional office of a medical doctor, osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, architect, lawyer, professional engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect or community planner. 
(4)  Publicly owned buildings and public utility offices, transformer stations and substations, but not including outside storage or warehouse yards. 
(5)  Two-story mixed use buildings. 
(6)  Three-story mixed use buildings as special land uses under section 50-465. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-2; Code 1997, § 98-302; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-449. - Review of architectural plans and site plan. 
    Any person seeking approval of the issuance of a building permit for new construction in an RO-1 restricted office district shall furnish to the building inspector a preliminary sketch drawn to architectural scale, showing the front, side and rear elevations and architectural features, which sketch shall show the location and appearance of all roof-mounted air conditioning, heating and blower units. A site plan shall also be furnished in accordance with sections 50-34-50-42. The building inspector shall review such sketch and site plan and refer them to the planning commission with the inspector's recommendation, prior to the approval and issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-3; Ord. No. 810, § 98-303, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-450. - Design of building exteriors. 
    All exterior elevations of buildings or structures in the RO-1 district shall comply with section 50-373 (design standards ordinance) and section 50-374 (change in appearance of building exterior). 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-4; Code 1997, § 98-304; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-451. - Denial of approval of exterior design. 
    If, in the opinion of the planning commission, the architectural appeal, finished exterior or functional design of the building or structure front shall be at extreme variance with the provisions of section 50-450, or with that of existing buildings or structures already constructed, which would result in a substantial depreciation of property or aesthetic values of the immediate and adjacent vicinity, the planning commission shall recommend the denial of any building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-6; Code 1997, § 98-306; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-452. - Appeals. 
    Any person affected by the decision of the planning commission under this division shall have the right to file a claim with the board of appeals within ten days after the decision of the planning commission has been rendered. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-7; Code 1997, § 98-307; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-453. - Building height. 
    No commercial or mercantile building in RO-1 districts shall be erected, reconstructed or remodeled so as to exceed two stories in height, with a minimum height of 28 feet, except as provided in sections 50-534 and 50-535. All one-story commercial or mercantile buildings shall have a minimum height of 16 feet at the front elevation, such height to be measured at the top of the coping. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-8; Code 1997, § 98-308; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-454. - Front yard. 
    In RO-1 districts, no front yard is required. Where the use of the property is such that a front yard is desirable for the proper use of the site, the owner thereof may make application to the building inspector for permission to provide such a front yard. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-9; Code 1997, § 98-309; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-455. - Side yard on interior lot line. 
    In RO-1 districts, side yards are not required along interior side lot lines if all walls abutting or facing such lot lines are of fire-proof construction and wholly without windows or other openings; but if the side wall is not of fire-proof construction, a side yard shall be provided, and if of fire-proof construction, but containing windows or other openings (other than emergency exits or vents), either a side yard or an outer court as specified in section 50-460 shall be provided. Where a side yard is provided, it shall have a width as prescribed for outer courts in section 50-461. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-10; Code 1997, § 98-310; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-456. - Side yard on street side of corner lot. 
    In RO-1 districts, no side yard is required on the street side of corner lots. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-11; Code 1997, § 98-311; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-457. - Rear yard on interior rear lot line. 
    In RO-1 districts, rear yards are not required along interior rear lot lines for buildings or parts of buildings not used as dwellings, if all walls abutting or facing such lot lines are of fire-proof construction and wholly without windows or other openings; provided that, in all cases where the rear wall is not of fire-proof construction and contains windows or other openings (other than emergency exits or vents), either a rear yard or an outer court as specified in section 50-460 shall be provided. Where a rear yard is provided it shall have a depth equal to the width required for outer courts in section 50-461. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-12; Code 1997, § 98-312; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-458. - Rear yard abutting street. 
    In RO-1 districts, on any lot running through from street to street, a rear yard shall be provided on the rear street conforming to the requirements for front yards on that street. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-13; Code 1997, § 98-313; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-459. - Outer courts generally. 
    When a side yard is not provided along an interior side lot line or a rear yard is not provided along an interior rear lot line in RO-1 districts, an outer court shall be provided opposite any windows or other openings (other than emergency exits or vents) which face such side or rear lot lines, extending from such opening outward to the front, rear or side of the building, and extending upward unobstructed from the lowest point of such window or other opening. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-14; Code 1997, § 98-314; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-460. - Width of outer courts. 
    In RO-1 districts, the width of outer courts, measured to the lot line, shall be in proportion to the number of stories through which it extends, and shall be not less than five feet for one story, and eight feet for two stories, and two feet additional for each story in excess of two stories. Where such court serves a building or part of a building used as a dwelling, the full width prescribed in this section shall be provided at the lowest story used as a dwelling. The width of an outer court shall be measured to the lot line, except that, in the case of lots whose side or rear lines abut a public alley, the established centerline of such alley may be taken as the point of measurement instead of the corresponding lot line. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-15; Code 1997, § 98-315; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-461. - Inner courts. 
    In RO-1 districts where inner courts are provided, they shall conform to the requirements of the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.). 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-16; Code 1997, § 98-316; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-462. - Corner clearance for business uses. 
    In RO-1 districts, no business building or structure may be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways and a line joining points on such lines six feet distant from their point of intersection, or, in the case of a rounded corner, the point of intersection of their tangents. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-17; Code 1997, § 98-317; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-463. - Maximum lot coverage. 
    The maximum lot coverage of a lot or parcel of land by a building in an RO-1 district shall be 40 percent. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-18; Code 1997, § 98-318; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-464. - Off-street parking facilities. 
    Off-street facilities shall be provided in the RO-1 district as specified in section 50-530. 
(Code 1975, § 5-11-19; Code 1997, § 98-319; Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-465. - Special land uses. 
    Three-story mixed use buildings are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Where a three-story building abuts a residential use, or abuts an alley abutting a residential use, then the following setbacks are required for only that portion of the building that abuts those uses as illustrated in section 50-1. 
a.  For that portion of the building 28 feet or less in height, a 30-foot setback is required, as measured from the nearest lot line used as a residence. 
b.  For that portion of the building above 28 feet in height, a 40-foot setback is required, as measured from the nearest lot line used as a residence to any vertical portion of the building above 28 feet. 
c.  The width of any alley or landscape buffer shall be included in measuring any setback. 
(2)  A ten-foot wide buffer is provided as illustrated in section 50-1. 
a.  Plantings at least six feet high, comprised of at least 50 percent evergreen, consistent with section 50-532, greenbelts. 
b.  The planning commission may also require a four-foot masonry wall. 
c.  The location of the buffer, and the location of the wall (if required) shall conform to illustration in section 50-1 unless the planning commission determines during site plan review that the purposes of this division would be better served by modification of this requirement. 
(3)  All residential components of a mixed use building shall comply with the following minimum square footage requirements: 
a.  For a studio apartment: 750 square feet. 
b.  For a one bedroom: 1,000 square feet. 
c.  For a two bedroom: 1,200 square feet. 
d.  For a three bedroom: 1,350 square feet. 
(4)  The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for any use or building in a mixed use area shall be calculated from, and not be reduced below, that required in the property's underlying use as set forth in section 50-530, off-street parking requirements, except as follows: 
Mixed Use Residences Studio (minimum 750 square feet) 1 space per dwelling unit 1 bedroom (minimum 1,000 square feet) 1.50 spaces per dwelling unit 2 bedrooms (minimum 1,200 square feet) 1.75 spaces per dwelling unit 3 bedrooms (minimum 1,350 square feet) 2 spaces per dwelling unit  
The planning commission may consider and recommend, and the city council may approve, a total reduction of off-street parking, if a parking study, which details the combined uses and the customary operation of those uses, demonstrates that adequate parking is available. 
(5)  Mixed use applications are subject to section 50-372 review of architectural plan and site plan and section 50-373 design standards. 
(6)  Mixed uses in the RO-1 district requires that the ground floor be a permitted nonresident use and the third floor be a residential use. 
(Ord. No. 833, 8-16-2010) 
Secs. 50-466-50-483. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-484. - Purpose. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking district is intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used for off-street vehicular parking of private cars, so as to serve business and commercial areas. This district is also designed to afford maximum protection to adjacent residential areas by providing landscaped setbacks, fences and well-designed parking lot facilities. It is also intended that this district act as a transitional area between commercial and residential areas, thereby permitting private developers as well as public agencies to provide needed off-street parking. 
(Code 1975, § 5-12-1; Code 1997, § 98-341) 
Sec. 50-485. - Permitted uses. 
    In all P-1 districts, no property may be used for other than vehicular parking, subject to the requirements in section 50-485. 
(Code 1975, § 5-12-2; Code 1997, § 98-342) 
Sec. 50-486. - Operation of parking areas. 
    The following regulations shall apply in the P-1 district: 
(1)  Parking areas shall be used only for parking of passenger vehicles operated by the management, the employees, customers and guests of the enterprise doing business in the city. 
(2)  Parking may be without or with charge. 
(3)  No business involving repair of or service to vehicles, trailers, mobile homes, travel trailers, boats or boat trailers, or sale, display or storage of vehicles, trailers, mobile homes, travel trailers, boats or boat trailers, shall be permitted from or upon property zoned in a P-1 district. 
(4)  No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon the premises, except as provided for in section 50-574. There shall not be more than two such buildings in the area, and each such building shall not be more than 50 square feet in area and such buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(5)  No advertising signs shall be erected on the premises, except that not more than one directional sign at each point of ingress or egress may be erected, which may also bear the name of the operator of the lot and the enterprise it is intended to serve. Such signs shall not exceed six feet in area, shall not extend more than ten feet in height above the nearest curb, and shall be entirely upon the parking area. 
(Code 1975, § 5-12-3; Code 1997, § 98-343) 
Sec. 50-487. - Location. 
    All P-1 districts shall be contiguous to a C-2, C or RO-1 district. In all cases, lots which are used for parking shall be the adjacent successive lots from the business or commercial property. 
(Code 1975, § 5-12-4; Code 1997, § 98-344) 
Sec. 50-488. - Modification of requirements. 
    The board of appeals, upon application by the property owner of the parking area, may modify the yard, wall, ingress and egress requirements of this division where, in unusual circumstances, undue hardship would be suffered or no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this division. In all cases where a protective wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress or egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area and better visibility. 
(Code 1975, § 5-12-14; Code 1997, § 98-354) 
Secs. 50-489-50-514. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-515. - Existing building permits. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction or intended use of a building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within six months of the date of such permit, and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within such six months and which entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within two years from the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-2; Code 1997, § 98-3) 
Sec. 50-516. - Prior height permits. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the ultimate erection to its full height as originally planned of a building constructed to a less height prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but with its foundations and structural members designed to carry the higher building. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-3; Code 1997, § 98-4) 
Sec. 50-517. - Multiple use of yards. 
    No yard, court or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall again be used as a yard, court or other open space for another building existing or intended to exist at the same time, it being the intention of this chapter to prevent the erection of buildings closer together than is intended by this chapter through the device of selling off a strip of land already used as a yard in procuring the building permit for one building so that the same strip of land can be shown as the required land for an adjoining building. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-4; Code 1997, § 98-5) 
Sec. 50-518. - Measurement of depth for rear yard abutting alley. 
    Wherever there is a public alley at the rear of a lot upon which the lot abuts for its full width, measurement of the depth of any abutting rear yard required under this chapter may be made to the centerline of such alley. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-5; Code 1997, § 98-6) 
Sec. 50-519. - Street frontage and access requirements for dwellings. 
    No dwelling shall be built, moved or converted upon a lot having a frontage of less than 20 feet upon a public street, or upon a private street or other permanent easement giving access to a public street, such private street or easement to have a width throughout of not less than ten feet for each lot fronting upon it, but this shall not require a width for such private street or easement of more than 40 feet where less than ten lots front upon it, or of more than 60 feet in any case. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-6; Code 1997, § 98-7) 
Sec. 50-520. - Yard depth and width along district boundaries. 
    Along any boundary line between two different kinds of districts, any side yard, rear yard or lot line court required in the less restricted districts shall be increased in minimum width and depth to the average of the required minimum widths and depths for such yards and courts in the two kinds of districts. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-7; Code 1997, § 98-8) 
Sec. 50-521. - Parking or storage of commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
(a)  No commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored upon any residential property or the public streets and alleys, except for the period actually required in connection with the delivery of merchandise or materials, the rendering of any services or performance of any building construction; except, that no more than one commercial vehicle of a rated capacity of three-fourths ton or less may be parked or stored upon any residential property when entirely within a suitable garage. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "commercial vehicle," also defined in section 50-1, shall include any truck used for commercial purposes, any stake truck, dump truck, highway tractor-trailer truck, semi-truck trailer, utility-type trailer, storage container, construction vehicle or equipment, or other vehicle with mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, plows, or other similar equipment. A pickup truck, van, or SUV type vehicle, is also deemed a commercial vehicle if such vehicle exhibits one of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Commercial license plates. 
(2)  An advertising sign or lettering, business logo, business address, telephone number, or internet address on the exterior of the vehicle or mounted or placed inside the vehicle so as to be plainly visible from the exterior thereof in such fashion as to convey or attempt to convey an advertising message to the public. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-8; Code 1997, § 98-9; Ord. No. 786, § 1, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-522. - Parking or storage of commercial and recreational vehicles in nonresidential districts. 
    No commercial vehicle, boat, boat trailer, recreational vehicle, mobile home, camper, storage container, or trailer shall be parked or stored upon any nonresidential property, or the public streets and alleys, except for the period actually required in connection with the delivery of merchandise or materials, or the rendering of any services, or performance of any building construction. However, one commercial vehicle (other than a storage container) of a rated capacity of three-fourths ton or less may be parked overnight in a commercial district if it is parked in a legal parking spot specifically dedicated to that commercial vehicle, or if it is parked in a fully enclosed garage. 
(Code 1997, § 98-9.5; Ord. No. 786, § 1, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 50-523. - Projections on buildings. 
    Outside stairways, fire escapes, fire towers, porches, platforms, balconies, boiler flues, vestibules, attached garages and other projections shall be considered as part of the building and not as a part of the yards or courts or unoccupied spaces; provided that the building inspector may permit encroachments or extensions into the front or rear yard provided such structures do not extend more than 30 inches from the main wall of the building, do not in the aggregate occupy more than 20 percent of the length of such wall, and do not interfere with the light or ventilation of any room used as a dwelling. This section shall not apply to unenclosed outside porches not exceeding one story in height which do not extend into the required front yard farther than eight feet or into the rear yard farther than 12 feet, or to one such unenclosed porch which does not extend into the side yard nearer than four feet to the side lot line or exceed 12 feet in width from the side wall of the building, or to cornices not exceeding 18 inches in width. Where at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived there exist subdivision lots of 35 feet in width or less, such porches may extend to within three feet of the side lot line. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-9; Code 1997, § 98-10) 
Sec. 50-524. - Building grades. 
(a)  Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. For purposes of this section, the building grade line, sometimes referred to as the finish grade or finish grade line, shall mean the elevation of the ground adjoining the building on all four sides. The first floor elevation shall mean the height that the first floor extends above the building grade. A sloping earth grade beginning at the sidewalk level shall be maintained and established from the center of the front lot line to the finish grade line at the front of the building and from the rear wall of the building to the rear lot line. The height of the finish grade line of any dwelling shall not be less than 12 inches or more than 18 inches above the average front sidewalk elevation; provided that, if a different grade shall be required by reason of the depth of the public sewer, the board of appeals shall have the power and authority to permit a deviation from the regulations imposed in this section. The first floor elevation shall be not less than six inches or more than 26 inches above the finish grade line of the building. 
(b)  When a new building is being constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade shall have priority over determining the grade around the new building and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to meet existing grades and not to permit runoff of surface water to flow onto the adjacent properties. Grades shall be approved by the building inspector or the city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-10; Code 1997, § 98-11) 
Sec. 50-525. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances, it being the intention of this section to except such essential services from the application of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-11; Code 1997, § 98-12) 
Sec. 50-526. - Accessory buildings. 
    The purpose of this section is to regulate the number, size, location and appearance of all accessory buildings. These regulations shall apply to all detached structures, including but not limited to garages, carports, storage buildings and sheds, gazebos, pool houses and similar structures. In any zoning district, all accessory buildings are subject to the conditions of this section. Unless specifically stated to the contrary, all of the requirements pertaining to accessory buildings included in this section shall apply to all zoning districts. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  No accessory building shall be located in whole or in part on or over an easement for utilities, drainage, access, communications, or related purposes. 
b.  No accessory building shall be permitted unless the principal building has been previously erected or is being erected simultaneously. 
c.  When erected as an integral part of the permitted principal building, a structure shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the permitted principal building. 
d.  The architectural character, design and the construction materials of all accessory buildings shall be compatible with the architectural character of the principal building. 
e.  In the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E and R-2 zoning districts accessory buildings are only permitted in rear yards. 
f.  Accessory buildings shall not be used for temporary or permanent dwelling, lodging or sleeping. 
g.  Accessory buildings not exceeding 200 square feet require a zoning compliance permit issued by the building inspector, shall be placed on a four-inch concrete slab over four inches of compacted sand, and shall have a four-inch by 24-inch concrete rat wall below existing grade. 
h.  Accessory buildings in excess of 200 square feet require a building permit issued by the building inspector, shall have a four-inch by 24-inch rat wall, and shall have a four-inch concrete slab or a frost protected foundation as required by state building code, as amended. 
(2)  Height and area limitations. 
a.  Lot coverage. The combined lot coverage of all detached accessory buildings located within a rear yard shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the required rear yard. The combined lot coverage of all principal buildings and accessory buildings on the lot shall be in conformance with the maximum permitted lot coverage for the applicable zoning district as defined by this chapter and, in no instance shall the total area of permitted accessory buildings exceed the lesser of the area of the first floor of the principal building, or 1,000 square feet in area maximum. A maximum of two accessory buildings are permitted per property, only one of which may be used as a private garage. 
b.  Height. Accessory buildings are subject to the following height restrictions: 
1.  One story with a maximum wall height of ten feet measured from the finished grade level to the bottom of the eaves. 
2.  Maximum height shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the finished grade level adjoining the building to the highest point on the ridge of the roof. 
3.  In no instance shall an accessory building be constructed higher than the principal structure on the property. 
4.  In the R-1A zoning district, the maximum height of accessory buildings and structures shall be 22 feet. 
5.  In all other residential districts, the maximum height of accessory buildings and structures shall be 18 feet. 
(3)  Placement and setbacks. 
a.  If such accessory building is erected within ten feet of any residence building or structure on the same lot or parcel of property, then the accessory building shall not be constructed closer than four feet to the side lot line and six feet to the rear lot line, subject to the easement requirements of this section. 
b.  If an accessory building is erected within 20 feet, but not closer than ten feet, to any residence building or structure on the same lot or parcel of property, then the accessory building shall not be constructed closer than three feet to the side lot line, and six feet to the rear lot line, subject to the easement requirements of this section. 
c.  If an accessory building is erected not closer than 20 feet to any residence building or structure on the same lot or parcel of property, then the accessory building shall not be constructed closer than two feet to the side lot line, and six feet to the rear lot line, subject to the easement requirements of this section. 
d.  An accessory building shall not be constructed within four feet of any existing building or structure situated upon the same lot or an adjoining lot. 
e.  The side yard setback for accessory buildings and structures located on corner lots shall be determined by the lesser of the total of the two required side yards of the applicable district or the established prevailing setback existing on the remaining three developed corner lots. 
f.  For purpose of this section, lots that abut or are adjacent to an alley are not considered corner lots, and the side yard setbacks shall be determined by the provisions of this subsection (3). 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-12; Code 1997, § 98-13; Ord. No. 791, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 814, § 98-13, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 867, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 50-527. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries are street lines, alley lines or the subdividing or boundary lines of recorded plats, or the extensions thereof, and, where the districts designated on the zoning map and made a part of this chapter are approximately bounded by street lines, alley lines or subdividing or boundary lines of recorded plats, such lines or the extension thereof shall be considered to be the district boundaries. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-13; Code 1997, § 98-14) 
Sec. 50-528. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Any lawful nonconforming use consisting of a building, existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, may be continued, except as prohibited or restricted in this chapter, provided that the building or use thereof shall not be structurally changed, altered or enlarged unless such altered or enlarged building or use shall conform to the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. No nonconforming use, if changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall be resumed or changed back to a nonconforming use. Failure to continue to use any land, building or structure, or part thereof, which use is a nonconforming use under this chapter, for a period of one year or more, shall be held to be conclusive proof of an intention to legally abandon any such nonconforming use. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration, repairing or rebuilding of any nonconforming building or structure damaged to the extent of 60 percent or less of its assessed value, exclusive of the foundation, at the time the damage occurred, by fire, explosion, act of God or any act of the public enemy subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or shall prevent the continuance of the use of such building, or part thereof, as such use existed at the time of such impairment of such building or part thereof, provided that such building or structure is rebuilt or rehabilitated or such use shall be resumed within one year from the date of the impairment or destruction of such building, structure or part thereof. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reinforcement or reconstruction of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing of a nonconforming building, structure or part thereof existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, rendered necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation, provided the cost of such work shall not exceed 30 percent of the assessed valuation of such building or structure at the time such work is done, nor shall any provisions of this chapter prevent compliance with the provisions of any building code in effect in this city or the housing law of the state relative to the maintenance of buildings or structures. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit alteration, improvement or rehabilitation of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing of a nonconforming building or structure existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided such alteration, improvement or rehabilitation does not involve any increase in height, area or bulk, or change in use. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration of any building or wall declared unsafe by the building inspector. 
(f)  There may be a change in tenancy, ownership or management of an existing nonconforming use, provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming use. 
(g)  The planning commission may from time to time recommend to the city council the acquisition of such private property as does not conform in use or structure to the regulations and restrictions of the various districts defined in this chapter and the removal of such use or structure pursuant to the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-14; Code 1997, § 98-15) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses or structures, MCL 125.3208. 
Sec. 50-529. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof erected and occupied for storage, goods display, department stores, markets, mortuaries, hospitals, laundries, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys. 
(b)  Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 50 feet, with a 14-foot height clearance, according to the following schedule: 
Gross Floor Area 
(square feet) Loading and Unloading Spaces Required 0-2,000 None 2,000-5,000 one space 5,000-20,000 one space plus one space for each 5,000 square feet in excess of 5,000 square feet. 20,000-100,000 four spaces plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000 square feet. 100,000-500,000 five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet. Over 500,000 15 spaces plus one space for each 80,000 square feet in excess of 500,000 square feet.  
(Code 1975, § 5-3-15; Code 1997, § 98-16) 
Sec. 50-530. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage or parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be provided and maintained as prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Loading space not to be counted as parking space. Loading space as required in section 50-529 shall not be construed as supplying off-street parking space. 
(2)  Calculations resulting in fractional space. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(3)  Increase in floor area of existing use. Whenever a use requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area, and such use is located in a building existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, additional parking space for the additional floor area shall be provided and maintained in the amount specified in this section for that use. 
(4)  Gross floor area of office, merchandising and service uses. For the purpose of this section, gross floor area, in the case of office, merchandising or service types of uses, shall mean the number of square feet contained in such structure, which figure shall be obtained by multiplying the outside dimensions of the structure, inclusive of any basement. (See the definitions of the terms "gross floor area" and "basement" in section 50-1.) 
(5)  Location of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for one-family homes, two-family homes and multiple-family dwellings, including high-rise structures, shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve. For one-family homes and two-family houses, two of the required parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be in an enclosed garage structure served by a paved driveway from the garage to the access street or alley. For multiple-family dwellings, including high-rise dwellings, two of the required parking spaces shall be provided within an enclosed garage structure. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or on property in the city within 300 feet of the permitted use requiring such off-street parking. Such distance shall be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility and the building to be served, provided that the off-street parking facility shall not be separated from the building to be served by a major thoroughfare. 
(6)  Uses not specifically listed. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for a use which is so mentioned, and to which such use is similar, shall apply. 
(7)  Collective facilities. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provision of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided that, collectively, such facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the table. 
(8)  Required parking spaces. The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto and additions to existing buildings as specified in this section shall be determined in accordance with the following table, and the space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use: 
Use Minimum Number of Parking Spaces a. Residential uses: 1. One-family and two-family residential Four for each dwelling unit. 2. Multiple-family residential Two for each efficiency or one-bedroom dwelling unit, and three for each two-bedroom dwelling unit, and one parking space for each bedroom over two. b. Institutional uses: 1. Churches, temples or synagogues One for each four seats in the main place of assembly or worship. 2. Hospitals One per each patient bed, plus one additional space for every three employees during that eight-hour shift in which the greatest number of employees are on duty, plus one space for every ten doctors on the hospital staff. 3. Elementary and junior high schools One for each teacher and administrator, plus sufficient off-street space for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 4. Senior high schools (public, parochial and private) One for each employee and one for each four students. 5. Private clubs, civic clubs or lodge halls One for each employee on the largest shift, plus one for every three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by city, county or state fire, building or health codes. 6. Tennis clubs or other similar uses Six for each court, plus one for each employee. Should a spectator area be provided, one space for each three seats shall be required. 7. Places of outdoor assembly One for every three seats or six feet of benches. 8. Theaters and auditoriums (indoor) One for each four seats, plus one for each employee. c. Business and commercial uses: 1. Planned shopping centers (as approved by the planning commission) 5.5 for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. 2. Automobile carwash establishments Eight spaces for each establishment, plus 25 waiting spaces for each washing stall, plus a drying lane 50 feet long at the exit of each washing stall. 3. Beauty parlors and barbershops Three spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 1.5 spaces for each additional chair. 4. Bowling alleys One for each employee, plus five for each bowling lane. 5. Dancehalls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or ice skating rinks, exhibition halls and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area (note: McCann Ice Skating Arena would be subject to these requirements). 6. Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food or refreshments One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus one for each employee on the premises during the peak employment shift. 7. Establishments for sale and consumption off the premises of beverages, food or refreshments involving delivery services One for each employee on the premises during the peak employment shift, plus one for each motorized delivery vehicle used in delivering goods sold. 8. Establishments for sale and consumption on and off the premises of beverages, food and refreshments involving delivery service One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus one for each employee on the premises during the peak employment shift, plus one for each motorized delivery vehicle used in delivering goods sold. 9. Furniture and appliance, household equipment or repair shops, showrooms, or a plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade, shoe repair and other similar uses One for each 500 square feet of gross floor area. For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each employee. 10. Automobile service stations One for each employee, plus one for the owner and manager, plus two for each grease rack or stall for servicing automobiles or wash rack. 11. Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 12. Mortuary or funeral home establishments One for each 50 square feet of space in the slumber room, parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 13. Motels, hotels and other commercial lodging establishments One for each occupancy unit, plus one for each employee, plus extra spaces for dining rooms, ballrooms or meeting rooms as required in this section. 14. Motor vehicle sales and service establishments, and trailer sales and rental One for each 400 square feet of gross floor area of salesroom. 15. Retail stores except as otherwise specified in this section One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 16. Fitness and training centers Three-street parking spaces for each of the first two pieces of equipment, and 1.5 spaces for each additional piece of equipment, in addition to one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by the building code. d. Offices: 1. Banks One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus one for each office or each staff member and employee, whichever is the greater. Where drive-up windows are provided, waiting space equivalent to 12 spaces for each drive-up window shall be provided. 2. Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in subsection d.3 of this table One for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 3. Medical or dental centers or clinics, and professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.  
On all changes of occupancy where a new tenant occupies the building, whether the new tenant continues the same use or not, in structures existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, the off-street parking requirements shall conform to at least 50 percent of the requirements specified in this subsection, provided that the total area of the original structure remain unchanged. If the total area of an existing building is changed, the building must conform to the requirements specified in this subsection. Any and all buildings constructed after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived must conform to the requirements of this subsection. 
(9)  Reduction of parking facilities. Off-street parking existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which serves an existing building or use, shall not be reduced in size less than required under the terms of this section. 
(10)  Establishment of parking facilities by city. The council, in consultation with the city planning commission, shall make studies of various areas in the city for the purpose of determining areas within which there is need for the establishment of off-street parking facilities to be provided by the city and to be financed in whole or in part by a special assessment district, or by other means, where such need is found. This study and report shall include recommendations on the site, location and other pertinent features of the proposed off-street parking facilities and the areas they should be intended to serve. Wherever, pursuant to this procedure, the city shall establish off-street parking facilities by means of a special assessment district, or by any other means, the council may determine, upon completion and acceptance of such off-street parking facilities by the council, that all existing buildings and uses and all buildings erected or uses established thereafter within the special assessment district shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for privately supplied off-street parking facilities. 
(11)  Size of parking spaces. A parking space shall be nine feet by 19 feet. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-16; Code 1997, § 98-17) 
Sec. 50-531. - Residential parking and semicircular drives. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curb means the edge of the pavement of any street, whether or not such edge of the pavement is raised above the grade of the pavement. 
    Front setback line means the line formed at the outer surface of a residential building where the building wall meets the surface ground level, and such line shall extend the width of such residential lot parallel to the front lot line. 
    Front yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
    Motor vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, which is self-propelled by an internal combustion engine or electric motor or designed or intended to be drawn or pulled by a self-propelled vehicle (for example a trailer, boat, personal watercraft, etc.). 
    Paved driveways and paved parking area mean that portion of a residential lot located between the curb and the front setback line which is paved other than walkways for pedestrian traffic. Impervious strips as is permitted by subsection (d) of this section (for example ribbon driveways) in the driveway or parking area shall not be allowed. 
    Semicircular driveway means any paved parking area and/or driveway which includes a circular design. 
    Storage means the keeping or standing in any particular place or area, not within a garage or similar structure, within the city limits, for a period of time exceeding 72 hours in any seven-day period. 
(b)  Semicircular driveways. 
(1)  Semicircular driveways shall be permitted on any residential lot that has a minimum of 75 feet of frontage onto a single public street. 
(2)  The semicircular drive shall be so constructed that the measured distance from the front property line to the inside edge of the semicircular drive (defined as that edge closest to the road at the point which is farthest from the front property line) shall be a minimum distance of 12 feet. See semicircular driveway illustration at the end of this section. 
(3)  The hard surface width for a semicircular drive shall be no less than nine feet nor more than 12 feet in width. As provided in subsection (g) of this section paved driveway and parking areas, including semicircular driveways for any residential lot, shall not exceed 30 percent in coverage of the front yard. 
(4)  In no instance shall semicircular driveways be used for the storage of motor vehicles. Semicircular driveways shall not be counted in determining off-street parking, etc., as required by subsection (f) of this section. 
(5)  Semicircular driveways shall be approved by the building official. 
(6)  Parallel parking of motor vehicles side-by-side on semicircular driveways and parking areas shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Curb cuts for residential property. 
(1)  Curb cuts shall not be constructed beyond the property lines of adjacent lots. 
(2)  Curb cuts shall be the width of the driveway at the front lot line plus two feet. 
(3)  In no instance shall the total curb cuts for one lot or parcel exceed 46 feet. Curb cuts shall be approved by the building official. 
(d)  Parking and driveway surfaces. Paved driveway and parking areas shall be made of concrete, asphalt, brick, slate or other solid impervious surfaces as approved by the building official. The pavement system shall be designed to resist the elements, frost, erosion, rutting, blowing dirt or dust and the ponding of water. 
(e)  Parking on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Complaints for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. 
(f)  Restricted to paved parking area. It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle or for any owner or tenant of any residential property located within the city to allow or permit the parking of any motor vehicle in the area between the curb and the front setback line of any residential lot except upon the paved driveways and parking area thereof. 
(g)  Parking area and driveway prohibitions. Paved driveways and parking areas on any residential lot of more than 45 feet in width shall not exceed 30 feet in width and shall not exceed 30 percent in coverage of the front yard. Paved driveways and parking areas on any residential lot of 45 feet or less in width shall not exceed 12 feet in width. The width of any paved driveway and parking area on any residential lot shall be measured at the widest point of the paved driveway and parking area based on a straight line running parallel to the front lot line, starting at the edge of the paved driveway and parking area closest to the side lot line and ending at the opposite edge of the paved driveway and parking area. (See illustration at the end of this section.) 
(h)  Lot and building regulations generally. The provisions of this zoning chapter shall be applicable. 

(Code 1997, §§ 82-206, 98-18; Ord. No. 775, § 1, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 777, § 2, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 50-532. - Greenbelts. 
(a)  Suitable plant materials. Whenever a greenbelt is required in this chapter, it shall be completed prior to the issuance of any permanent certificate of occupancy and shall thereafter be maintained with permanent plant materials, as set forth in this subsection, to provide a screen to abutting properties. Such greenbelts shall be planted and maintained with suitable materials equal in characteristics to the following plant materials: 
Evergreen trees: 
Juniper 
Fir 
Spruce 
Hemlock 
Pine 
Douglas Fir 
Narrow evergreens: 
Column Hinoke Cypress 
Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper 
Pyramidal Red Cedar 
Pyramidal White Pine 
Swiss Stone Pine 
Irish Yew 
Douglas Arbor-Vitae 
Columnar Giant Arbor-Vitae 
Tree-like shrubs: 
Flowering Crab 
Mountain Ash 
Redbud 
Hornbeam 
Magnolia 
Russian Olive 
Dogwood 
Rose of Sharon 
Hawthorn 
Large deciduous shrubs: 
Honeysuckle 
Mock-Orange 
Lilac 
Cotoneaster 
Euonymus 
Buckthorn 
Viburnum 
Forsythia 
Ninebark 
Hazelnut 
Privet 
Sumac 
Large deciduous trees: 
Oak 
Hackberry 
Planetree (Sycamore) 
Ginkgo 
Sweet-Gum 
Linden 
Hard Maple 
Birch 
Beech 
Honeylocust 
Hop Hornbeam 
(b)  Spacing of plants; minimum height. The spacing of plant materials shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet to the fence line or property line. 
(2)  Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
(3)  Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers, and shall not be less than three feet in height. 
(4)  Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than six feet on centers, and shall not be less than three feet in height. 
(5)  Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten feet on centers, and shall not be less than four feet in height. 
(6)  Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet on centers, and shall not be less than eight feet in height. 
(c)  Prohibited trees. The following trees are not permitted: 
Box Elder 
Soft Maples (Red or Silver) 
Elms 
Poplars 
Willows 
Horse Chestnut (nut bearing) 
Tree of Heaven 
Catalpa 
(d)  Lawn areas; maintenance. The remainder of the greenbelt area which is not planted with the stock listed in this section shall be kept in lawn. All lawn and plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition and in a neat and orderly appearance. 
(e)  Approval of plans. All greenbelt plans shall be submitted to the city planning commission for site plan review where required under chapter 40 or this chapter, or, if no such plan review is required, to the building inspector for approval as to suitability of planting materials and arrangement thereof in accordance with the provisions of this section. Design and specifications for fences, walls and other protective barriers, where required, will be indicated on the greenbelt plan. 
(f)  Amendment by council resolution. The list of suitable plant materials may be amended by council resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-18; Code 1997, § 98-19) 
Sec. 50-533. - Lot splits. 
    The following shall apply to lot splits: 
(1)  The developer or petitioner shall submit the following to the city clerk: 
a.  Twenty-one copies of an application and drawing for the lot split shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the public hearing to be held by the city council. 
b.  The drawing of the proposed lot split shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or surveyor and drawn to a reasonable and legible scale. 
c.  The lot split drawing shall contain the following information: 
1.  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider or petitioner, and engineer or surveyor. 
2.  Date, north arrow and scale, written and graphic. 
3.  Street names, right-of-way and roadway widths of all existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the proposed lot split. 
4.  Proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers and water mains, including location and size. 
5.  All existing structures and other physical features that would influence the layout and design of the lot split. 
6.  Location, width and purpose of easements. 
7.  Lot lines and lot numbers. 
(2)  The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the proposed lot split to the city engineer, department of public services, building inspector and city assessor for review and recommendation. 
(3)  The city planning commission shall review the proposed lot split for conformance with all ordinances, administrative rules and regulations and the land use plan for the city, and shall prepare recommendations to be submitted to the city council prior to the council public hearing. 
(4)  The petitioner or developer shall pay to the city a hearing notice fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for the notice of public hearing. Payment shall be made at the time the application for council hearing is made. 
(5)  The city clerk shall notify all property owners within 300 feet of the proposed lot split, as found in the records of the city assessor, of the council public hearing to be held. A notice of hearing and drawing of the proposed lot split shall be sent to the county drain commission, Michigan Bell Telephone Company, Detroit Edison Company and Michigan Consolidated Gas Company. All notices shall be sent at least 15 days prior to the public hearing date as established by the city clerk. 
(6)  On receipt of the recommendation of the city planning commission, the city clerk shall establish a date for a public hearing before the city council for consideration of the proposed lot split. If the city council approves the lot split, it shall adopt a resolution effectuating the lot split and shall transmit the resolution to the city clerk for recording. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3-19; Code 1997, § 98-20; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 4-3-1995) 
State Law reference- Further partition or division of property, MCL 560.263. 
Sec. 50-534. - Public and semipublic buildings, churches and schools. 
    The height of public or semipublic buildings, churches or schools shall not in any case exceed 55 feet. If the height of any such building exceeds the height allowed in the district concerned, then any such building shall be set back from all lot lines not less than one foot in addition to the required yard dimensions for each foot such building exceeds the height allowed in the district concerned. 
(Code 1975, § 5-13-1; Code 1997, § 98-381) 
Sec. 50-535. - Chimneys, towers and similar structures. 
    Chimneys, fire towers, tanks, water towers, pumping towers, church towers and steeples, monuments and mechanical appurtenances pertaining to and necessary to the permitted use of the district in which they are located shall not be included in calculating the height of the principal structure. 
(Code 1975, § 5-13-2; Code 1997, § 98-382) 
Sec. 50-536. - State-licensed residential facilities. 
    Notwithstanding any other section in this chapter, a state-licensed residential facility shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all residential zones, including those zoned for single-family dwellings, when required by the Michigan zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
Sec. 50-537. - Portable storage units. 
    Personal storage units ("PSU" also commercially known as "pods") are prohibited in all zoning districts unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A permit must first be obtained from the building official. Only one 30 day permit shall be granted for each property owner per calendar year. The permit may be issued for 30 consecutive or nonconsecutive days. In the event the permit is granted, a $25.00 fee shall be charged. The fee amount is subject to amendment by council resolution. 
(2)  The location will be determined by the building official. The building official will first determine whether it is possible for the PSU to be located in the backyard of the property or behind the front setback. In making such determination, the building official will take into consideration access to the property for residential, construction and emergency vehicles and other criteria. If the building official makes a determination that a location behind the front yard setback is not feasible, then the PSU may be placed on the driveway or in front of the home. 
(3)  The PSU shall not contain any hazardous waste, flammable materials, or other materials which in the opinion of the building official or fire marshal are likely to constitute a hazard. Acceptance of the permit on behalf of the property owner constitutes consent to search the PSU at any time. 
Sec. 50-538. - Outdoor cafe permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe on any sidewalk or public right-of-way without a permit as provided by this article. An outdoor cafe is defined as an outdoor dining area located on or adjacent to a sidewalk which abuts a commercial establishment serving food or beverages. Outdoor cafes shall be permitted only within the C and C-2 zoning districts. An outdoor cafe permit shall be a license to use the permitted area and shall not grant any person any property right or interest in the permitted area. The city may require any permittee to restore the cafe area to its original condition. 
(1)  Scope, procedure and fee. 
a.  This section applies to intended uses on sidewalks and those areas adjacent to commercial buildings between the sidewalk and roadway curb. Outdoor dining entirely on private property continues to be regulated under subsection 50-370(14). 
b.  Each permit shall be effective for one year from May 1 until November 1, and must be annually renewed with the approval of the city. Applications in compliance with this section may be approved by the building official. Applications involving a structure are reviewed by the planning commission for approval of the structure under section 50-34, site plan review. Subsequent approvals may be renewed annually by administration provided that the standards and conditions set forth in this section continue to exist. 
c.  The annual permit fee for an outdoor cafe shall be established by city council resolution. 
(2)  Outdoor cafe permit application. 
a.  An application for an outdoor cafe permit shall be made to the building official. The building official will submit the application to the city administrator, the clerk, director of public safety and director of public works for review and comment. The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  Name and address of the business establishment. 
3.  A drawing (drawn to scale) showing the layout and dimensions of the sidewalk, outdoor cafe area and adjacent private property, proposed location, size and number of tables, chairs, steps, umbrellas, awnings, canopies, location of doorways, trees, parking meters, sidewalk benches, trash receptacles, railings, decorative chains and any other fixture, structure or obstruction either existing or proposed within the outdoor cafe. 
4.  Photographs, drawings or manufacturers' brochures fully describing the appearance of all proposed tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings or other fixtures related to the outdoor cafe. 
5.  If any table, railing, awning or any other fixture is to be temporarily or permanently anchored, such information must be shown on the drawing. 
6.  Capacity of existing establishment. 
7.  If alcohol will be served. 
8.  If the applicant does not own the property, the application shall include written authorization from the property owner. 
9.  Exterior lighting plans, if any. 
(3)  Standards and criteria for application review. The following standards and criteria shall be used in reviewing the application: 
a.  The permitted area shall allow a minimum of four feet of sidewalk clearance to allow safe pedestrian movement and four feet clearance from any curb. Use may not create a hazard, obstruct motor vehicles or unduly impede sidewalk use. 
b.  Permits shall be issued only to persons who hold a valid business license and who wish to provide tables and chairs on the permitted area abutting such establishment for use by the general public. 
c.  Outdoor cafes are restricted to the frontage of the abutting business establishment to which a permit has been issued. 
d.  The perimeter around the outdoor cafe area may be delineated using nonpermanent fixtures such as railing, potted plants, decorative chains, or other approved fixtures. The permanent anchoring of tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings, railings or other fixtures may be approved by the building department provided such anchoring meets all city and county requirements. 
e.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings and any other fixtures shall be of uniform design and shall be made of quality materials and workmanship to ensure the safety and convenience of users and to enhance the visual quality of the urban environment. Bollards should be consistent in size and appearance throughout the city. Design, materials and colors must be compatible with the abutting building and otherwise comply with the Code. 
f.  The application must meet all other terms and conditions of this section. 
(4)  Liability and insurance. 
a.  The permittee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out of use of a permit. The permittee shall enter into a written agreement with the city to evidence this indemnification. 
b.  The permittee shall acquire and keep in full force and effect, at its own expense, the following insurance requirements for the entire permit period: 
1.  No alcohol permit. Commercial general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The city must be named as an additional insured on this policy and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy evidencing compliance with this requirement. 
2.  Alcohol permit. Commercial general liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The city must be named as an additional insured on this policy and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy evidencing compliance with this requirement. 
(5)  Conditions of outdoor cafe permit. Outdoor cafes permitted under this article shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The permit issued shall be personal to the permittee and shall be transferable only with the written approval of the city administrator. 
b.  The city may require the temporary removal of outdoor cafes by the permittee when street, sidewalk or utility repairs necessitate such action or when it is necessary to clear or repair sidewalks. The permittee shall be responsible for removing all outdoor cafe fixtures at least two days prior to the date identified in writing by the city. The permittee shall not be entitled to any refund for such removal. The city shall not be responsible for any costs associated with the removal or the return and installation of any outdoor cafe fixtures. 
c.  The use shall be specifically limited to the outdoor cafe area shown in the application. 
d.  The permittee shall insure that the outdoor cafe does not interfere with or limit the free unobstructed passage of sidewalk users in the approved pedestrian path. In the event the cafe utilizes a portion of the sidewalk, then the seating must be adjacent to the building. 
e.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings and any other fixtures used in connection with an outdoor cafe shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearance and shall be in good repair at all times. 
f.  No tables, chairs or any other fixtures used in connection with an outdoor cafe shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post or sign. 
g.  No additional outdoor seating authorized herein shall be used for calculating eating requirements pertaining to the location of, applications for, or issuance of a liquor license for any establishment, nor shall the additional seats be used to claim any exemption from any other requirements of any city, county or state codes, ordinances and/or laws. 
h.  The opening and closing hours of the outdoor cafe shall not extend beyond the hours of operation for the business establishment holding the outdoor cafe permit, and in any event shall not extend later than 2:00 a.m. 
i.  The use shall not unduly impact nearby residential or commercial properties. 
j.  The permittee is responsible for repair of any damage to the sidewalk caused by the outdoor cafe. 
k.  No signs shall be permitted within the outdoor cafe area. 
l.  Permittee shall meet all other city, Wayne County and state regulations, laws or ordinances, and requirements before a permit is issued. 
m.  For applications involving alcohol sales: No permit will be issued until LCC approval is provided to the city. 
n.  No music, television or similar entertainment is allowed within the outdoor cafe area. 
o.  In the event the application involves use of the right-of-way between the sidewalk and the curb, the city shall require improvement of that area by construction of an approved surface such as brick pavers, exposed aggregate, stamped concrete, tiles or other decorative hard surface subject to Wayne County approval. Asphalt and standard concrete are not considered approved surfaces. 
p.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 50-538(6), the permittee shall have until November 8th to remove all objects relating to the outdoor cafe, except any existing decorative hard surface. 
(6)  Denial, revocation or suspension of permit. 
a.  The building official may deny, revoke or suspend a permit for any outdoor cafe for any reason and without penalty upon giving 30 days' written notice. 
b.  The building official may also deny, revoke or suspend a permit immediately and without notice if it is found that: 
1.  Any required business, health, LCC or other permit/license for the outdoor cafe, or the abutting business establishment has expired or been suspended, revoked or canceled. 
2.  The permittee does not have insurance in effect which complies with the minimum amounts and requirements described in this article. 
3.  Conditions have changed regarding pedestrian or vehicular traffic causing congestion or safety concerns. Such decision shall be based upon findings of the building official that the minimum four-foot pedestrian path is insufficient under existing circumstances and represents a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
4.  The permittee has failed to correct violations of the Grosse Pointe Woods City Code, Wayne County requirements, or conditions of the permit within three days of receipt of the city's notice delivered in writing to the permittee. 
c.  In the event the permittee fails to remove any tables, chairs, awnings or other fixtures or objects related to the outdoor cafe before the date set forth in the city's notice of denial, revocation or suspension, the city may remove such fixtures or objects. The permittee shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the city for the removal and storage of such fixtures or objects. 
d.  Violation of this section constitutes a municipal civil infraction in addition to the sanctions available under this section. 
(7)  Appeals and variances. 
a.  The decision of the building department to deny, revoke or suspend a permit may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals by an aggrieved party. 
b.  Variances to the requirements of this section may be granted by the zoning board of appeals if the request meets the criteria for obtaining a variance from the board. 
(Ord. No. 824, 11-3-2008) 
Sec. 50-539. - Solar energy systems. 
    A solar energy system is permitted in any city zoning district. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to install or operate a solar energy system unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A building permit and any necessary mechanical, plumbing and electrical permits shall be secured prior to the start of the installation of an solar energy system. Dimensioned plans are required with the building permit application. 
(2)  Only rooftop solar energy systems are permitted. Freestanding or wall-mounted solar energy systems are not permitted. 
(3)  The solar energy system installation shall be configured to the degree practicable to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the street. Systems that are visible from the street must be either composed of building-integrated components (such as solar shingles) that are not readily evident, or be designed and mounted to match the shape, proportions, and slope of the roof. 
(4)  Installation of solar energy system equipment, including the rails and panels, are subject to the height limitations of the specific zoning district where they are being installed. 
(5)  Solar panels shall not be located within four feet of any peak, eave or valley to maintain adequate accessibility. 
(6)  Solar panels shall not project more than one foot above the roof deck. 
(7)  The following additional design standards shall apply: 
a.  Solar panels shall be arranged so that the panels do not reflect sunlight or glare onto adjacent buildings, properties or roadways. 
b.  The system shall use materials and colors that blend into the existing roof or wall design. 
c.  The system shall include high quality mesh to enclose the space between the roof surface and the solar panels to deter animal nesting. 
(8)  If a system is defective or not in operation for a period of 12 months, the system shall be deemed a nuisance. The current owner of the property shall be required to either remove the system or repair it at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 850, 12-17-2012) 
Secs. 50-540-50-565. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 50-566. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, lay out, operate or use a parking lot in the city contrary to the provisions of this article, or to permit another person to do so upon land owned or controlled by them. 
(Code 1997, § 98-386) 
Sec. 50-567. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charge for parking means parking may be with or without charge. 
    Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, motor scooter, motorcycle or other self-propelled vehicle. 
    Municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lot means such properties which are owned or leased by the city and designated by the council as metered off-street parking lots. 
    Parking lot means any structure, outdoor space or uncovered plot, piece or parcel of land, or any portion thereof, together with appurtenances, where motor vehicles are parked, stored or kept, but excluding land, parcels or lots zoned residential unless such land, parcel or lot adjoins and abuts a nonresidential zoning district, and which has been approved by the city for use as a parking area. 
    Service driveways means those portions of the parking lot set aside and intended to be used for means of ingress and egress to the parking lot and the parking spaces. 
(Code 1997, § 98-387) 
Sec. 50-568. - Means of ingress and egress. 
    A parking lot shall be provided with adequate means of ingress and egress to public streets or alleys, which shall be of such size, number and location so as to minimize traffic congestion within and without the parking lot and will not create unnecessary hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the vicinity thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 98-389) 
Sec. 50-569. - Requirements for barriers for parking lots adjacent to sidewalk. 
(a)  Where a parking lot regulated by the provisions of this article shall adjoin a public sidewalk, there shall be erected on such parking lot, to the extent that such parking lot adjoins the public sidewalk, a barrier so located as to prevent cars parked on such parking lot from extending over or encroaching upon such public sidewalk. Such barrier shall be not in excess of eight inches in height, nor less than six inches in height and shall be firmly attached or anchored to such parking lot; and such barrier shall be of such type as to prevent vehicles using such parking lot from interfering with or jeopardizing pedestrian traffic on such public sidewalk; provided that a fence complying with the governing chapter may be provided in lieu of the barrier as aforesaid. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized means of ingress and egress to the parking lot. 
(c)  Necessary curbs or other protection against damage to adjoining properties, streets and sidewalks shall be provided and maintained. 
(Code 1997, § 98-390) 
Sec. 50-570. - Method of parking. 
    It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle in a municipally owned and operated off-street metered parking lot in such a position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area so designated as a parking space by such lines or markings. All vehicles parked or stood in any parking space shall be parked in such a manner so that the front of such vehicle shall be facing the parking meter designated for the parking space so occupied. 
(Code 1997, § 98-391) 
Sec. 50-571. - Drainage and surfacing. 
    Parking lots shall be surfaced with concrete, plant-mixed bituminous or other all-weather impervious, dust-free material of sufficient thickness so as to provide a suitable and proper dustproof, usable pavement and shall be properly graded and drained to dispose of surface water. Plans and specifications for drainage and surfacing of parking lots shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. Means of ingress and egress to public streets shall be surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous materials. 
(Code 1997, § 98-392) 
Sec. 50-572. - Off-street parking areas adjacent to residential property. 
(a)  Setbacks; protective wall or landscape screening. Side yards shall be maintained for a space of not less than ten feet between the side lot lines of adjoining residentially zoned or used property and the parking area. The depth of the front yard or setback line from the street as established for houses in any block in any given residential area shall be continued and made applicable to parking space in such residential area. It shall be unlawful to use the space between such setback line and the sidewalk for the parking of motor vehicles; provided that the barrier specified in subsection (b) of this section shall be located in the setback line as required in this subsection. 
(b)  Ornamental wall. Whenever a parking area adjoins residential property or a residential street, an ornamental masonry wall not less than two feet or more than four feet in height shall be erected and maintained between the required yard space and area to be used for parking, except for such portions as are used for entrances and exits. On such other locations where a protective barrier is required, the use of a dense shrubbery screen meeting the standards of section 50-532 shall be as followed. 
(c)  Maintenance. All required walls or other landscape screening shall be properly maintained and kept free of debris, signs or any advertising whatsoever. Bumper guards, composed of either a curb at least six inches high or steel posts 24 inches to 30 inches high and not more than five feet apart set three feet in concrete, shall be provided to prevent vehicles from striking such wall or shrubbery. 
(d)  Open lots. Open off-street parking lots are allowed for the periodic storage of private passenger vehicles for periods of less than one day when the space used for parking is separated from all required yards and contiguous streets by an ornamental wall or fence four feet in height, and if all vehicular access to such lot is from the alley and not directly from any street, and such use is recommended for approval to the board of appeals by the planning commission as not being injurious to the surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter, provided such use complies with the noise requirements of section 50-567. 
(e)  Landscaping. Where required landscaping is not sufficiently and properly maintained, the city administrator may, after five days' notice has been given to the property owner as shown on the latest assessment roll, order whatever steps are necessary to suitably maintain the landscaped area and charge all of the costs plus a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the property owner. 
(f)  Variance from this section. The city council may, after a public hearing and an affirmative vote of a majority of the council, grant a variance from the requirements of this section, which variance may permit the construction of a fence which will provide substantial protection for adjoining residential properties and such variance shall be subject to proper and reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the council. 
(Code 1997, § 98-393) 
Sec. 50-573. - New construction. 
    No person shall construct a new parking lot without first having obtained site plan approval from the planning commission. Plans and specifications for the construction of a new parking lot shall be submitted to the city administrator and building official, who shall cause to be determined whether such plans and specifications comply with the provisions of this Code. If such plans and specifications are found to be in compliance with the provisions of this Code, the planning commission shall authorize the construction of such parking lot. If the application is rejected, the applicant shall be notified to that effect and shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the city council, either in person or by legal counsel, and to present such evidence pertinent to the application, after which the city council shall take final action upon the application and, as a prerequisite to granting such application, the council may impose reasonable conditions so as to preserve the character of the neighborhood. 
(Code 1997, § 98-394) 
Sec. 50-574. - Parking structures in P-1 district. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in subsection 50-486(4) and under special conditions, parking structures may be permitted in the P-1 district subject to the following conditions. A site plan must be submitted to the city planning commission showing the proposed parking structure, ingress and egress points, relationship to adjacent properties and to the building it is planned to serve, and landscaping, at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations of the structure shall also be provided so that the exterior building material and architectural style will be in harmony with the principal buildings the parking structure is intended to serve and with the surrounding area. All plans must be reviewed and reports thereon submitted by the director of public safety, city engineer, city planner and building inspector. Such report shall be provided the city planning commission within 30 days of the request made to the city department heads. If the plans meet the required standards and design, and indicate no adverse effects which in the opinion of the city planning commission may cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the commission shall recommend approval to the city council, which body shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. Specific design standards for the parking structure and appurtenances thereto (e.g., signs) are as follows: 
(1)  When the parking structure is contiguous to side or rear lot line of a residentially zoned or used district, there shall be provided a minimum side yard of 20 feet between the side lot line an the structure. 
(2)  Permitted height of any parking structure shall not exceed 30 feet. For every one foot the parking structure exceeds ten feet in height, the yard requirements shall be increased by one foot beyond the minimum 20-foot requirement in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  When parking is permitted on the roof of a parking structure, an ornamental wall shall be provided around the perimeter of the roof. This wall shall be of suitable material and in harmony with the architecture of the parking structure and sufficiently opaque as to substantially conceal parked cars. 
(4)  All exterior lighting, especially that which may be provided on the roof, shall be glare-free and so arranged as to reflect away from all residentially zoned or used properties affected by the parking structure. There shall be no lighting of elevations of a parking structure facing any residentially used or zoned property. 
(5)  Signs shall be in accordance with the requirements of chapter 32. 
(6)  Unless otherwise specified, parking structures shall observe all requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city council may, after a public hearing and an affirmative vote of a majority of the council, grant a variance from the requirements of this section, subject to proper and reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the council. 
(Code 1997, § 98-395) 
Sec. 50-575. - Lighting. 
    Every parking lot which is operated during any hours of the night shall be provided with adequate lighting units to enable parking attendants to have a reasonable view of all portions of the parking facility at all times. Lights shall be shielded and directed away from residences and other adjacent property and from the public streets in such manner as to prevent a disturbing glare to occupants of adjacent property and to vehicular traffic using the public streets. 
(Code 1997, § 98-396) 
Sec. 50-576. - Limitation on period of parking. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit or allow any motor vehicle to be parked, stored or kept in or upon any licensed parking lot for a continuous and uninterrupted period of more than 24 hours at any one time, it being the intent of the provisions of this section to prohibit the use of any such parking lot for the unlimited storage or parking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1997, § 98-397) 
Sec. 50-577. - Traffic lane markings. 
    The parking lot shall be provided with such markings as to indicate entrances and exits, traffic lanes for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles to and from parking spaces, and such other traffic safety controls which may be designated by the director of public safety. 
(1)  Dimensional requirements. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
Parking Pattern Maneuvering Lane Width (feet) Parking Space Width 
(feet) Parking Space Length 
(feet) Total Width of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane 
(feet) Total Width of Two Tiers of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane 
(feet) 0° (parallel parking) 15 9 23 23 31 30° to 53° 15 9 19 36 57 54° to 74° 18 9 19 37 60 75° to 90° 25 9 19 44 63  
PARKING LAYOUTS 

(2)  Handicapped parking spaces. Parking spaces for handicappers shall be located as close as possible on the most direct route to barrier-free building entrances. Signs shall be provided to indicate the direction of travel to barrier-free building approaches when the barrier-free entrance is not visible from the accessible parking space or spaces. Each accessible parking space shall have not more than a nominal three percent grade and be not less than 12 feet wide or be not less than eight feet wide and be adjacent to an access aisle which is not less than five feet wide and which is not a traffic lane. The parking space surface shall be stable and firm. There shall be a barrier-free route of travel from accessible parking spaces to the nearest barrier-free building approach. 
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES 

(Code 1997, § 98-398) 
Sec. 50-578. - Attendants, private security guards; when required. 
    When in the opinion of the director of public safety a hazard to the welfare and safety of any person exists in or adjacent to any parking lot, the director of public safety shall certify such fact and reasons for such opinion to the city council. The city council acting upon such written certification of the director of public safety and after ten days' notice to the owner and/or operator of such parking lot shall hold a public hearing, at which time all parties interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Upon a finding by the city council that such a hazard in fact exists, the council may, as a condition for the continued use of such property as a parking lot, require the owner and/or operator to provide sufficient attendants and/or uniformed private security guards licensed under the laws of the state at such parking lot during the hours of operation of such parking lot, or any portion thereof. Upon a failure of the owner and/or operator to furnish attendants or private security guards, if so required by the city council, such lot shall be closed to parking and the continued use thereof for parking shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1997, § 98-399) 
Sec. 50-579. - Inspections; correction of defects. 
    All parking lots within the city shall be inspected from time to time as directed by the city administrator. Any failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be reported in writing to the owner and/or operator of the parking lot to remedy such condition or make such correction. Failure to comply with any notice to remedy or correct any conditions of a parking lot may be the basis for the filing of a complaint against the owner and/or operator. 
(Code 1997, § 98-400) 
Sec. 50-580. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner and operator of any parking lot to maintain such lot and any greenbelt of shrubbery thereon, the barriers, entrances, exits, and surface and drainage system in a state of good repair at all times while operating such lot or permitting the use thereof. 
(Code 1997, § 98-400.1) 
Sec. 50-581. - Noise. 
    The use of any loud noise-producing device or public address system shall be prohibited upon off-street parking lots permitted by this article. 
(Code 1997, § 98-400.2) 
Sec. 50-582. - Prohibited uses. 
    No repairs, service to vehicles or display of vehicles for the purpose of sale shall be carried on or permitted upon such premises. 
(Code 1997, § 98-400.3) 
Sec. 50-583. - Signs. 
    No sign shall be erected upon such parking lots, except not more than one sign at each entrance to indicate the operator, the purpose for which operated, and the parking rates. Such signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in area, shall not extend more than ten feet in height above the nearest curb, and shall be entirely upon the parking lots. 
(Code 1997, § 98-400.4) 
Secs. 50-584-50-614. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan broadband development authority act, MCL 484.3201 et seq. 

Sec. 50-615. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the general purpose and intent of the city to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems as may be required by law. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the city to provide for such authorization only in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this article, an attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests. 
(b)  Pursuant to the general purpose set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the goals of this article are to: 
(1)  Permit the location of wireless communications facilities (WCFs) in nonresidential areas and residential areas on nonresidential property; 
(2)  Protect residential areas and land uses from the potential adverse impact of WCFs; 
(3)  Strongly encourage the joint use of existing WCF sites, prominent buildings or structures as a primary location rather than construction of additional single or multiple use WCFs; 
(4)  Minimize the total number of WCFs throughout the community; 
(5)  Require users of WCFs to locate them in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(6)  Encourage users of WCFs to configure them (stealth technology) in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(7)  Consider the public health, safety and welfare as well as the safety aspect of WCFs; 
(8)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
(9)  Provide for the disclosure of adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities in order to permit the city to effectively plan for the location of such facilities; 
(10)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from WCF failure through engineering and careful siting of towers; 
(11)  Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs; 
(12)  Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of WCFs, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary WCFs in a timely manner as hereinafter set forth; 
(13)  Minimize the negative visual impact of WCFs on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historical sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible; utilization of collocation wherever feasible; the use of towers which are designed for compatibility; the avoidance of lattice structures that are unsightly; and consideration of alternative means of providing service such a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, fiber optic or similar systems which do not require a tower. 
In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city's zoning ordinance and map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in considering sites for the location of WCFs. 
(Code 1997, § 98-533; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-616. - Reservation of rights to require franchise. 
    The city is not at this time requiring a franchise for the siting of a wireless communications facilities (WCF) within the city. The city reserves the right, in accordance with applicable federal, state and local law, to require such a franchise in the future to the extent such a siting may be deemed to constitute the transacting of local business within the city. Neither issuance of a WCF authorization permit to locate a WCF under this article, nor the issuance of an annual WCF permit shall constitute a waiver of or otherwise adversely affect this reservation of rights. In addition, WCFs shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
(Code 1997, § 98-534; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-617. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alternative tower structure (ATS) means manmade "trees," clock towers, buildings, bell steeples, flagpoles, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that will help to camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers and avoid their proliferation. 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
    Applicant means a wireless communications provider who has applied for a WCF authorization permit or annual WCF permit pursuant to this article. 
    Attached wireless communications facilities means wireless communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing towers or ATSs, existing buildings, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A tower proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition. 
    Collocation means the location by two or more wireless communications providers of WCFs on a common tower, building, or other structure with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
    Preexisting towers and antennas means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
    Public rights-of-way means all public rights-of-way within the city which are owned by the city or county, either as an easement or in fee simple, including but not limited to the public rights-of-way used for streets, highways, sidewalks and alleys. 
    Telecommunications Act means the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC 151 et seq., as amended. 
    Towers means structures erected or modified to be used to support wireless communication antennas. Towers within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which support WCF materials. Buildings principally used for purposes other than supporting antennas shall not be considered towers. 
    Wireless communications facilities (WCF) means and includes all towers, antennas, alternate tower structures, other support structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, digital towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment building and private and commercial mobile radio service facilities. 
    Wireless communications provider means any person, company, or entity providing or intending to provide wireless communication services of any kind in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 98-535; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-618. - Applicability and location. 
(a)  Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the application requirements of this article. However, preexisting towers and antennas not otherwise exempt from this article are still subject to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, section 50-623, section 50-624, section 50-625 and the annual permit report requirements of this article. 
(b)  New WCFs. All new WCFs proposed to be located in the city shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Modified WCFs. Any modifications made to an existing WCF (including preexisting towers and preexisting antennas) shall be treated for purposes of this article as a new WCF, which requires the submission of a new application, new permitting procedure and compliance with this article as if the WCF was a new WCF, and the entire WCF, as modified, shall be subject to all of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas/municipal towers and antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 20 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas, nor shall it govern any municipal tower or antenna utilized by the city in connection with performing its municipal functions. 
(e)  Location. WCFs are only permitted in the following zoning districts subject to certain additional conditions set forth in this article: 
(1)  C commercial business districts. 
(2)  Residential and community facility districts, but only if all of the following applies: 
a.  The application shows and the council is satisfied that the facility cannot be located in a C commercial business district. 
b.  The design involves a steeple, bell tower, other ATSs or tower harmonious with the site (e.g. church steeple, school tower). 
c.  The most recent use of property was nonresidential. 
(Code 1997, § 98-536; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-619. - Approval process; application for permit. 
(a)  Types of permits. 
(1)  The following three separate permits are required: 
a.  A WCF authorization permit to proceed with installation, construction, operation, expansion, extension or modification of a WCF; 
b.  An annual WCF permit (section 50-625) to allow the applicant to continue to operate the WCF, which must be renewed annually. Each wireless communications provider using a WCF must submit a separate applications and be granted separate permits. Applicants receiving a WCF authorization permit are still required to obtain; and 
c.  A building permit as required by section 50-23, section 50-121 and article II of this chapter. 
(2)  If work under a WCF authorization permit is not started within six months of the date of the permit, the permit shall be void. Once work has started under a WCF authorization permit, no changes to this article (which would require revisions to the design of the WCF) which are made after the date work has started under the WCF authorization permit shall be effective as to the WCF if construction of the WCF is completed within one year of the date of the issuance of the WCF authorization permit. 
(b)  Procedure for submission and review. All applications for a new, renewed or amended WCF authorization permit to install, construct, operate, expand, extend or modify a WCF shall be submitted for review and consideration in accordance with section 50-32 and the following: 
(1)  A formal written application shall be submitted to the city building official. An application fee shall be submitted as established by the city council. The fee will be based on an amount necessary to adequately and thoroughly investigate and review the application for compliance with this article and in order that the city may have the application reviewed by technical consultants where necessary in order to ensure that all current technological considerations have been properly taken into account. 
(2)  Once the application has been received and the filing fee paid, the building official shall refer the application to the city administrator for a preliminary review. The city administrator shall determine, in conjunction with the building official, whether or not the application is complete in terms of providing all necessary information required under this article in order for the planning commission to begin its determination as to whether or not a WCF authorization permit should be recommended. The city administrator shall have the discretion to require any additional information felt appropriate and necessary for referring the matter to the planning commission for their review and consideration. 
(3)  Upon submission to the planning commission by the city administrator, the planning commission shall review the application at a regular or special meeting. If it is determined by the planning commission that the application is complete, then the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to the special approval land use procedures (sections 50-32 and 50-121) of this chapter consistent with section 50-620(c) and the general notice requirements of this chapter. Consideration of the application shall be in accordance with section 50-32 (special land use approval) except that public notice will be provided to property owners within 1,000 feet as provided by subsection (b)(5) of this section. The planning commission's recommendation shall be in writing. It shall thereafter be referred to the city council for action. 
(4)  The city council shall schedule the matter for a public hearing consistent with section 50-620(c). 
(5)  For purposes of this article, any special use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved special use shall require public notice consistent with section 50-620(c) to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within 1,000 feet of the property on which the proposed WCF is to be located. 
(6)  The city council shall review the planning commission's recommendation and make a determination as to whether or not to approve or deny the recommendation or take other appropriate action. 
(7)  If the application for a WCF authorization permit is approved, the city council shall make a determination as to the appropriate amount of a cash, irrevocable surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit to be kept on file with the city which will ensure that adequate funds will be available to maintain, repair or remove or repair any WCF which might be abandoned or need repair as set forth in this article. It shall be a continuing requirement of any permission given to operate a WCF in the city that the applicant keep in force any such cash deposit, irrevocable surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit as required by the city. 
(c)  Required information in WCF application. A WCF application shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site plan prepared by an architect and engineer, both licensed in the state, shall be prepared and submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, signage, camouflage, lighting, appearance of facility, and outdoor equipment, all of which shall be designed to conform to applicable building codes and zoning ordinances. 
(2)  The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the WCF base, accessory buildings and enclosure. 
(3)  The application shall include a signed certification by an engineer licensed in the state with regard to the manner in which the existing or proposed WCF would fall under the most catastrophic conditions. The engineer's notes, drawings, and actual calculations will be included with the signed certification. This certification will be utilized, along with other criteria, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the tower and other buildings, structures, and facilities. 
(4)  The application shall include a description of security to be posted with the city at the time of receiving a WCF authorization permit for the WCF to ensure maintenance, repair and removal of the facility, as provided in this article. In this regard, the security shall, at the election of the city, be in the form of: 
a.  Cash; 
b.  Irrevocable surety bond; 
c.  Irrevocable letter of credit; or 
d.  At the city's option, an agreement in a form approved by the city attorney and recordable at the office of the register of deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant and property owner to maintain, repair or remove the WCF in a timely manner as required by this article, with the further provision that the applicant and property owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorneys fees incurred by the city in securing maintenance, repair or removal, and any costs and attorney fees shall become a lien against the property if not paid in full when due. 
(5)  The application shall also include the following information to demonstrate the need for the proposed WCF: 
a.  A map showing existing and known proposed WCFs within the city, and further showing existing and known proposed WCFs within areas surrounding the borders of the city, which are relevant in terms of potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the city, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. 
b.  Factual evidence supporting the need for the WCF, including justification for its height and an evaluation of alternative designs which could result in lower heights or eliminate the need for the WCF or related structures. 
c.  Soil reports from a state-licensed geotechnical engineer if the application involves towers. The soil report shall include soil boring results and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. 
d.  A report certified by a state-licensed engineer describing the collocation capabilities of the proposed WCF. 
e.  A drawing detailing the setback distance from residential areas and showing compliance with the setback requirements of this article. 
f.  A description of the surrounding area and property uses within 1,000 feet of the proposed location. 
g.  Factual evidence detailing the impact of the facility on the location of future WCFs. 
(6)  A report of a state-licensed engineer, which certifies the tower constructionally accommodates the number of shared users proposed by the applicant. 
(7)  A maintenance plan and agreement as required by sections 50-620 and 50-623. 
(8)  A removal agreement signed by both the owner of the property and the applicant which states that they promise to be bound by the removal requirements of this article. 
(9)  The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the WCF is on the premises. 
(10)  The application fee, as established by the city council, as well as the fee required by section 50-33. 
(11)  Proof of liability insurance of the type and amount as established by the city administrator. 
(12)  A copy of a signed agreement between the land owner and the applicant, giving the applicant the right to construct and operate the WCF, and to permit future collocation at the WCF as required by the city. The owner or duly authorized representative of all ownership interest in the land on which the WCF is proposed to be located shall sign the application and certify that the appropriate legally recordable property rights have been obtained by the applicant. 
(13)  A copy of all executed agreements between the owner of the WCF and the applicant which will use the WCF, and between the applicant and any other party that the applicant requires the permission of or a license from in order to operate or use the WCF, including such agreements as are required to permit future collocation at the proposed WCF, as required by the city. 
(14)  A collocation agreement executed by the owner of the proposed WCF and applicant permitting collocation at the proposed WCF, as required by the city, together with such other agreements as the city may deem necessary to permit future collocation, including those described in subsections (c)(11) and (12) of this section. Such agreement shall include an agreement to provide information about the WCF to persons interested in collocating on the WCF and to charge market rates for collocation on the WCF. 
(15)  A certification by the owner of the proposed WCF and applicant that the WCF complies with all federal, state statutes, regulations and rules, and all city article. 
(16)  A certification signed by the owners of the WCF and applicant that all franchises and licenses required by federal, state or local law for the construction and/or operation of a WCF in the city have been obtained and they shall file a copy of all required franchises and licenses with the planning commission. 
(17)  Evidence that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology is available which would otherwise accommodate the applicant's proposed need, as provided in section 50-621(6). 
(18)  Evidence of the noise levels to be emitted by the WCF when in operation. Levels above 70 decibels shall not be permitted. 
(19)  The application shall be signed by the owner of the proposed WCF and applicant. 
(Code 1997, § 98-537; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-620. - Authorization as special land use. 
(a)  Circumstances allowing special land use treatment. 
(1)  Subject to all the standards and conditions set forth in this article, WCFs may be allowed as a special land use. In addition, though municipally owned land is exempt from the terms and conditions of this chapter, the city intends to apply these same terms and conditions (as well as any others that may be appropriate) when and if wireless communications providers request the opportunity to negotiate a lease for the siting of WCFs including towers, poles, antennas and other equipment on municipally owned land. 
(2)  In the following circumstances, a proposal to establish a new WCF shall be considered as a special land use: 
a.  If, at the time of the submittal, the applicant can demonstrate that there is no reasonable means of satisfying the service needs of the system through adaptation of or addition to facilities inside or outside the municipal boundaries of the city; 
b.  If there is no feasible alternative or other means of satisfying the service needs, such as a microcell cable link or utilization of other lines, cables, facilities, or systems that would have less visual impact or would obviate the necessity of installing a tower or ATS; 
c.  If any such WCF shall be of a design such as (without limitation) a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area; and 
d.  If the WCF is capable of supporting collocation of other WCFs to the extent determined by the city council, and if appropriate agreements are in place to permit collocation. 
(b)  Additional conditions for permit. If the conditions of subsection (a) of this section are satisfied, then a WCF may be permitted in the city as a special land use, upon recommendation of the planning commission and approval by the city council following public hearing as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, subject to the conditions and procedures set forth elsewhere in this chapter, and also subject to the following: 
(1)  General design and appearance. The planning commission and city council shall, in their discretion, with respect to the design and appearance of a tower, ATS and all accessory buildings, require construction which creates harmony with the surrounding area, minimizes distraction, reduces visibility, maximizes aesthetic appearance, and ensures compatibility with surroundings. 
(2)  Federal and state standards. Any WCF shall comply with all applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental and safety effects of radio frequency emissions, as confirmed by submission by the applicant of a certification of compliance from an engineer licensed in the state. 
(3)  Accessory buildings. Any accessory building must comply with section 50-526 (entitled "accessory buildings"), other applicable ordinances of the city (for example, design standards) and the following specific requirements: 
a.  The building must be limited to the maximum allowable height for accessory structures and shall be no larger than necessary to accommodate the equipment and accessories. 
b.  Any accessory building must be located underground unless: 
1.  The accessory building is contained totally inside an existing building; 
2.  The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the building official that an underground location is not technically feasible; or 
3.  The building official allows the accessory building to be placed on a roof of a nonresidential building subject to other conditions and requirements of this article. 
c.  Any accessory building located on a roof must be architecturally compatible with the principal building as determined by the building official, and must not be visible from ground level. 
d.  All users of a WCF must use the same accessory building. Accordingly, any accessory building must be constructed to allow for expansion if necessary to assure that all operators use one accessory building in the event of collocation. 
e.  Accessory buildings located on the ground must be constructed of brick, with gabled roof and appropriate fencing and landscaping. 
(4)  Access. There shall be unobstructed access to the WCF, for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by such factors as: 
a.  The location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; 
b.  Utilities needed to service the WCF and any attendant facilities; 
c.  The location of buildings and parking facilities; 
d.  Proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and 
e.  The type of equipment which will need to access the site. 
(5)  Lot splits. The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met. No existing utilities shall be disrupted or interfered with except temporarily as may be required during construction and only then if a written agreement has been procured from the city and the utility company. 
(6)  Maintenance plan. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard. At a minimum it will address anticipated maintenance needs for the facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, access plans, and traffic, noise and safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(7)  Towers and antennas. All towers and antennas included in the WCF must satisfy the requirements of section 50-621. 
(8)  Signs. No signs shall be allowed on any WCF, including any antenna or tower, except safety or warning signs approved by the city. 
(9)  Transmission lines. Transmission lines to any WCF shall be underground. 
(10)  FAA, FCC and MAC requirements. Any requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be complied with. WCFs, including any towers and/or antennas shall not be artificially lighted, unless specifically required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives, and design chosen shall cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(c)  Procedures for scheduling public hearings. 
(1)  No variance required. If the application as submitted does not require a variance, the following procedure shall be used for scheduling of public hearings: 
a.  The application will be submitted to the planning commission for a public hearing and recommendation. 
b.  The application shall be submitted to the city council for public hearing and either approval, approval with conditions, or denial. 
(2)  Variance required. If the application as submitted requires a variance, the following procedure will be used for scheduling of public hearings: 
a.  Submission to the planning commission for a recommendation. 
b.  Review by the zoning board of appeals for consideration of the variance request as specified in article II, division 5 of this chapter. If the zoning board of appeals denies the request for a variance, the application approval process is terminated. If the request for a variance is approved, then the process proceeds to subsection (c)(2)c of this section. 
c.  Review by the planning commission for recommendation. 
d.  Review by the city council for either approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(Code 1997, § 98-538; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-621. - Towers and antennas. 
    All towers and antennas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Towers shall be designed to blend into natural settings and surrounding buildings and, subject to any applicable FAA standards, shall be a neutral color approved by the city. 
(2)  Any support system, including the tower and ATS, shall be designed by a state-licensed structural design engineer, shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soil report from a state licensed geotechnical engineer. 
(3)  Setback for towers. Any tower must be set back a sufficient distance from any property line to protect adjoining property from potential facility failure by being large enough to accommodate to complete failure on site. Additional setback requirements are as follows: 
a.  Setback from residential. The setback from a lot used for residential purposes will be measured from the base of the tower to the nearest lot line of any lot used for residential purposes. The setback from lots used for residential purposes must be at least 300 percent of the total height of the structure and in no event less than 200 feet. 
b.  Setback from public rights-of-way. The setback from public rights-of-way must be at least equal to the height of the tower. 
c.  Setback from nonresidential buildings. The setback from nonresidential buildings must be at least equal to the height of the tower as measured from the base of the tower to the affected building. 
Additional reasonable setbacks may be required depending on the proposed site. 
(4)  Multiple towers shall not be permitted on a single site. 
(5)  State or federal requirements. All towers, antennas, and ATSs must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers, antennas, and support structures. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers, antennas, and ATSs into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower, antenna or ATS at the applicant's expense. 
(6)  No new tower, antenna, or ATS shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the city council after receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology is available which would otherwise accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna or need, or the city council, after receipt of a recommendation of the planning commission, determines that any collocation of the proposed antenna would have a greater impact on the community than the proposed new tower. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna or need may consist of the following: 
a.  No existing tower or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements and cannot be reasonably modified to accomplish same. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment, and cannot be reasonably modified to accomplish applicant's needs. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as cable, microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, etc., is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology which exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
(7)  Towers shall be no higher than required for reasonable communication, but in no event greater than 100 feet. 
(8)  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing when required by the city which shall be not less than six feet in height, nor more than eight feet in height, and shall otherwise comply with the city's articles regulating fences for the zoning district in which the tower is located. 
(9)  The tower shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device. 
(10)  The following requirement shall govern the landscaping surrounding a tower provided, however, that the planning commission may alter these requirements in such cases that would better serve the goals of this article: 
a.  The tower facility shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower base from adjacent properties and in no event shall be less than six feet in height. 
b.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
(11)  Attached wireless communication facilities, antenna, and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment installed on an ATS must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the ATS so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(12)  The antenna and other attachments on a WCF shall be designed and constructed to include the minimum attachments required to operate the facility as intended at the site, both in terms of number and size of such attachments, and shall be designed and constructed to maximize aesthetic quality. 
(13)  Separation. Towers may not be closer than 1,500 feet as measured from the base of each tower or ATS. Tower separation distances shall be calculated and applied to WCFs located in the city, as compared to a WCF located in the city or outside the city, irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
(14)  Any antenna which is attached to an ATS or other structure shall not extend above the highest point of the structure unless not visible from the ground and must comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
(15)  If the antenna is on the roof of a structure, it shall be set back from the edge of the roof by a distance at least equal to its height, measured from where it is attached to the roof to the highest point of the antenna. 
(16)  Attached WCFs and antenna installed on an ATS shall incorporate the vertical design elements of the structure to which they are attached or to the ATS and, if on the roof of any structure, shall match existing roof structures, such as air conditioning units, stairs and elevator support structures. 
(Code 1997, § 98-539; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-622. - Collocation. 
(a)  Statement of policy. In order to minimize the proliferation of towers and the adverse visual impact associated with such proliferation and clustering, collocation of antennas on existing towers or attached WCF shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
(1)  A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower. 
(2)  If additional height is required for collocation, then the tower shall be relocated to accommodate all setback requirements required by the increased height. 
(3)  The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city, taking into consideration the intent and purpose of this section and other requirements of this article. 
(4)  Owners of existing towers shall not be permitted to charge excessive fees for collocation. 
(b)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Collocation is required as a condition of the WCF authorization permit. No new structures are permitted unless an applicant demonstrates the inadequacy of existing facilities as provided for in this article. If a WCF provider fails or refuses to permit collocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where collocation is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the city. In such a case, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect. 
(2)  In addition, the city may take such action as allowed by statute and ordinances to require conformity, including requiring collocation and revocation of the WCF authorization permit and the annual WCF permit. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with the policy of the city. 
(3)  Collocation of an additional WCF on an existing WCF is treated the same as construction of a new WCF, and requires compliance with all terms of this article. Each separate WCF collocated on the same tower or structure is subject separately to the requirements of this article. 
(4)  For all collocations served by an accessory building, there must be a single, architecturally uniform accessory building for all operators at the WCF. 
(Code 1997, § 98-540; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-623. - Maintenance and repair. 
(a)  As a condition of issuance of the annual WCF permit, the wireless communications provider must submit and the building official must approve a maintenance plan. The planning commission and city council shall, in its discretion, with respect to the design and appearance of the tower and all accessory buildings, require construction and maintenance which creates harmony with the surrounding area, minimizes distraction, reduces visibility, maximizes aesthetic appearance, and ensures compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain all WCFs in a neat, safe, and orderly condition in accordance with all terms and conditions of the WCF authorization permit, annual WCF permit, applicable ordinances of the city and any applicable state or federal regulations. 
(b)  The landowner and wireless communications provider are jointly responsible for maintaining the site in a neat, safe and orderly condition, both during and after construction of the facility. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, a tower shall be maintained by the wireless communications providers in compliance with standards contained in applicable state and local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the electronic industries association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a WCF fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the WCF provider, the provider and landowner shall have 30 days to bring such WCF into compliance. Failure to do so shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the provider's and landowner's expense. 
(c)  Each facility is subject to inspection as the building official may deem necessary. At a minimum, each facility must be inspected annually, and must pass inspection as a condition of issuance of the annual WCF permit. Inspections will include an assessment not only of the structural soundness and overall safety of the facility, but will also address routine maintenance and repair issues. 
(d)  Failure to pass inspection at any time shall be deemed a violation of this article and subject the wireless communications provider and landowner to all actions allowed by this article and by local, state and federal law. 
(e)  The wireless communications provider shall be required as part of the annual permit report to submit an inspection of the WCF, inspecting such aspects of the WCF as the building official may require, certified by a structural engineer licensed in the state. 
(Code 1997, § 98-541; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-624. - Removal of facilities. 
(a)  The WCF authorization permit, and the annual WCF permit for a WCF shall be revoked, and the WCF shall be removed as provided in this section, upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
(1)  When the WCF has not been used for 60 days or more, it will be deemed to be abandoned. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. 
(2)  Six months after new technology is available at reasonable cost as determined by the city council, which permits the operation of the communications system without the requirement of the tower, or with a tower which is lower and/or more compatible with the area. 
(3)  When the facility is not maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in this article and written notice of the deficiencies is delivered to the wireless communications provider and the wireless communications provider fails to correct the deficiencies within 60 days thereafter. 
(4)  Any material breach of any of the conditions of the WCF construction or annual WCF permit. 
(5)  Failure to file annual permit reports as created by the building official. 
(6)  The WCF being operated at noise levels in excess of 70 decibels at any time. 
(7)  Failure to qualify for renewal of the annual WCF permit. 
(b)  The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility. 
(c)  Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, or lowering of the tower, specified in subsection (a) of this section, the wireless communications provider and landowner are jointly responsible and shall immediately apply for and obtain any required demolition, reconstruction or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/alteration/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the building official. 
(d)  If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days' written notice, the city may remove or procure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge, plus attorney fees, to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. Notwithstanding the potential or actual recovery of costs from the bond or other security, the provider and landowner remain jointly liable for the actual costs and administrative charges of demotion, alteration and removal. 
(e)  The wireless communications provider shall immediately notify the city building official in writing if and as soon as the use of a facility ceases. 
(f)  Any reuse of a facility after it has been abandoned will require a completely new permit process. 
(g)  The WCF authorization permit for any WCF, or portion thereof, which is required to be removed shall expire upon the occurrence of the event requiring removal. 
(Code 1997, § 98-542; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
Sec. 50-625. - Effect and approval. 
(a)  Authorization permits. Final approval to construct a WCF shall be effective for a period of six months, and if commencement of construction has not begun by that date, the WCF authorization permit shall expire without further notice and the applicant shall have no further rights under the permit. Once construction of a facility has begun, it shall be completed within three months unless the time period is extended by the city administrator for good cause shown. 
(b)  Annual permits. Annual WCF permits may be granted annually up to ten consecutive years by the city administrator, upon recommendation of the building official. Renewal each year requires payment of a fee determined by the city council, submission of an annual report containing such information as the city administrator may require, and submission of an annual permit report in a form as may be required by the building official, certified by the wireless communications provider. The annual report shall include, at a minimum, a certification that no event has occurred requiring removal of the WCF, including abandonment or the availability of new technology, listing the wireless communications providers using the WCF and a description of their use of the facility, changes to the information about the WCF, the wireless communications provider or the owner of the property on which the WCF is located contained in the original application. The annual report is due on the anniversary date of the date of issuance of the WCF authorization permit. 
(c)  Nonassignability. No WCF construction or annual WCF permit is assignable without the written consent of the city. 
(d)  Resubmission after ten years. After ten years of operation, the wireless communications provider and landowner must reapply for permission to continue to operate the WCF and must submit all information then required for issuance of a WCF authorization permit for a new WCF, with such exceptions to the required information as the city council may permit. 
(Code 1997, § 98-543; Ord. No. 778, 6-17-2002) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1975 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through April 30, 1994, which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the ordinance table. 
1975 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1, 
1-1-2 16-19, 16-20 1-1-3, 
1-1-4 16-22, 16-23 1-1-5 16-21 1-2-1- 
1-2-4 2-40-2-43 1-3-1- 
1-3-4 2-75-2-78 1-4-1- 
1-4-7 2-440-2-446 1-4-8 2-449 1-4-9- 
1-4-16 2-451-2-458 1-5-1- 
1-5-4 2-159-2-162 1-7-1- 
1-7-4 2-127-2-130 1-8-1 2-515 1-10-1- 
1-10-6 2-216-2-221 1-11-1, 
1-11-2 2-222 1-12-1- 
1-12-5 2-672-2-676 1-16-1- 
1-16-5 2-618-2-622 1-17-1, 
1-17-2 2-487, 2-488 1-18-1- 
1-18-8 2-406-2-413 1-21-1- 
1-21-19 2-284-2-302 1-21-21- 
1-21-39 2-304-2-322 1-21-41, 
1-21-42 2-323, 2-324 1-22-1- 
1-22-4 2-587-2-590 1-22-4, 
1-22-5 2-591, 2-592 1-23-1, 
1-23-2 2-648, 2-649 1-24-1, 
1-24-2 2-485, 2-486 2-1-2-2-1-4 44-21-44-23 2-1-5 44-58 2-1-16- 
2-1-22 44-59-44-65 2-1-23- 
2-1-28 44-89-44-94 2-1-30- 
2-1-37 44-95-44-102 2-1-41- 
2-1-51 44-103-44-113 2-1-54- 
2-1-56 44-144-44-146 2-1-57 44-114 2-1-58- 
2-1-60 44-147-44-149 2-1-61 44-115 2-1-63- 
2-1-66 44-24-44-27 2-2-1- 
2-2-6 44-167-44-172 2-3-1- 
2-3-17 38-19-38-35 2-5-1- 
2-5-12 46-19-46-30 2-6-2- 
2-6-13 38-61-38-72 2-7-1- 
2-7-8 38-103-38-110 2-8-1, 
2-8-2 28-124, 28-125 2-9-9, 
2-9-10 48-12, 48-13 2-9-12 48-14 2-9-16- 
2-9-19 48-15-48-18 2-10-1- 
2-10-8 30-58-30-65 2-10-9- 
2-10-11 30-67-30-69 2-11-1- 
2-11-38 36-1-36-38 2-11-39 36-40 2-11-40 36-39 2-11-41- 
2-11-54 36-41-36-54 2-12-1- 
2-12-27 30-1-30-27 2-13-1- 
2-13-10 18-19-18-28 2-15-1, 
2-15-2 2-380, 2-381 2-16-1- 
2-16-4 10-262-10-265 3-2-1- 
3-2-30 34-21-34-50 3-3-1, 
3-3-2 34-1 3-4-4, 
3-4-5 10-465, 10-466 3-4-9 10-467 3-6-1, 
3-6-2 10-432, 10-433 3-7-1, 
3-7-2 20-1 3-8-1- 
3-8-6 44-198-44-203 3-9-1- 
3-9-4 44-230 3-10-1 44-231 4-1-1- 
4-1-10 10-220-10-229 4-1-12- 
4-1-15 10-231-10-234 4-3-1, 
4-3-2 10-547, 10-548 4-3-3, 
4-3-4 10-581, 10-582 4-3-5- 
4-3-7 10-549-10-551 4-3-8 10-583 4-4-2 4-19 4-4-4, 
4-4-5 4-20, 4-21 4-6-1 10-146 4-6-2, 
4-6-3 10-178, 10-179 4-6-5, 
4-6-6 10-147 4-6-7 10-180 4-7-2 10-58 4-7-9- 
4-7-11 10-59-10-61 4-7-13 10-62 4-9-1- 
4-9-3 10-326-10-328 4-14-1- 
4-14-7 20-125-20-131 4-15-1- 
4-15-9 10-19-10-27 4-16-1- 
4-16-4 10-632-10-635 4-17-1 14-1 4-17-2- 
4-17-7 14-25-14-30 4-17-8, 
4-17-9 14-2, 14-3 4-19-1- 
4-19-3 10-360-10-362 4-20-1 10-83 4-20-2, 
4-20-3 10-110, 10-111 4-20-5 10-112 4-20-6 10-116 4-20-7- 
4-20-9 10-113-10-115 4-22-1 8-424 4-22-2, 
4-22-3 8-447, 8-448 4-23-1- 
4-23-3 10-294-10-296 4-24-1- 
4-24-6 12-79-12-84 5-1-1 50-1 5-2-1-5-2-3 50-180-50-182 5-3-1 50-2 5-3-2- 
5-3-8 50-515-50-521 5-3-9- 
5-3-16 50-523-50-530 5-3-18, 
5-3-19 50-532, 50-533 5-3-20 50-33 5-4-1- 
5-4-6 50-207-50-212 5-5-1- 
5-5-11 50-233-50-243 5-6-1- 
5-6-18 50-265-50-282 5-7-1- 
5-7-3 50-338-50-340 5-8-1- 
5-8-19 50-369-50-387 5-9-1- 
5-9-7 50-418-50-424 5-10-1- 
5-10-5 50-313-50-317 5-11-1- 
5-11-4 50-447-50-450 5-11-6- 
5-11-19 50-451-50-464 5-12-1- 
5-12-4 50-484-50-487 5-12-14 50-488 5-13-1, 
5-13-2 50-534, 50-535 5-14-1- 
5-14-8 50-141-50-148 5-15-1- 
5-15-10 50-23-50-32 5-15-11 50-121 5-16-1, 
5-16-2 50-55, 50-56 5-17-1- 
5-17-3 50-86-50-88 5-18-1 50-120 5-20-1- 
5-20-23 40-1-40-23 5-21-2- 
5-21-8 50-35-50-41 6-3-1-6-3-3 8-1 6-8-1-6-8-7 8-167-8-173 6-11-1, 
6-11-2 20-74, 20-75 6-13-1- 
6-13-11 8-245-8-255 6-14-1- 
6-14-5 20-94-20-98 6-16-1- 
6-16-3 8-403-8-405 6-19-1- 
6-19-7 8-200-8-206 6-20-1- 
6-20-3 8-147-8-149 6-21-1- 
6-21-3 8-122-8-124 6-22-1- 
6-22-7 8-302-8-308 6-23-1- 
6-23-4 28-395 7-4-1 22-50 7-4-8, 7-4-9 22-51, 22-52 7-4-11- 
7-4-15 22-53-22-57 8-2-2-8-2-4 28-1-28-3 8-3-1 28-198 8-3-3-8-3-5 28-470-28-472 8-3-7 28-72 8-3-8 28-401 8-3-9 28-400 8-3-10 28-399 8-3-11 28-71 8-3-12 28-197 8-3-13- 
8-3-17 28-192-28-196 8-3-18 28-4 8-3-19 28-70 8-3-20 28-356 8-3-21 28-105 8-3-22 28-191 8-3-23 28-342 8-3-24- 
8-3-30 28-432-28-438 8-3-33 28-190 8-3-34 28-8 8-3-35 28-317 8-3-36 28-69 8-3-37 28-355 8-3-38 28-391 8-3-39 28-390 8-3-42 28-473 8-3-43 28-126 8-3-44 28-7 8-3-45, 
8-3-46 28-315, 28-316 8-3-47, 
8-3-48 28-188, 28-189 8-3-49 28-129 8-3-51 28-159 8-3-53 28-45 8-3-54 28-187 8-3-55 28-158 8-3-56 28-157 8-3-57 28-393 8-3-58 28-66 8-3-59 28-392 8-3-61 28-68 8-4-1 28-354 8-4-2 28-353 8-4-3 28-6 8-4-4 28-5 8-4-5 28-431 8-4-6, 8-4-7 28-351, 28-352 8-4-8 28-469 8-4-9, 8-4-10 28-398 8-4-11, 
8-4-12 28-349, 28-350 8-4-13 28-317 8-4-15 28-348 8-4-17- 
8-4-19 28-345-28-347 8-4-20, 
8-4-21 28-340, 28-341 8-4-22, 
8-4-23 28-343, 28-344 8-4-24 28-339 8-4-25, 
8-4-26 28-467, 28-468 8-5-1, 8-5-2 28-220, 28-221 8-5-3-8-5-8 28-251-28-256 8-5-9- 
8-5-12 28-277-28-280 8-5-13 28-67 8-5-18 28-276 8-5-19 28-283 8-6-1-8-6-8 28-35-28-42 8-6-10, 
8-6-11 28-43, 28-44 8-7-1-8-7-9 20-21-20-29 8-7-10, 
8-7-11 20-29, 20-30 8-7-12- 
8-7-15 28-396 8-7-16, 
8-7-17 28-397 8-9-3, 8-9-4 46-98, 46-99 8-11-1 6-28 8-11-2 6-27 8-11-3-8-11-7 6-69-6-73 8-11-8 6-29 8-11-9 6-94 8-11-10 6-30 8-11-11- 
8-11-16 6-35-6-40 8-11-17- 
8-11-20 6-31-6-34 8-11-21, 
8-11-22 6-74, 6-75 8-11-23 6-1 8-11-24, 
8-11-25 6-119, 6-120 8-11-27- 
8-11-33 6-121-6-127 8-12-1-8-12-6 28-439 8-13-2 6-3 8-14-1- 
8-14-10 28-465 8-15-1- 
8-15-7 42-44-42-50 8-17-1 38-134 8-17-2- 
8-17-6 38-152-38-156 8-18-1- 
8-18-5 28-440 8-19-1- 
8-19-4 28-464 8-20-1- 
8-20-3 28-394 8-21-1- 
8-21-6 6-95 8-22-1- 
8-22-4 42-74-42-77 8-23-1- 
8-23-6 28-466 8-24-1, 
8-24-2 28-357 9-1-1, 9-1-2 42-132, 42-133 9-1-3 42-154 9-1-4-9-1-6 42-134 9-1-7, 9-1-8 42-176, 42-177 9-1-9 42-134 9-1-10 42-1 9-1-13 42-134 9-3-1- 
9-3-10 42-248-42-257 9-3-10 42-264 9-3-11 42-258 9-3-13, 
9-3-14 42-259, 42-260 9-3-16 42-261 9-3-18, 
9-3-19 42-262, 42-263 9-3-21- 
9-3-26 42-265-42-270 9-4-1-9-4-18 42-210-42-227 9-5-1 42-153 9-5-2 42-152 9-6-1 42-339 9-6-2 42-338 9-6-3-9-6-11 42-340-42-348 9-6-22 42-349 9-6-25- 
9-6-27 42-350-42-352 9-7-1-9-7-7 38-181-38-187 9-8-1-9-8-29 42-289-42-317  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1997 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1997 Code, as updated through March 7, 2005, which are included herein. Sections of the 1997 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances, see the ordinance table. 
1997 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-3 1-2 1-4-1-6 1-4-1-6 1-7-1-14 1-8-1-15 2-46-2-49 2-40-2-43 2-66-2-69 2-75-2-78 2-116-2-154 2-284-2-322 2-156-2-158 2-323-2-325 2-201, 2-202 2-380, 2-381 2-251-2-258 2-406-2-413 2-281-2-287 2-440-2-446 2-288 2-449 2-289-2-296 2-451-2-458 2-316-2-319 2-485-2-488 2-361-2-364 2-159-2-162 2-381, 2-382 2-127, 2-128 2-384 2-129, 2-130 2-401-2-404 2-193-2-196 2-421-2-427 2-216-2-222 2-428 2-222 2-461 2-515 2-521-2-526 2-587-2-592 2-546-2-550 2-618-2-622 2-571, 2-572 2-648, 2-649 2-591-2-596 2-672-2-677 2-681-2-687 2-806-2-812 6-1, 6-2 6-1, 6-2 6-31-6-44 6-27-6-40 6-71-6-77 6-69-6-75 6-101, 6-102 6-94, 6-95 6-131, 6-132 6-119, 6-120 6-134-6-140 6-121-6-127 6-157 6-3 6-166-6-172 6-153-6-159 10-1 8-1 10-91-10-93 8-122-8-124 10-127-10-130 8-21-8-24 10-167 44-1 10-231-10-248 8-54-8-71 10-281-10-299 8-200-8-218 10-300 1-7 10-321-10-331 8-274-8-284 10-361-10-367 8-167-8-173 10-401-10-411 8-245-8-255 10-441-10-443 8-403-8-405 10-531-10-533 8-147-8-149 10-561-10-567 8-302-8-308 10-606-10-610 8-335-8-339 10-631-10-636 8-367-8-372 14-1, 14-2 20-1 14-31-14-39 10-19-10-27 14-111-14-115 10-58-10-62 14-176 10-146 14-178 10-147 14-211-14-213 10-178-10-180 14-251 10-83 14-271, 14-272 10-110, 
10-111 14-274-14-277 10-112-10-115 14-279 10-116 14-311 8-424 14-341, 14-342 8-447, 8-448 14-401, 14-402 10-432, 
10-433 14-491-14-495 10-547- 
10-551 14-526-14-528 10-581- 
10-583 14-691-14-693 10-326- 
10-328 14-731-14-740 10-220- 
10-229 14-742-14-745 10-231- 
10-234 14-901-14-903 10-360- 
10-362 14-931-14-933 10-294- 
10-296 14-956-14-959 10-262- 
10-265 14-1061- 
14-1064 10-632- 
10-635 14-1091 10-488 14-1111- 
14-1115 10-515-10-519 14-1117 10-409, 10-410 18-1-18-3 12-1-12-3 18-31-18-66 12-25-12-60 18-91-18-96 12-79-12-84 22-1-22-3 14-1-14-3 22-31-22-36 14-25-14-30 26-31-26-35 16-19-16-23 30-31-30-40 18-19-18-28 34-31-34-39 20-21-20-29 34-40, 34-41 20-29, 20-30 34-42, 34-43 28-396, 28-397 34-91, 34-92 20-74, 20-75 34-141-34-145 20-94-20-98 34-171-34-177 20-125-20-131 38-31, 38-32 22-19, 22-20 38-34-38-36 22-21-22-23 38-61 22-50 38-68, 38-69 22-51, 22-52 38-71-38-75 22-53-22-57 39-41-39-47 24-19-24-25 42-31-42-33 10-465-10-467 48-1-48-7 26-1-26-7 48-31-48-43 26-33-26-45 48-71, 48-72 26-64, 26-65 48-91-48-106 26-89-26-104 48-131 26-122 50-2 4-19 50-4-50-14 4-20-4-30 54-2-54-4 28-1-28-3 54-7, 54-8 28-5, 28-6 54-9 28-392 54-10 28-66 54-11, 54-12 28-7, 28-8 54-14 28-105 54-41-54-48 28-35-28-42 54-50-54-53 28-43-28-46 54-81, 54-82 28-68, 28-69 54-83 28-342 54-84-54-87 28-70-28-73 54-111, 54-112 28-124, 28-125 54-113 28-317 54-114 28-393 54-115, 54-116 28-157, 28-158 54-117 28-187 54-118 28-159 54-121 28-129 54-122, 54-123 28-188, 28-189 54-124 28-126 54-124.1, 
54-124.2 28-127, 28-128 54-126, 54-127 28-390, 28-391 54-128-54-134 28-190-28-196 54-135 28-4 54-136, 
54-137 28-197, 28-198 54-161, 
54-162 28-220, 28-221 54-163- 
54-168 28-251-28-256 54-169- 
54-172 28-277-28-280 54-173 28-67 54-174 28-282 54-175 28-276 54-176 28-283 54-177- 
54-179 28-315-28-317 54-201- 
54-203 28-339-28-341 54-204- 
54-208 28-343-28-347 54-210- 
54-220 28-348-28-358 54-241, 
54-242 28-398 54-243 28-469 54-244- 
54-251 28-431-28-438 54-253- 
54-255 28-399-28-401 54-256, 
54-257 28-394, 28-395 54-258, 
54-259 28-439, 28-440 54-281- 
54-285 28-464-28-468 54-287- 
54-289 28-470-28-472 54-291 28-473 58-1-58-27 30-1-30-27 58-51-58-58 30-58-30-65 58-59-58-61 30-67-30-69 62-1-62-14 32-1-32-14 62-16-62-36 32-15-32-35 66-1 34-1 66-61-66-90 34-21-34-50 67-2-67-8 2-745-2-751 70-1-70-54 36-1-36-54 74-31-74-47 38-19-38-35 74-76-74-87 38-61-38-72 74-111-74-118 38-103-38-110 74-141 38-134 74-161- 
74-165 38-152-38-156 74-186- 
74-192 38-181-38-187 78-1-78-23 40-1-40-23 82-1 42-1 82-46-82-52 42-44-42-50 82-76-82-83 42-74-42-81 82-101- 
82-103 42-132-42-134 82-131, 
82-132 42-152, 42-153 82-151 42-154 82-177, 
82-178 42-176, 42-177 82-206 42-178 50-531 82-231- 
82-248 42-210-42-227 82-271- 
82-283 42-248-42-260 82-285 42-261 82-287- 
82-295 42-262-42-270 82-321- 
82-349 42-289-42-317 82-376- 
82-390 42-338-42-352 82-391, 
82-392 42-106, 42-107 82-394, 
82-395 42-108, 42-109 86-32-86-38 44-21-44-27 86-61-86-68 44-58-44-65 86-91-86-96 44-89-44-94 86-98-86-117 44-95-44-114 86-119 44-115 86-141- 
86-146 44-144-44-149 86-171- 
86-176 44-167-44-172 86-211- 
86-216 44-198-44-203 86-241, 
86-242 44-230, 44-231 86-271- 
86-283 44-256-44-268 86-283 44-269 86-291-86-295 44-287-44-291 90-31-90-42 46-19-46-30 90-66-90-77 46-53-46-64 90-78 46-64 90-79-90-82 46-66-46-69 98-1, 98-2 50-1, 50-2 98-3-98-9 50-515-50-521 98-9.5 50-522 98-10-98-20 50-523-50-533 98-21 50-33 98-51-98-54 50-180-50-183 98-71-98-76 50-207-50-212 98-101- 
98-111 50-233-50-243 98-131- 
98-148 50-265-50-282 98-171- 
98-173 50-338-50-340 98-201- 
98-219 50-369-50-387 98-241- 
98-243 50-418-50-420 98-245- 
98-247 50-422-50-424 98-271- 
98-275 50-313-50-317 98-301, 
98-302 50-447, 50-448 98-304 50-450 98-306-98-319 50-451-50-464 98-341-98-344 50-484-50-487 98-354 50-488 98-381, 98-382 50-534, 50-535 98-386, 98-387 50-566, 50-567 98-389-98-400 50-568-50-579 98-400.1- 
98-400.4 50-580-50-583 98-401-98-408 50-141-50-148 98-431-98-440 50-23-50-32 98-441 50-121 98-471, 98-472 50-55, 50-56 98-491, 98-492 50-86, 50-87 98-511 50-120 98-532 50-184 98-533-98-543 50-615-50-625  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through April 30, 1994, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since April 30, 1994, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 658  5-16-1994 4-18-1, 4-18-2 12-1, 12-2 4-18-3-4-18-38 12-25-12-60 4-18-40 12-3 669  2-28-1994 1 2-303 671  3- 7-1994 1 28-400 672  3- 7-1994 1 20-74 674  6- 6-1994 1 50-370 676  8- 1-1994 1(4-24-1) 10-488 1(4-24-2)-1(4-24-6) 10-515-10-519 677  9-12-1994 1 50-184 678  9-12-1994 1 2-677 679 12- 5-1994 1 44-231 681  2-27-1995 1 48-7 682  2-27-1995 1(2-9-6) 48-8 684  2-27-1995 1(2-9-8) 48-11 685  4- 3-1995 1 50-533 687  5-15-1995 1 8-207 690  8- 7-1995 1 28-358 694  1-15-1996 1 2-515 695  2-12-1996 1 50-148 696  3- 4-1996 1 28-69 697  3- 4-1996 1 48-11 699  7-15-1996 1 30-69 700  7-15-1996 1 2-590, 2-591 701 10-21-1996 1 2-380 704 12- 2-1996 1 8-335-8-339 705 12- 2-1996 1(8-21-1)-1(8-21-3) 8-367-8-369 1(8-21-4), 1(8-21-5) 8-371, 8-372 1(8-21-6) 8-370 716  5-19-1997 1 28-73 717 10-20-1997 1 10-220, 10-221 718 10-20-1997 1 50-448 719 11- 3-1997 1 44-287-44-291 721  2-23-1998 44-256-44-269 722  4- 6-1998 1 30-59 723  4- 6-1998 1 30-59 724  4- 6-1998 1 30-61 725  5-18-1998 1 10-223, 10-224 726  7- 6-1998 87-1-87-7 24-19-24-25 727  8- 3-1998 1 50-145 728  9-14-1998 1 2-325 729 11- 3-1998 30-13 731  3-15-1999 1 50-370 733  3-15-1999 1 10-409, 10-410 735  4-19-1999 1 26-1-26-7 26-33-26-45 26-64, 26-65 26-89-26-104 26-122 736  5- 3-1999 1 10-224 737  5- 3-1999 1 28-358 738  5-17-1999 1 10-26 740  9-13-1999 1 2-299 741 12-20-1999 1 42-134 744  3-20-2000 1 50-209 745  4- 3-2000 1 8-21-8-24 746  5-15-2000 1 28-46 747  5-15-2000 1 8-54-8-70 748  6-19-2000 1 8-274-8-284 749  6-19-2000 1 28-189 750  6-19-2000 1 28-188 751  6-19-2000 1 28-192 752  6-19-2000 1 10-224 753  6-19-2000 1 8-55 754  6-19-2000 1 28-401 755  6-19-2000 1 8-123 756  6-19-2000 1 28-127 757  6-19-2000 1 28-128 758  6-19-2000 1 28-126 759  7-10-2000 1 42-289, 42-290 42-293 42-298 760 11-20-2000 1 42-134 761 11-20-2000 1 44-1 762 11-20-2000 1 8-71 763 11-20-2000 1 50-26 764  1-15-2001 1 44-230 765  2-26-2001 1 42-74-42-81 768  5-21-2001 1 50-1 769  5-21-2001 1 50-1 770  5-21-2001 1 50-209 771  5-21-2001 1 50-183 775  2-25-2002 1 50-531 776  1- 7-2002 1 8-62 777  2-25-2002 2 42-178 50-531 778  6-17-2002 50-615-50-625 782  1- 6-2003 22-19-22-23 785  3-17-2003 2-745-2-751 786  7- 7-2003 1 50-521, 50-522 787  7- 7-2003 1 50-1 788  7-21-2003 1 50-208 790  7-21-2003 1 10-19-10-27 791  7-21-2003 50-526 793  5-17-2004 42-106-42-109 794  6-21-2004 1 6-2 795  6-21-2004 1 6-153-6-159 796  6-21-2004 46-53-46-64 46-66-46-68 797  8- 3-2004 4-19-4-21 798  9-13-2004 1-7 8-61 8-208-8-210 8-213-8-218 799 10-18-2004 2-299 801  1-17-2005 4-19-4-30 803  2-28-2005 62-1-62-14 32-1-32-14 62-16, 62-17 32-15, 32-16 62-18-62-36 32-17-32-35 804  6- 6-2005 68-2-68-7 2-771-2-776 805  9-19-2005 74-141 38-134 74-161-74-165 38-152-38-156 806 10-17-2005 90-43 46-31 90-44 46-32 807 11- 7-2005 74-35, 74-36 38-23, 38-24 74-48 38-36 808 11-21-2005 1(66-67) 34-27 1(66-81) 34-41 1(66-89) 34-49 809  3-20-2006 94-1-94-13 48-1-48-13 94-15-94-20 48-14-48-19 810  8- 7-2006 98-204 50-372 98-244, 
98-245 50-421, 50-422 98-303 50-449 98-442- 
98-450 50-34-50-42 98-493 50-88 812  2-26-2007 98-242 50-419 813  2-26-2007 50-15 4-31 814  4- 2-2007 98-1 50-1 98-13 50-526 98-72 50-208 816 90-106-90-109 46-97-46-100 817  6- 4-2007 90-106-90-109 46-97-46-100 819 10-15-2007       Added Adopting ord. 821  2- 4-2008 44-256-44-269       Added 44-270, 44-271 822  6-16-2008       Added 2-90-2-93 823 10- 6-2008 32-35 824 11- 3-2008       Added 50-538 825  2- 2-2009 2-440-2-458 826  2-23-2009 1       Rpld 2-587-2-592 827  3-16-2009 44-198-44-203       Added 44-204-44-206 828  5- 4-2009       Added 44-28 829  7- 6-2009 50-37 50-120 50-148(c)(13)       Added 50-149 830  9-14-2009       Added 38-190-38-201 831  7-12-2010       Rpld 8-245-8-255 832  7-12-2010       Added 8-245-8-259 833  8-16-2010 50-1 50-370, 50-371 50-447-50-464       Added 50-465 834  9-20-2010 2-508 835 10- 4-2010       Dltd 50-338-50-340       Added 50-338-50-341 836  1- 3-2011       Added 2-516 837  2-28-2011 32-10(b) 838  4-18-2011 2-294(b) 839  4-18-2011 32-3 32-10       Rpld 32-35 840  7-11-2011       Added 2-326-2-350 841  9-12-2011       Added 2-780-2-783 842  9-12-2011       Added 8-450-8-458 843  9-12-2011       Added 42-271, 42-272 844  2-27-2012       Dltd 20-125-20-131       Added 20-125-20-130 845  2-27-2012 10-22(e) 846  5- 7-2012       Added 50-185 847  7-16-2012 1-23       Added 44-272 848  8-20-2012 28-398 849  8-20-2012 42-108       Added 42-110 850 12-17-2012 50-1       Added 50-539 851  1-28-2013 1-25       Added 44-273 852  1-28-2013       Rpld 2-324 853  1-28-2013       Added 2-325A 854  7- 1-2013 28-398 855  7- 1-2013 2-301, 2-302 2-314 856  7-15-2013 50-1 50-370(2)f. 50-419(1)f. 857  8- 5-2013       Rpld 20-125-20-130 858  6-16-2014 28-431 859  6-16-2014 30-10 860  2-23-2015       Added 8-460-8-470 861  4-13-2015 10-224(f) 862  4-13-2015 2-807 863  5-18-2015 30-15 30-65 864  7-13-2015 6-28 6-38 865  9-21-2015 8-274-8-284 866 11-16-2015       Added 10-28, 10-29 867 12-21-2015       Added 50-526(1)g., h. 868  7-11-2016 2-294 869  7-11-2016 34-48 870  7-11-2016 8-69(1)n. 871 12-19-2016 8-284 872  2-27-2017 2-294 873  5- 1-2017 44-144 874  9-11-2017 1-5 Adopt. Ord. 875 10- 2-2017 44-144(b) 876 12- 4-2017       Rpld 34-21-34-50       Added 34-21-34-48 877 12- 4-2017       Rpld 10-262-10-265       Added 10-262, 10-263 878  2-26-2018 6-69, 6-70, 6-72 879 10-15-2018 8-284  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.4b 1-2 10.31 et seq. 18-20 14.301 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI 15.181 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 15.231 et seq. Char. § 17.6 Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. V 2-413 2-700 15.261 et seq. Char. § 6.4 Char. § 9.8 Ch. 2 2-344 Ch. 2, Art. V 2-412 8-23 15.321 et seq. Char. § 5.9 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.341 et seq. Char. § 5.9 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.401 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 15.431 et seq. Ch. 2 28.451 et seq. 28-398 29.1 et seq. Ch. 22 30-12 29.41 et seq. Ch. 22 29.417 et seq. Ch. 34 30.401 et seq. Ch. 18 18-19, 18-20 35.441 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI 37.2102 Ch. 2, Art. II 38.1132 et seq. 2-318 2-346 38.1211 et seq. 2-326 2-328 2-340 2-346 38.1681 et seq. 2-325A 38.2701 et seq. 2-325A 117.1 et seq. Char. Chs. 1-18 Ch. 2 Char. § 2.1 Char. § 15.1 117.3(a) Char. § 4.1 Char. § 9.6 117.3(c) Char. § 3.1 117.3(e) Char. § 3.3 117.3(f) Char. § 9.2 117.3(g) Char. Ch. 9 Char. § 9.1 117.3(h) Char. § 8.4 117.3(i) Char. § 9.5 Char. § 9.7 Char. § 9.19 117.3(k) Char. Ch. 7 Char. §§ 7.4, 7.5 Char. § 7.8 8-54 22-19 42-106 117.3(m) Char. § 4.10 Char. § 6.7 117.4i(c), 117.4i(d) Char. § 2.2 117.4i(e) 28-281 117.4i(g) Char. § 7.11 117.4i(j) Char. § 2.2 117.4i(k) 1-12 117.4a Char. Ch. 10 Char. § 11.1 Ch. 36 117.4a(1) Char. §§ 10.1, 10.2 117.4b Char. § 11.1 Ch. 36 117.4d Char. § 11.1 Ch. 36 117.4e(1), 
117.4e(2) Char. § 2.2 117.4h(1) Char. § 2.2 117.4h(3) Char. § 2.2 117.4h(6) Char. § 2.2 117.4l 1-12 117.5 Char. § 11.1 Ch. 36 117.5(d) Char. § 5.10 117.5(i) Char. § 13.2 117.5b 1-1 Char. § 7.10 117.5c Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 3 117.6 et seq. Char. § 1.1 117.32 Char. § 15.14 123.51 et seq. Ch. 30 123.161 et seq. Char. § 12.4 44-167 123.361 et seq. Ch. 34 123.811 et seq. 2-222 123.1104 28-434 124.1 et seq. Char. § 2.3 124.281 et seq. Ch. 44 125.31 et seq. Char. § 4.15 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 4 Ch. 50 125.33-125.37       2-441-2-445 125.37 2-446 125.37a 2-447 125.37b 2-448 125.38 2-449 125.38a 2-450 125.39- 
125.45 2-451-2-457 125.401 et seq. 50-385 50-461 125.581 et seq. Char. § 4.16 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 8 8-21 125.3101 et seq. Ch. 50 50-536 125.3202(3) 50-43 125.3208 50-528 125.3401 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 4 125.3502 50-32 50-282 125.3505 50-31 125.3601 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 5 125.3865 2-451 129.12 Char. § 8.6 129.131 44-272, 44-273 129.135 44-272, 44-273 141.101 et seq. Char. § 10.1 141.261 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 36 141.421 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 Ch. 2, Art. VII 141.1001 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 Ch. 2, Art. VII 141.1201 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 Ch. 2, Art. VII 141.2101 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 Ch. 2, Art. VII 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 3 Ch. 2, Art. VI 168.323 Char. § 3.15 168.327 Char. § 5.2 168.491 et seq. Char. § 3.1 168.492 Char. § 3.1 168.542 et seq. Char. § 3.9 168.544a Char. § 3.10 168.559 et seq. Char. § 3.14 168.631 et seq. Char. § 3.6 168.653a Char. § 3.7 168.654 et seq. 2-515 168.684 et seq. Char. § 3.14 168.719 Char. § 3.13 168.720 Char. § 3.8 168.861 et seq. Char. § 3.16 168.951 et seq. Char. § 3.17 206.501 et seq. 2-487 207.211 et seq. 42-300 207.215 42-300 211.1 et seq. Char. § 9.2 2-487 211.2 Char. § 9.4 211.7 et seq. Char. § 9.3 211.10 et seq. Char. § 9.4 211.24 et seq. Char. § 9.5 211.28 Char. § 9.6 2-485 211.28 et seq. Char. § 9.6 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 5 211.30a Char. § 9.7 Char. § 9.10 211.39 Char. § 9.12 211.43b Char. § 8.6 211.44 2-487 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.13 211.47 Char. § 9.17 211.55 et seq. Char. § 9.18 211.741 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 36 36-5 36-11 211.744 Char. § 11.10 34-29 36-29 211.746 Char. § 11.6 36-38 211.761 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 36 247.61 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IV 247.171 et seq. Ch. 38 247.241 et seq. Ch. 46 247.291 et seq. Ch. 38 247.321 et seq. Ch. 38 247.651 et seq. 42-304 252.301 et seq. Ch. 32 257.1 et seq. 2-703 30-3 Ch. 42 42-106 42-289 257.6a 22-21 257.6b 22-21 257.7 42-289 257.217c 42-1 257.312e 42-292 257.601a 42-297 257.605, 
257.606 Ch. 42 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 42, Art. VI 257.610 Ch. 42 257.625 42-109, 42-110 257.625(1)(c) 42-110 257.625(6) 42-75 257.625a 42-317 257.625a(2) 42-317 257.627 42-109 257.672 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. VI 257.675c 42-226 257.684 42-304 42-307 257.801(1)(k) 42-314 257.907(3) 42-312 257.951 42-132 257.951 et seq. 42-132 257.6741)(d 22-53 287.261 et seq. Ch. 6 287.262 6-73 287.266 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 287.288 6-1 287.290 Ch. 6 287.321 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 3 289.1101 et seq. 10-432, 10-433 324.101 et seq. Ch. 20 30-9 324.1601 et seq. 28-6 324.3101 et seq. 44-258 324.4101 et seq. 26-104 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 44 324.8901 et seq. 30-9 30-11 34-23, 34-24 324.9101 et seq. 26-36 324.11101 et seq. 26-101 Ch. 34 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 34 324.11522 22-23 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 34 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 34 324.20101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 6 324.30301 et seq. Ch. 48 324.36501 et seq. Ch. 6 324.40101 et seq. Ch. 6 30-8 324.41101 et seq. 28-6 324.41902 28-439 324.43508 28-440 324.52701 et seq. Ch. 46 324.80101 et seq. Ch. 48 324.80110 et seq. Ch. 48 333.5111 6-30 333.6107 28-471 333.7101 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. V, 
Div. 4 28-315 333.20901 et seq. Ch. 18 333.26201 et seq. Ch. 34 338.41 et seq. 10-223 338.1051 8-458 380.1 et seq. 28-466 380.701 28-466 400.271 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI Ch. 14 400.272 2-703 400.701 et seq. 50-1 408.681 et seq. Ch. 30 409.101 et seq. 10-60 418.101 et seq. 18-27 419.301 et seq. 10-60 434.21-434.28 2-698-2-705 434.181 et seq. 2-705 436.1101 et seq. Ch. 4 30-15 436.1501 et seq. 10-59 436.1701(1) 28-470 436.1703(2) 28-472 436.1703(5) 28-472 442.211 et seq. 10-29 445.111 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI Ch. 14 445.371 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI 445.481 et seq. 10-360-10-362 460.701-460.718       24-21 480.11 et seq. 42-289 42-294 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 12 Ch. 50, Art. VI 484.3101 et seq. Ch. 12 Ch. 50, Art. VI 484.3201 et seq. Ch. 12 Ch. 50, Art. VI 560.101 et seq. Ch. 40 40-1 40-10 50-31 560.263 50-533 600.101 et seq. 2-806 600.3801 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 600.8396 2-806 2-811 600.8701 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 600.8705 2-809 2-811 600.8707(6) 2-806 600.8709 2-811 600.9921 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 600.9928 Char. § 15 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 17.1 691.1402 Ch. 38 691.1407 18-27 691.1408 Ch. 2, Art. II 722.111 et seq. 50-1 722.641 et seq. 28-466 722.673 28-281 722.751 et seq. 28-465 750.1 et seq. Ch. 28 28-7 750.15 28-221 750.49 et seq. Ch. 6 750.50 28-5 30-8 750.81 et seq. 28-70-28-73 750.92 28-3 750.113 28-197 750.131- 
750.134 28-192-28-195 750.145 28-220 750.157n 28-196 750.167(1)(c) 28-66 750.167(1)(e) 28-356 30-16 750.167(1)(f) 28-282 750.167(1)(i), (j) 28-279 750.170 28-352 750.183, 
750.184 28-35 750.193 et seq. 28-38 750.200 et seq. Ch. 22 750.215 et seq. 28-41 750.222 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 30-10 750.224 28-431 750.233, 
750.234 28-432, 28-433 750.234 et seq. 28-434 750.234f 28-437 750.235 28-435 750.237 28-436 750.240 28-39 750.240 et seq. Ch. 22 30-12 750.241 22-50 22-52 750.243a 28-398 750.249 1-15 750.280 28-187 28-190 750.292 28-191 750.301 et seq. 10-61 Ch. 28, Art. V, 
Div. 2 750.302 28-253 750.303 28-252 750.304 28-255 750.306 28-254 28-256 750.309 28-251 750.335a(1) 28-280 750.337 28-282 750.356 28-188 750.356 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 750.377a 28-126 750.377a et seq. Ch. 28, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 30-6 42-225 42-258 750.377b 22-51, 22-52 22-55 750.380 28-127 750.382 28-128 750.383 28-45 750.383a 44-64 750.411a 28-40 750.411d 28-39 750.437 28-390 750.448 30-18 750.448 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. V, 
Div. 3 750.452 28-277 750.454 28-278 750.473 28-466 750.479 28-36 28-42, 28-43 750.479a 28-46 750.493a 28-391 750.502c 30-13 750.535 28-189 750.540e 28-69 750.546 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 30-24 750.552 28-157 752.272 28-317 752.362 28-281 752.525 28-351 752.542 28-346 752.543 28-354 752.801 42-224 42-257 752.891 28-468 767.39 1-13 28-2 769.4a 28-73 801.261 et seq. 28-44  
