CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HUDSONVILLE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Adopted September 1, 1987 
Effective September 15, 1987 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF HUDSONVILLE, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joan Edson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bill Lamain 
Gary Raterink 
Elmer Pohler 
Don Vander Kuyl 
John Tamminga 
Jim Holtrop 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Hannes Meyers, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Joan Brouwer 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Leon Van Harn 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Hudsonville, Michigan of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the Commission through March 10, 1987. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 3 is numbered 3-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 2 is 2-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-2.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Hannes Meyers, Jr., City Attorney, and Ms. Joan Brouwer, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 122 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Hudsonville, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The City of Hudsonville Ordains: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Hudsonville, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 24, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 10, 1987 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code, or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 10, 1987 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon the publication thereof. 
    Section 8. In accordance with Section 6.9 of the City Charter, printed copies of the Code shall be available for inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge and the publication of this ordinance shall constitute notice of the printing and availability of the codified City Ordinances. 
    Passed and approved on the 1st day of September, 1987 on the following vote: 
AYES: Commissioners  Lamain, Raterink, Pohler, Vander Kuyl, Holtrop, Tamminga: Mayor Edson 
NAYS: Commissioners None 
ABSENT: Commissioners None 
/s/  _____
Joan Edson, Mayor 
/s/  _____
Joan Brouwer, Clerk 
Certificate 
    I hereby certify that the above Ordinance was published in the Grand Valley Advance on the ____________ day of September, 1987 
/s/  _____
Joan Brouwer, Clerk 
Supplement History Table 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 08-269  9-16-08 Included 10 08-270 10-14-08 Included 10 08-271 11-11-08 Included 10 09-272  2-10-09 Included 10 09-273  4-14-09 Included 10 10-275  9-14-10 Included 10 10-277 12-14-10 Included 10 10-278 12-14-10 Included 10 11-281 11-15-11 Included 11 11-282 12-13-11 Included 11 Memo of  1-16-13 Included 11 12-285  6-12-12 Included 11 12-287  9-11-12 Included 11 Charter Amend. of 11- 3-98 Included 12 13-291  5-14-13 Included 12 13-294  7- 9-13 Included 12 13-296 12-10-13 Included 12 14-297  3-18-14 Included 12 16-304  9-13-16 Included 13 16-305 11-15-16 Included 13 17-306  3-14-17 Included 13 17-307  3-14-17 Included 13 17-308  3-14-17 Included 13  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
of the 
CITY OF HUDSONVILLE 
MICHIGAN 
Charter Commission: Chairman: John Brink 
Secretary: Edward F. Wierenga 
Commissioners Ted Kort, Nelson Hoezee, Henry Scholten, Louis Smit, 
Ray Van Dyke, John Vander Molen, and John De Vree Jr. 
Attorney: James J. Nopper 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Hudsonville Charter as adopted by the electors on November 5, 1957. Amendments have been inserted and are indicated by history notes in parentheses following the amended sections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Other changes made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.; power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Hudsonville, pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Michigan, in order to secure the benefits of efficient self-government and to promote our common interests and welfare, do ordain and establish this home rule charter. 
CHAPTER I. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Transportation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.61 et seq., MSA 5.2085 et seq. 

Section 1.1. - [Name.] 
    This municipal corporation shall be known and exist as a body corporate under the name "The City of Hudsonville." 
Section 1.2. - [Boundaries.] 
    The City shall include the following described territory in Ottawa County, Michigan, together with such annexations thereto and less such detachments therefrom as may be made from time to time in accordance with the applicable law: Beginning at the center of Section Twenty-eight (28) of Town Six (6) North, Range Thirteen (13) West (Georgetown Township); thence West approximately One (1) mile to the center of Section Twenty-nine (29); thence South approximately Nine hundred twenty-three (923) feet to a point Sixteen hundred seventeen (1617) feet North of the Southwest corner of said Section Twenty-nine (29); thence West approximately One-half (1/2) mile to the West line of said Section Twenty-nine (29); thence South approximately One (1) and Sixteen hundred seventeen (1617) feet to the Southwest corner of Section Thirty-two (32); thence East approximately One and one-half (11/2) miles to the South One-quarter (1/4) post of Section Thirty-three (33); thence North approximately One and one-half (11/2) miles to the point of beginning. This area contains approximately 2.153 square miles. 
Editor's note- Subsequent annexations are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
CHAPTER II. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - [Powers of home rule cities.] 
    The City shall possess and be vested with all the powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which home rule cities are or hereafter may be permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Michigan, as fully and completely as though such powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated herein, unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter. Any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities anywhere in this charter shall not be held to be exclusive. 
Section 2.2. - [Power to exercise all municipal powers in management and control of municipal property.] 
    The City shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property, either within or without the corporate limits of the City and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated in this charter or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the City, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws and ordinances relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the Constitution and general laws of the state and to this charter. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3), MSA 5.2083(3). 
Section 2.3. - [Enumeration of powers.] 
    The following shall be deemed to be among the powers conferred upon the City subject to any specific limitation placed thereon by this charter or by state law: 
State Law reference- Restrictions on city powers, MCL 117.5, MSA 5.2084. 
(1)	The power to refund money advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water-main extensions; 
State law reference- Permissible that charter provide for water main extensions, MCL 117.4b(1), MSA 5.2075(1). 
(2)	Public buildings, grounds, acquisition. The power for the acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or otherwise, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of the county in which it is located, of the following improvements including the necessary lands therefor, viz.: City hall, police station, fire stations, boulevards, streets, alleys, public parks, recreation grounds, municipal camps, public grounds, zoological gardens, museums, libraries, airports, cemeteries, public wharves and landings upon navigable waters, levees and embankments, watch-houses, city prisons and work houses, penal farms, institutions, hospitals, quarantine grounds, city dumps, garbage collection, electric light and power plants and systems, gas plants and systems, waterwork plants and systems, sewage disposal plants and systems, market houses and market places, office buildings for city officers and employees, public works, and public buildings of all kinds; and for the costs and expenses thereof; provided, that no municipal services shall be extended beyond the limits of the city unless the commission shall determine such to be in the public interest; 
(3)	Condemnation. The power for the acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease or otherwise of private property, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of the county in which it is located, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, whether herein specifically mentioned or not. If condemnation proceedings are resorted to for the acquisition of private property outside the corporate limits of such city, such condemnation proceedings may be brought under the provisions of Act 149 of the public Acts of 1911 [MCL 213.21 et seq.; MSA 8.11 et seq.], as amended or as may be amended, entitled "An act to provide for the condemnation by state agencies and public corporations of private property for the use or benefit of the public to define the terms 'public corporation', state agencies and 'private property' as used herein," being sections 353 to 373 inclusive to the Compiled Laws of 1915, or such other appropriate provisions therefor as exist or shall be made by law; 
State law reference- Permissible that charter provide for condemnation, MCL 117.4e(2), MSA 5.2078(2). 
(4)	Property, lease, sale, etc. The power for the maintenance, development and operation, of its property and upon the discontinuance thereof to lease, sell or dispose of the same subject to any restrictions placed thereupon by law: Provided, that on the sale of any capital asset of a municipally owned utility the money received shall be used in procuring a similar capital asset, or placed in the sinking fund to retire bonds issued for said utility; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for maintenance and disposition of city property, MCL 117.4e(1), MSA 5.2078(1). 
(5)	The power to fix and collect charges for the services rendered on such basis as the Commission may from time to time determine, which charges, in addition to the personal liability therefor, may in the discretion of the Commission be made a lien upon the property served and if not paid when due, subject to collection in the same manner as City taxes; 
(6)	The power to manufacture and sell fertilizer, as a by-product of the operation of its sewers and sewage disposal plant; 
(7)	The power to purchase or condemn the franchise and the property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in power business, and street railway or transportation companies; 
State law reference- Authority to operate utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 24; permissible Charter provisions concerning public utilities, MCL 117.4c. 117.4f, MSA 5.2079. 
(8)	The power to use, regulate, improve, and control the surface of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public ways, and the space above and beneath them, including the power to establish and vacate streets, alleys, and public ways; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public ways, MCL 117.4h(1), MSA 5.2081(1). 
(9)	The power to provide for the use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys, and public places in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of a reasonably compensation to the owners thereof; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for joint use of public property, MCL 117.4h(2), MSA 5.2081(2). 
(10)	The power to provide for a plan of streets and alleys within the City and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for plan of streets and alleys within three miles of city, MCL 117.4h(3), MSA 5.2081(3). 
(11)	The power to provide for the use, control, and regulation of streams, waters, and water courses within its boundaries; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of water courses, MCL 117.4h(4), MSA 5.2081(4). 
(12)	The power to acquire, establish, operate, extend, and maintain facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for service and use thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for vehicle parking facilities, MCL 117.4h(6), MSA 5.2081(6). 
(13)	The power to regulate and restrict the locations of oil, and gasoline stations, and any other hazardous occupations within the City; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulating gas stations, MCL 117.4i(2), MSA 5.2082(2). 
(14)	The power to establish districts or zones within which the use of land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population may be regulated by ordinance; Provided, that such regulations in one or more districts may differ from those in other districts; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for zoning, MCL 117.4i(3), MSA 5.2082(3). 
(15)	The power to license, regulate and restrict trades, occupations and amusements within the City, not inconsistent with State and Federal laws and to prohibit such trades, occupations and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of its inhabitants; 
State law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades and occupations, MCL 117.4i(4), MSA 5.2082(4). 
(16)	The power to license, regulate, restrict, and limit the number and locations of billboards and advertising signs within the City; 
State law reference- Permissible that charter provide for regulation of billboards, MCL 117.4i(5), MSA 5.2082(5). 
(17)	The power to enforce all such local police, sanitary, and other regulations as are not in conflict with general laws; 
(18)	The power to require an owner of real property within the City to construct and maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property, and, if the owner fails to comply with such requirements or, if the owner is unknown, to construct and maintain such sidewalks and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property; 
(19)	The power to require an owner of real property within the City to abate public hazards and nuisance which are dangerous to the health or safety of inhabitants of the Village within a reasonable time after notification that such hazard or nuisance exists, and, if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or, if the owner is unknown to abate such hazard or nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such property; 
(20)	The power to prohibit or control the operation of commercial establishments on Sunday. 
[CHAPTER III.] - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c), MSA 5.2073(c). 

Sections 3.1. - [Non-partisan elections.] 
    The nomination and election of all City officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. 
Section 3.2. - [Wards and precincts.] 
    The City shall constitute Three (3) wards and shall be divided into such number of election precincts as presently established until the City Commission shall otherwise provide by resolution. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e), MSA 5.2073(e); election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq., MSA 6.1654 et seq. 
Section 3.3. - [General elections.] 
    A regular City election shall be held on the first Monday in April in each year. 
Editor's note- Regular elections are now held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year pursuant to MCL 168.644a, MSA 6.1644(1). See Code of Ordinances Section 9-1. 
Section 3.4. - [Primary elections.] 
    A regular city primary election shall be held on the first Monday in March in each year. If, upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any elective city office, valid petitions have been filed for on more than twice the number of candidates for such office to be elected at the following regular city election, than [then] no primary election shall be held with respect to such office. If no primary is to be held for one or more offices, the Clerk shall publish notice of this fact and the reason therefor as part of, or at the time provided for, the publication of notices for such primary election. Candidates, equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected in each city office at the next subsequent regular city election, who receives the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together with the names of candidates who filed valid petitions for any office for which no primary was held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission as nominees for the next subsequent regular city election. 
Editor's note- Primary elections are now held the Tuesday following the first Monday in August of each odd-numbered year pursuant to MCL 168.644b, MSA 6.1644(2). 
Section 3.5. - [Special elections.] 
    Special city elections shall be held when called be resolution of the City Commission. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639, MSA 6.1631, 6.1639. 
Section 3.6. - [Elective officers and terms of office.] 
    The elective officers of the City are: 
(a)	A Mayor, 
(b)	Six (6) Commissioners, two (2) of which shall be residents from each of the three wards nominated and elected by the voters of their particular ward. 
Commencing with the 1999 calendar year election, the term of office of the Mayor is four (4) years or until his/her successor is elected and qualifies. The terms of office of the Commissioners are four (4) years or until their successors are elected and qualify. The terms of Mayor and Commissioners shall commence at 12 o'clock noon of the first Monday following the election at which they are elected. 
(Char. Amend. of 11-3-98, § 1) 
Section 3.7. - [Nominations.] 
    The method of nomination of all candidates for the City primary elections shall be by petition. Petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than fifteen (15) not more than Thirty (30) registered electors of the ward in which the candidate resides and will represent, except the mayor, and the Justice of the Peace* the petitioners for which may reside in any part of the city. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any office than there are persons to be elected to said office at the following regular city election. Where a person's signature appears on more petitions than he is hereby permitted to sign, the signatures bearing the most recent date shall be invalidated. 
    A nominating petition may be accepted for filing by the City Clerk only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate to the filing thereof. Nominating petitions shall be filed [4] with the Clerk before 5 o'clock in the afternoon on Thursday, the 25th day proceeding [preceding] the primary election. Each candidate for an elective office shall, at the time his nominating petition is filed, file an affidavit that he possesses the eligibility qualifications for such office. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
In accordance with MCL 168.644f, petitions for offices to be filled at the odd-year general elections shall be filed by 4:00 P.M. on the seventh Tuesday prior to the odd-year primary election. 

Section 3.8. - [Nominating commission.] 
    There is hereby created a commission of the city government, to be known as the Nominating Commission. Such commission shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and approval of the City Commission, in the first instance, within four months following the effective date of this charter, two for terms of two years and three for terms of one year, or until their successors are appointed as herein provided. Thereafter three members in the commission shall be appointed at the first meeting of the city Commission in May of each year, two for terms of two years and one for the term of one year. In the event that no nomination petition is filed for an elective office or offices of the City at the next ensuing election, the commission herein created shall nominate such a number of representative qualified electors of the city who signify their willingness to serve in such office or offices, if elected thereto, as a candidate or as candidates for such office or offices as will make the number of candidates therefor equal twice the number of persons to be elected thereto. Such nomination shall be made by the Nominating commission not less than twenty days prior to each regular city election and certified by the said commission to the Election Commission. The inability of the said commission to nominate any person or persons to any office or offices, as in this section required, shall not affect the validity of the election either as a whole, or with respect to the office or offices for which no such nomination was made. 
(Char. Amend. of 11-3-98, § 3) 
Section 3.9. - [Petitions forms.] 
    The form of the nominating petition shall be determined by the City Clerk. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
Section 3.10. - [Approval of petitions.] 
    Immediately after the filing of each petition the Clerk shall determine whether the regular requirements have been met and shall give written notice of such determination to each candidate. If a candidate's nominating petition does not meet the requirements of this Section, and the time for filing nominating petitions has not elapsed, additional nominating petitions may be filed. 
Section 3.11. - [Conduct of elections.] 
    The City Clerk shall be in charge of the conduct of elections in the city. He shall appoint, with the consent of the City Commissioners, such election inspectors and member[s] of the elections board as are necessary and provided for by the applicable state law. 
Section 3.12. - [Board of canvassers.] 
    The Mayor, Clerk and City Manager shall be the Board of City Canvassers. Such Board shall convene at 7:30 p.m., on the second day following each election at the usual meeting place of the City Commission and publicly canvass the returns and determine the results of the city election upon each question and proposition and also determine which persons are nominated or elected to the several offices respectively voted on at said election. Such members of the Board of Canvassers as shall appear at such meeting shall constitute a quorum. 
Editor's note- The board of canvassers is now selected pursuant to MCL 168.24a et seq., MSA 6.1024(1) et seq. 
Section 3.13. - [Determination of winning candidates.] 
    A candidate may be elected in the primary election if he shall receive a majority of all the votes cast for candidates for that office. Where several offices are to be filled at the same election, a candidate shall be deemed to have received a majority if he shall have received more than one-half (1/2) of the average number of votes cast for each of the offices. The average is to be determined by dividing the total number of votes cast for all the candidates for such office by the number of offices. In the event a candidate is elected in the primary where there is more than one office to be filled, then candidates equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to the office than [sic] remaining shall be declared nominees and certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission, based upon the method of determination and the procedure prescribed in Section 3.7 hereof. In the regular election, the number of candidates for each office equal to the number to be elected who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected. 
Section 3.14. - [Registration of electors; voting hours; ballots; notice of elections.] 
(1)	All persons who are entitled to the franchise under Article III, Section I of the constitution of the State of Michigan as amended shall be qualified electors of the City, and shall be entitled to vote for all elected offices of the city except commissioners from other wards. 
(2)	Electors shall be registered to vote by the Clerk in accordance with the general election laws, and all such electors shall be entitled to vote for all elected officials of the City. 
(3)	The voting hours shall be from 7 o'clock in the forenoon until 8 o'clock in the afternoon and no longer. Every qualified elector present and in line at the polls at the hour prescribed for the closing thereof shall be allowed to vote. 
(4)	Preparation of ballots and the procedure and conduct at polling places shall be in accordance with the general elections laws. 
(5)	Absentee ballots shall be furnished in accordance with the general election laws. 
(6)	The Clerk shall give public notice of each city election by publication thereof in a newspaper in general circulation in the City. The first publications of such shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to such election. The notice shall be directed to the electors of the City of Hudsonville and contain the following: 
(a)	Whether the election is to be a primary, special, or general city election; 
(b)	The date of the election; 
(c)	The voting hours; 
(d)	The offices to be filled; and 
(e)	The propositions or special questions to be submitted. 
Propositions or special questions submitted to the voters shall be quoted in full in the notice if less than 300 words in length; if greater, a summary or condensation shall be prepared by the Clerk, or, if the question has been initiated by petition, by such person or persons who initiated such question. 
(7)	All other procedural aspects of the city elections, unless provided otherwise in this charter, shall be in accordance with the general election laws except as same shall relate to political parties or party or partisan procedures. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c), MSA 5.2073(c); registration of electors generally, MCL 168.491 et seq., MSA 6.1491 et seq.; opening and closing of polls, MCL 168.720, MSA 6.1720; notice of election, MCL 168.653, MSA 6.1653. 
Section 3.15. - [Recount.] 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the State of Michigan. Unless otherwise required by law, the petition for recount of the votes cast at any city election shall be filed with the Clerk before 5 o'clock in the afternoon on the second full day after the Board of Canvassers has determined the result of the election at which such votes were cast. The person filing such petition shall give notice thereof to the opposing candidate or candidates in the manner provided by law. Any such opposing candidate may file a counter petition for recount before 5 o'clock in the afternoon in the next full day thereafter. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq., MSA 6.1861 et seq. 
[CHAPTER IV.] - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of city offices, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 

Section 4.1. - [Commission form of government.] 
    The municipal government of the City shall be the commission form of government under which the responsibility of making determinations of policy shall be in the city commission and the responsibility for the administration of such policies shall be in the city manager and the other administrative officers of the City. 
Section 4.2. - [City Commission.] 
    There shall be a City Commission of Seven (7) members consisting of six commissioners and a mayor who shall be a member of the Commission for all purposes. The Commission shall be the governing and legislative body of the City, and, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, there is vested in it the authority to exercise all powers possessed by the City. The Commission shall have the power to replace any member who is no longer able to serve on the Commission. The member replacing such a commissioner shall serve until the next City election. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of a body vested with legislature power, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 4.3. - [Mayor.] 
    The Mayor shall be the executive head of the City. He shall also be the presiding officer of the Commission, and shall have voice and vote in all proceedings of the Commission with that of other members of the Commission but shall have no veto power. The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and may, in emergencies, exercise within the City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riots and disorder and shall have the authority to command the assistance of all able bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City and to suppress riot and disorder. He shall also serve on the board of supervisors [6] of the county. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Election and appointment of members of the board of supervisors is now done pursuant to MCL 46.401 et seq., MSA 5.359(1) et seq. 

Section 4.4. - [Mayor pro tempore.] 
    At its first meeting following each regular City election after the newly elected members have taken office, the Commission shall elect one of its members mayor pro tempore for a term expiring at the first Commission meeting following the next regular village election. The election shall be by a majority vote of the Commission. The mayor pro tempore shall perform all the duties of the mayor when on account of a vacancy in the office, absent from the City, disability, or otherwise, the mayor is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his office. If both the Mayor and Mayor pro tempore are unable to perform the duties of the office of Mayor, the Commission shall elect another of its members to temporarily perform such duties. 
Section 4.5. - [Administrative departments.] 
    The following administrative departments are created: (1) Finance Department; (2) Department of Public Works; and (3) Department of Public Safety. The Commission may create and abolish such additional departments as it deems advisable. The Commission shall by ordinance prescribe the functions, duties, and organization of each department and the duties and responsibilities of the officers and employees of each department. 
Section 4.6. - [City Manager.] 
    A City Manager shall be appointed by the Commission by majority vote to serve at its pleasure. He shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall be directly responsible to the Commission. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments of the City government under his jurisdiction. 
Section 4.7. - [Finance Department.] 
    The head of the Finance Department shall be the City Treasurer who shall be appointed by the Commission and may be one of its members. He may, by majority vote of the commission, be made subject to the City Manager. The duties of the Finance Department shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)	To supervise and be responsible for the disbursements of all City moneys and to have control over all expenditures thereof. 
(b)	To maintain a general accounting system for the City which shall conform to any uniform system as may be required by law. 
(c)	To submit at the end of each fiscal year, a complete statement and report of the City's financial status at the end of each year. 
(d)	To collect all taxes and special assessments, license fees, and other revenues of the City and such other revenues as provided by law. 
(e)	To have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the City, and to deposit all funds in such depositories as may be designated by the Commission in accordance with law. 
(f)	To have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City and to have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. 
(g)	To perform such other functions as may be designated by the Commission or by the State of Michigan. 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting act MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq.; designation of depositories, MCL 129.12, MSA 3.752; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b, MSA 7.86. 
Section 4.8. - [Department of Public Works.] 
    The administrative head of the Department of Public Works shall be the director of Public Works who shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Commission, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Manager and the Commission. The City Manager may be appointed Director of Public Works at the discretion of the Commission. Among the duties of the department shall be the responsibility for administering the highway and street construction and maintenance program of the City, and such engineering, public works, utility, or other activities as are assigned to it by this charter or by the Commission. 
Section 4.9. - [Department of Public Safety.] 
    The administrative head of the Department of Public Safety shall be the director of Public Safety, who shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Commission, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the manager and the Commission. The City Manager may be appointed Director of Public Safety at the discretion of the Commission. Among the duties of the department shall be the responsibility for the protection of the public safety of the City, including fire and police protection. 
Section 4.10. - [City Clerk.] 
    A City Clerk shall be appointed by the Commission by majority vote to serve at its pleasure. The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Commission, shall attend all its meetings, and shall keep a permanent journal in the English language, of its proceedings. The Clerk shall certify by his signature all ordinances, resolutions, and other actions of the Commission and shall keep a record thereof which shall be public. He shall, upon request, administer the oath required for municipal purposes and he shall be custodian of all papers, documents, surety bonds and records which pertain to the City and the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. He shall be custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest the same. He shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of journal, MCL 117.3(m), MSA 5.2073(m); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.; historical records and papers, MCL 399.5, MSA 15.1805. 
Section 4.11. - [City Assessor.] 
    A City Assessor shall be appointed by the Commission by majority vote to serve at its pleasure. The duties of the Assessor shall include the preparation of all regular and special assessment rolls and he shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by law. He may by majority vote of the commission, be directly responsible to the finance department and/or to the City Manager. 
Section 4.12. - [Police Chief.] 
    The Police Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Commission to serve at its pleasure of the manager and the Commission. The Police Chief shall be responsible for maintaining the public peace and the safety of persons and property in the Village. A City Constable or Constables may also be appointed by the Commission. 
Section 4.13. - [Fire Chief.] 
    The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Commission to serve at the pleasure of the Manager and the Commission. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for preventing and extinguishing fires in the city. 
Section 4.14. - [Health Officer.] 
    The Health Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Commission. The Health Officer shall be responsible for administering the public health activities of the City. 
Section 4.15. - [City attorney.] 
    A City Attorney shall be appointed by the Commission by majority vote to serve at its pleasure. The City Attorney shall act as the legal advisor to and be the attorney and counsel for the Commission. 
Section 4.16. - [Justice of the Peace-Election.] 
    There shall be a Justice of the Peace elected for the City of Hudsonville, who shall be nominated and elected in the same manner as the Mayor, and he shall serve for a term of four years, unless provided otherwise by State Law. The first Justice shall serve until the regular City election in 1959, or until his successor is elected and qualified. 
Editor's note- Justice of the Peace were abolished by MCL 600.9921, MSA 27A.9921. 
Section 4.17. - [Same-Jurisdiction.] 
    The Justice of the Peace elected in the City of Hudsonville shall have and exercise therein and within the county, the same jurisdiction and powers in all civil and criminal matters, causes, suits, and proceedings, and shall perform the same duties in all respects, so far as occasion may require, as are or may be conferred upon or required of Justice of the Peace by the general laws of the State. They have authority to hear, try, and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery or enforcing of fines, penalties, and forfeitures imposed by the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for violations of such ordinances, as in the ordinances prescribed and directed, subject only to the limitations prescribed and directed in this charter or provided by state law. 
    Such Justice of the Peace shall also have: 
(a)	Jurisdiction to the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all civil matters, ex cantractu [contractu] and ex delicto, with such exceptions and restrictions as are or may be provided by State law. 
(b)	The same power and authority as the circuit courts of the State possess to set aside, upon legal cause shown therefor, the verdict or judgement in any civil case, and grant a new trail therein, whenever a motion in writing is made and filed with the Justice of the Peace within five days (5) after the rendition of the verdict or judgement in said case. Such motion shall briefly and plainly set forth the reasons and grounds upon which it is made and shall be supported by an affidavit or affidavits setting forth the facts relied upon and filed at the time of filing said motion. A notice of the hearing of such motion with a copy of the motion and affidavits filed as aforesaid, shall be served upon the adverse party or his attorney at least two days (2) before the hearing thereof. Such motion shall be determined within two days (2) after the same shall have been heard and submitted and such motion shall be submitted and heard within one week (1) after the same shall have been filed. The time for taking an appeal from judgement in case such motion be not granted shall begin to run from the time when such motion shall be overruled. In no case shall the pendency of such motion stay the issuing and levy of an execution in such case, but in case of levy under execution pending such motion, no sale of the property so levied on shall be advertised or made until the final determination of such motion. 
(c)	Such additional powers and authorities as may be conferred upon City Justice of the Peace by State law, it being the intent of this section that the Justice of the Peace in the City of Hudsonville shall have and exercise all powers and authority which Justice in cities may now or hereafter be permitted to exercise under State law, this charter, or the ordinances of the city. 
(d)	The proceedings in all suits and actions before said Justice of the Peace, and in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of them, shall, except as otherwise provided in this charter, be according to and governed by the general laws of the State, which are applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
(e)	Docket: Every Justice of the Peace shall enter in the docket kept by him the title of all suits and prosecutions commenced or prosecuted before him for violations of the ordinances of the city, and all the proceedings and the judgement rendered in every such cause and the items of all costs taxed or allowed therein; and also the amounts and date of payment of all fines, penalties, and forfeitures, moneys, and costs received by him on account of any such suit or proceeding. Such docket shall be submitted by the Justice of the Peace, at all reasonable times, to the examination of any person desiring to examine the same and shall be produced by the Justice of the Peace to the Council annually or whenever required. 
(f)	Compensation of justices of the peace: The provisions of the general law of the State of Michigan applying to the compensation of Justices of the Peace shall apply to Justices of the Peace in the City of Hudsonville: Provided, that the Council may, by ordinance, provide for placing the Justice of the Peace of the city on a salary instead of a fee basis. Such ordinance shall fix their salaries and may not be amended at any time after the thirteenth day before the last day for filing nominating petitions for any election at which a Justice of the Peace is to be elected nor may the salary of any Justice be changed during the term of office for which he has been elected or appointed. In the event that no ordinance is passed amending the salary of the Justice, such salary shall remain the same for the ensuing term as it was for the previous term. 
    The salary of the Justice of the Peace shall be in lieu of all fees, both in civil and criminal cases, to which said Justice might be entitled but for the provisions of this section, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies, and for administering oaths in matters not connected with suits and proceedings in this court. 
(g)	All fines, penalties, and forfeitures collected or received by any Justice of the Peace for, or on account of, violations of the penal laws of the State and all fines, penalties, forfeitures, and moneys collected or received by such Justice, for or on account of violations of any ordinances of the city, shall be paid over by such Justice of [to] the city Treasurer on or before the 10th day of the month next after the collection or receipt thereof; and the Justice shall take the receipt of the City Treasurer therefore and file the same with the City Clerk. 
    Each such Justice shall report on oath, to the Treasurer, at the time of making the payments herein provided, for, the name of every person against whom a prosecution has been commenced, or judgement rendered for any of such fines, penalties, or forfeitures, and the amount of all moneys received by him on account thereof, or on account of any such suit or prosecution. 
    All fines recovered for the violation of the penal laws of the State when collected and paid into the city treasury shall be disposed of as provided by law. 
(h)	Prosecution under state penal laws: The expenses of prosecutions before Justice of the Peace of the city, for violations of State criminal laws, and in punishing the offenders, shall be paid by the County of Ottawa. 
(i)	Bond required: Each Justice of the Peace, in addition to any other security required by law to be given for the performance of his official duties, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give a corporate surety bond to the city, in a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to be approved by the Mayor, which approval shall be endorsed upon the bond, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of Justice of the Peace within and for the city. 
(j)	Rules of court: Subject to the approval of the Council, the Justice of the Peace of the city may, by court rule, regulate the office hours and make other necessary and proper rules for the regulation and conduct of the city's justice court, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this charter and the general laws of the State. 
(k)	Traffic violations bureau: The Council shall have the power and authority to pass an ordinance establishing a Traffic Violations Bureau for the handling of Traffic cases, other than driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, failure to stop in the event of an accident, or reckless driving. In such Traffic Violations Bureau, any persons who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under the ordinances of the city may, within the time specified in the notice, in lieu of making an appearance in court, answer to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine, and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge. The creation of such a Bureau by the Council shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court, should such person so choose. 
Editor's note- Justices of the peace were abolished by MCL 600.9921, MSA 27A.9921. 
[CHAPTER V.] - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY 

Section 5.1. - [Eligibility for office.] 
    Each person who holds any elective office of the City shall have been a resident of the area included with the City, or any area annexed thereto, for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the last day for filing petitions for such office or prior to the day of appointment to fill a vacancy, and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City on such day and throughout his tenure of office. The Commission shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members. Commissioners representing any ward shall serve only so long as they are residents of that ward. The other officers in the city shall be citizens of the United States qualified as electors of the Community in which they reside. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for qualification of city officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 5.2. - [Compensation and expenses of mayor and commissioners.] 
    The compensation of the Mayor and Commissioners shall be established by the City Commission, providing fees shall be allowed in an amount to be stipulated by the Commission for attendance at committee, City Commission, and other meetings and activities. Such fees shall be provided in the annual budget to be adopted with the hearing provided in this charter. Such fees shall not, however, affect the Mayor and Commissioners during their terms of office and shall be established only for the next ensuing term of the Mayor or the Commissioners. The compensation of the first Commission shall be the same as for the present Village of Hudsonville, being Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per regular meeting attended for Mayor and Twenty dollars ($20.00) for Commissioners. 
    Upon authorization of the council, additional reasonable expenses may be allowed to its members when actually incurred on behalf of the city. 
Editor's note- Compensation of elected officials is now determined by the local officers' compensation commission vested in Code of Ordinances Section 2-176 et seq., adopted pursuant to MCL 117.5c, MSA 5.2084(3). 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 5.3. - [Compensation of city officials and employees.] 
    The compensation of other City officials and employees shall be fixed from time to time by the Commission. 
Editor's note- Compensation of elected officials is now determined by the local officers' compensation commission vested in Code of Ordinances Section 2-176 et seq., adopted pursuant to MCL 117.5c, MSA 5.2084(3). 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 5.4. - [Vacancies in elective office.] 
    Any vacancy in any elective office shall be filled by appointment by majority vote of the members of the Commission then in office. The person appointed shall serve until 12 o'clock noon of the Monday following the next regular spring election or until his successor is elected and qualified. At such regular spring election if the vacant office would not expire on the Monday noon following, the remainder of the unexpired term shall be filled by an election at such time. 
Editor's note- Elections are now held in the Fall. See editor's notes following Charter Sections 3.3 and 3.4. 
Section 5.5. - [Oath of office.] 
    Every elective and administrative officer and such other officers and employees as the Commission shall designate shall take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed for public officers by the Constitution and shall file same with the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Oath of public officers, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. XI, § 1. 
Section 5.6. - [Official bonds.] 
    All officers and employees of the City whose duties involve the receipt, disbursement, or custody of City funds and all other officers and employees so required by the Commission, shall file with the City an official bond in such form and amount as the Commission shall direct and approve. Such official bond shall be conditioned that the bonded person will faithfully perform the duties of his office and will, on demand deliver to his successor in office, or other proper officer of the City, all books, papers, moneys, and effects, and property belonging to or appertaining to his office, and that he will pay over or account for to the City all moneys received by him as such officer or employee. All official bonds shall be corporate bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City. 
[CHAPTER VI.] - LEGISLATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

Section 6.1. - [Regular meetings.] 
    The commission shall provide by ordinance for at least one (1) regular meeting of the Commission each month, and shall fix the time and place thereof. If a meeting cannot be held in the regular meeting place, the Mayor shall designate where the Commission shall meet. A regular meeting shall be held at 7 o'clock p.m. on the Monday next following each regular City election. 
Section 6.2. - [Special meetings.] 
    Special meetings shall be held at the regular meeting place of the Commission. They shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor or any three (3) Commissioners on at least six hours' written notice served personally on each Commissioner or left at his usual place of residence. Any special meeting shall be a legal meeting for all purposes without such notice if all the Commissioners are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
State Law reference- Notice shall be posted eighteen (18) hours prior to the meeting, MCL 15.265, MSA 4.1800(15). 
Section 6.3. - [Open meetings.] 
    All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for public meetings, MCL 117.3(l), MSA 5.2073(l); open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 
Section 6.4. - [Organization, rules and order of business; quorum.] 
    The Commission shall determine its own organization, rules, and order of business. A majority of the members of the Commission in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Commission. In the absence of a quorum, a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time and date. 
Section 6.5. - [Official journal.] 
    An official journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Clerk, in the English language. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of journal, MCL 117.3(m), MSA 5.2073(m). 
Section 6.6. - [Public peace, health and safety.] 
    The Commission shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for public peace, health and safety, MCL 117.3(j), MSA 5.2073(j). 
Section 6.7. - [Prior village ordinances and resolutions; prior duties of officers.] 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the Village of Hudsonville which are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended or until one (1) year from the effective date of the City. Ordinances and resolutions which are inconsistent with this charter are hereby repealed. Where enforcement discretion are [is] vested in prescribed officers, the officer who shall perform comparable duties under this charter shall be vested with such enforcement and discretionary powers. 
Section 6.8. - [Official action of the Commission.] 
    All official action of the Commission shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. All legislation shall be by ordinance. All action of the Commission shall be by majority vote of those present and voting, provided that a quorum as above defined is present at the Commission meeting. All official action of the Commission may be amended or repealed by an appropriate ordinance, resolution, motion or order, as the case may be. 
Section 6.9. - [Style of ordinances; publication; codification; identification.] 
    The style of all ordinances shall be: "The City of Hudsonville Ordains:". All ordinances shall be published in full in a newspaper in general circulation in the City at least once before they become operative, provided, however, that a codification of City ordinances need not be published in full and instead the Commission shall provide for making printed copies of the codification which shall be available for inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge and the Commission shall publish notice of the printing and availability of such codified City ordinances prior to the effective date of such codification. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2); mandatory that charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Section 6.10. - [Penalties.] 
    All violations of City ordinances shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or imprisonment for a period of not exceeding Ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court, provided that if the applicable state law permits fines in a greater amount or imprisonment for a longer period such shall apply any provision of this charter notwithstanding. 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, MCL 117.4i(10), MSA 5.2082(10). 
Section 6.11. - [Initiative or referendum.] 
(1)	An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or the repeal of any ordinance may be initiated by a petition, hereafter called a referendum. 
(2)	An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by registered electors equal in number to 10% of those who voted at the last general election prior to the filing of the petition. The form of the petition shall be approved by the City Attorney. The petition shall be filed with the City Clerk and if found to be sufficient by him, then presented to the Commission at its next regular meeting. 
(3)	Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the City Clerk, the Commission within thirty (30) days shall either (a) if it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance; (b) if it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance; or (c) determine to submit the proposal to the electors. 
(4)	Should the Commission decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any purpose, or in the discretion of the Commission at a special election. The result shall be determined by the majority vote of the electors voting thereon. 
(5)	Should two or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
(6)	An ordinance adopted through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Commission for a period of two years after the date of election at which it was approved. An ordinance repealed by referendary proceedings may not be re-enacted for a like period of time. 
(7)	Any ordinance may be adopted, amended, or repealed at any time by appropriate initiatory or referendum procedure in accordance with the foregoing. The Commission may submit the question of adopting, amending, to electors of the City on its own motion, and may submit any other question to the electors as it seems advisable. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(6), MSA 5.2082(6). 
Section 6.12. - [Ward boundaries.] 
    The City Commission shall as herein provided, define and determine the boundaries of the three wards of the City. Whenever any one ward shall have a population twenty percentum greater than any other ward, the boundaries of these or any of the wards shall be so changed by the Commission as to correct the imbalance between the wards to less than the said 20 per-centum imbalance. Within one (1) year of the receipt of the returns of each Federal Decennial census, the City Commission shall re-set ward boundaries so that there shall be a less than ten per-centum imbalance between the populations of the wards, provided, if there shall be such an imbalance occurring prior to the next decennial census, the said City commission may re-set the ward boundaries, provided further, that the ward boundaries shall not be changed more than once in any two year period, and provided further, said ward boundary provisions, shall be subject to any state law affecting boundaries or annexations. The original boundaries of the said ward shall be set by the charter commission within the ninety (90) day period following the incorporation election, and the said boundaries shall clearly be shown and published in connection with and in the same manner as this charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e), MSA 5.2073(e). 
[CHAPTER VII.] - GENERAL FINANCE 

Section 7.1. - [Fiscal and budget year.] 
    The fiscal and budget year of the City shall begin on the first day of July of each year. 
Section 7.2. - [Itemized proposal for fiscal year.] 
    The City Manager and the Treasurer shall prepare a complete itemized proposal for the next fiscal year, and shall submit it to the Commission at its regular meeting in the month of May. 
Section 7.3. - [Proposal budget document.] 
    The proposed budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include the following information: 
(1)	Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the City showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the current and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(2)	Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of the sinking fund, if any. 
(3)	Detailed estimates of all anticipated income from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the amounts received from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(4)	A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case may be, for the end of the current fiscal year. 
(5)	An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount from bond issues which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(6)	Such other supporting schedules as the City Manager or Treasurer may deem necessary or the Commission may require. 
Section 7.4. - [Recommended budget on public record.] 
    Upon submission to the Commission of the recommended budget it shall become a public record, a copy of which shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 
Section 7.5. - [Budget hearing.] 
    A public hearing on the recommended budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time as the Commission shall direct. Notice of such public hearing and that the budget is on file shall be published at least one week before the date set for said public hearing. 
Section 7.6. - [Adoption of budget.] 
    Not later than the regular June meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall by ordinance adopt a budget for the next fiscal year and appropriate the amounts needed for municipal purposes during such year. Such ordinance shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. Appropriations to a contingent fund, which is not for a specific purpose or purposes, shall not exceed an amount which is reasonably necessary to provide for unforeseeable contingencies. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h), MSA 5.2073(h). 
Section 7.7. - [Appropriations.] 
    After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be withdrawn from the treasury except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The Commission may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one department or fund to another. The balance of any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund and be reappropriated during the next fiscal year. 
Section 7.8. - [Depositories.] 
    The Commission shall designate depositories for City funds in accordance with law and shall provide for the regular deposit all City monies. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12, MSA 3.752; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b, MSA 7.86. 
Section 7.9. - [Disbursement of funds.] 
    All City funds shall be disbursed by the Treasurer in a manner not inconsistent with law and according to procedures to be established by resolution or ordinances of the Commission. 
Section 7.10. - [Annual report; independent audit.] 
    The City Manager and Treasurer shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the City within a reasonable time after the end of each fiscal year. An independent audit of the City accounts shall be made annually, at the end of the fiscal year, to be conducted by qualified accountants. The annual report and the results of the audit shall be made public in such manner as the Commission shall determine. 
[CHAPTER VIII.] - TAXATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 

Section 8.1. - [Power to tax; tax limit.] 
    The City shall have the power to assess taxes and to lay and collect rents, tolls and excises. The annual general ad valorem tax levy for municipal purposes shall not exceed 2% of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the City. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g), MSA 5.2073(g). 
Section 8.2. - [Subjects of taxation.] 
    The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f), MSA 5.2073(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 
Section 8.3. - [Tax day.] 
    The taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the first day of January of each year. 
State Law reference- Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2, MSA 7.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq., MSA 7.10 et seq. 
Section 8.4. - [Preparation of the assessment roll.] 
    On or before the first Monday in March in each year the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the City which is subject to the ad valorem taxation. Values shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. At least two weeks prior to this time a tentative assessment roll shall be prepared and made available for public inspection. Notice by mail shall be given to the owner thereof of any increase over the previous year in the assessed value of any property or the addition of any property to the roll unless a general proportionate increase shall have been made. The assessor shall also publish notice or post notice in three public places in the City that the tentative roll has been completed and will be available for inspection. Failure to give personal notice as provided above shall not invalidate the assessment roll of any assessment. During the two-week period the Assessor shall hear complaints and make such changes in the roll as he deems necessary before certification. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq., MSA 7.24 et seq. 
Section 8.5. - [Board of review.] 
    Three qualified electors not members of the Commission owning real property within the City, shall be appointed by the Commission, one for one year, one for two years, and one for three years, and thereafter for three year terms on completion of the original terms, who shall constitute the Board of Review. The assessor of the City shall be ex-officio, non-voting member of this Board. The Board of Review shall meet at a time and place set by the Commission, after the assessment roll is certified by the Assessor, and shall continue in session until all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments shall appear and are heard. If it shall appear then [that] any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board of Review shall correct the roll in such manner as it seems just. Notice of the time and place of the meetings of the Board of Review shall be published or posted in three public places in the City by the Assessor at least once one week prior to its first meeting. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a); mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i). 
Section 8.6. - [Endorsement of roll.] 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the City for the year in which it was prepared. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1). 
Section 8.7. - [Tax roll.] 
    After the Commission has made the appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Commission determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax together with such other assessments which the Commission requires to be assessed or re-assessed. The Assessor shall then proceed to spread the amounts of the general ad valorem tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in the assessment rolls and to place such other assessments and charges upon the roll as are required and authorized by the Commission. The Mayor shall then annex his warrant to the prepared tax roll directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect prior to March 1st of the following year from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and granting to and vesting in him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes and assessments on such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for collection of taxes. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq., MSA 7.87 et seq. 
Section 8.8. - [Taxes due; lien; notice; collection fees; partial payments.] 
    City taxes shall be due and payable on July 1st of each year and shall become a lien on such property. The treasurer shall publish at least three times notice of the time when such taxes are due and mail a bill to each person named on the tax roll. Failure to give the above notice shall not invalidate the taxes on the tax roll. All taxes paid on or before August 15th shall be collected without additional charges. After such date there shall be added one-half of 1% for each and every month, or fraction thereof, to taxes remaining unpaid, together with such collection fee as the Commission may by resolution prescribe. The commission may, by resolution, authorize the Treasurer to accept partial payments on taxes and special assessments together with interest and collection charge in such manner as the Commission may determine, providing that the period for partial payment not extend beyond the next March 1st. 
Section 8.9. - [Return of unpaid taxes.] 
    On March 1st of the following calendar year the treasurer shall return all unpaid taxes on property to the County Treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns of state and county taxes are made by township treasurers. Such return shall include all the additional charges hereinbefore provided, which charges shall in such return be added to the amount levied in said roll against each description. The taxes thus returned shall be collected. All taxes and charges on lands so returned as delinquent and [sic] shall be and remain a lien thereon until paid. 
Section 8.10. - Exemption. 
    No exemption from ad valorem taxation shall be allowed except such as are expressly required or permitted to be made by state law. In the case of exemption made to persons who are unable to contribute towards the public charges, such exceptions may be made only by reason of poverty on the filing of an oath stating the condition of poverty. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq., MSA 7.7 et seq. 
[CHAPTER IX.] - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT[9] 
    The Charter of the City of Hudsonville is amended by repealing Sections 9.1 through 9.10 thereof dealing with special assessment powers, provisions and procedures of the City, and providing instead, that the same shall be set forth in an appropriate ordinance adopted by the City Commission, the provisions of which shall conform to law. 
(Amended 11-3-81) 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 

[CHAPTER X.] - BORROWING POWER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) 

Section 10.1. - [Grant of authority.] 
    Subject to the limitations of applicable state law, the Commission may, by ordinance or resolution, authorize the borrowing of money and the issuing of bonds and other evidences of indebtedness therefore, for any purpose or purposes within the scope of powers vested in the City and for the purpose or purposes permitted by applicable state law. 
    Such bonds, except as prohibited by law, may pledge the full faith and credit of the City. 
State Law reference- Authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1), MSA 5.2074(1). 
Section 10.2. - [Special assessment bonds.] 
    The authority of the Commission shall include but not to be limited to the borrowing of money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost combination of such assessments, and to issue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the City. 
State Law reference- Authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2), MSA 5.2074(2). 
Section 10.3. - [Preparation and record of bonds.] 
    Every bond which is issued shall contain on its face a statement specifying the object for which the same is issued. It shall be unlawful for any officer of the City to use such bonds or the proceeds from the sale thereof for any object other than that mentioned on the face of such bond. Bonds and all other evidences of indebtedness which are issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk under the seal of the City. The coupons evidencing the interest upon said bonds may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness the same shall be cancelled. 
State Law reference- Cremation or disintegration of public obligations, MCL 129.121 et seq., MSA 3.996(1) et seq. 
CHAPTER XI. - CHARTERS AND CONTRACTS 

Section 11.1. - [Authority to contract vested in Commission.] 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the City is vested in the Commission and shall be exercised according to law and the provisions of this charter. 
Section 11.2. - [Competitive bids.] 
    Comparative or competitive prices shall be obtained and a record kept thereof for the purchase or sale of all materials, property, supplies, public improvements and services where the amount involved is in excess of $100.00, and less than $500.00. Competitive bids shall be secured when the amount involved is in excess of $500.00. Such prices need not be obtained in the employment of professional services. Such prices need not be obtained when the Commission determines by ordinance or resolution that it would not be advantageous to the City to obtain such prices. Such prices need not be obtained when the work is to be performed by a City department or agency. 
Section 11.3. - [Advance approval by Commission.] 
    In all sales or purchases in the amount of $500.00 or more, (a) the sale or purchase shall be approved in advance by the Commission; and (b) sealed competitive bids shall be obtained unless the Commission determines that it would not be advantageous to the City to obtain such bids. 
Section 11.4. - [Dividing of sales or purchases.] 
    No sale or purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
Section 11.5. - [Purchase, sale or lease of real property.] 
    Any purchase or sale of real property or lease to the City of real property shall be approved in advance by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elect of the Commission. 
Section 11.6. - [Acceptance of bids.] 
    Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications unless the Commission shall adopt resolution stating the reason for not accepting the same. Sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the City. 
Section 11.7. - [Written contract or purchase order.] 
    All purchases and sales shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. 
CHAPTER XII. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, §§ 24, 25; permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f, MSA 5.2076, 5.2079. 

Section 12.1. - [Continuation of prior franchises.] 
    All franchises to which the City or Township is a party affecting property within the limits of the city on the effective date of this charter shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Section 12.2. - [Power to grant franchises.] 
    The City shall have the power to grant a franchise to any person for the use of the streets and other public places of the City for the furnishing of any public utility service to the City and its inhabitants. 
Section 12.3. - [Approval of franchises by electors.] 
    No franchise which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Commission shall be granted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise shall be approved by the Commission for referral to the electorate before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the Commission nor until a public hearing has been held thereon nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Commission unless the expense of holding such election as determined by the Commission shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the proposed grantee. 
State Law reference- Submitted of franchise to electors required if irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 25; expenses of special election to the paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i), MSA 5.2084(i). 
Section 12.4. - [Franchise renewal, extension or amendment.] 
    A franchise, renewal or extension thereof or amendment thereto which is subject to revocation at the will of the Commission may be enacted by the Commission without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection in the form which it is finally enacted for at least four (4) weeks after publication of a notice that such franchise is so on file. 
Section 12.5. - [Fixing of rates, bases and charges of franchises.] 
    Public utility franchises, revocable or irrevocable, shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares, and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility, used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares, and charges, shall in no event include a value predicted upon the franchise, good will, or prospective profits. 
Section 12.6. - [Cost of improvements or maintenance of public places; joint use.] 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvements or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required in the City to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and other public places of the City by the City and by other utilities insofar as such use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for use of public places by public utilities, MCL 117.4h(2), MSA 5.2081(2); permissible that Charter provide for joint use of public property, MCL 117.4h(2), MSA 5.2081(2). 
CHAPTER XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 13.1. - [Claims against city.] 
    In any action on claims against the city in which there is no government immunity from suit, the claimant, nevertheless, is hereby required as a condition precedent to bringing suit against the city to satisfy the following conditions: 
(1)	A claim shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk within six (6) months after the injury damage shall have occurred which shall specify the time, place and nature and extent of the injuries and damages of which complaint is made. The names and addresses of all known witnesses and the attending physician, if any. 
(2)	The City shall have Sixty (60) days thereafter to investigate the claim and to determine whether or not payment should be made. 
(3)	No court action shall be begun after one year has elapsed from the date the claim against the City shall have occurred. 
State Law reference- City liability for damages to property and personal injuries sustained on public ways, MCL 242.1 et seq., MSA 9.591 et seq. 
Section 13.2. - [Recall of elective officers.] 
    Any elective officer may be removed from office by the electors in the manner provided by the general laws of the State of Michigan. A vacancy created by the recall of any elective officer shall be filled by election in the manner prescribed by law. No person who has been removed from office by recall, or who has been resigned from such office while recall proceedings are pending against him, shall be appointed to any office within one year after such recall of resignation. 
State Law reference- Recall, MCL 168.951 et seq., MSA 6.1951 et seq. See also Mich. Const. 1963, Art. II, § 8. 
Section 13.3. - [Power over cemeteries.] 
    The Commission shall have the power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance and protection of cemeteries, together with improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto owned or hereafter acquired by the City either within or without its corporate limits. 
Section 13.4. - [Charter amendments.] 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law. Should two or more amendments be adopted at the same election which have conflicting provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22; Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.21 et seq., MSA 5.2100 et seq. 
Section 13.5. - [Severability of Charter provisions.] 
    If any provision, section or clause of this charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not effect [affect] any remaining portion or application provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable and, to this end, this charter is declared to be severable. 
Section 13.6. - [Merit system; pension and retirement system.] 
(1)	The City Commission may provide by ordinance for a merit system of personnel management and may establish by ordinance a Civil Service Board to operate such merit system of personnel management. 
(2)	The City Commission may establish by ordinance a pension and retirement system for any or all groups of employees in the service of the City. The cost of any such pension and retirement system shall be determined on actuarially sound mortality and service tables. 
Section 13.7. - [Records to be public.] 
    All records of the City shall be public. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l), MSA 5.2073(l); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 
[CHAPTER XIV.] - SCHEDULE 

Section 14.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the city under this charter and to accomplish the transition from Township and Village to City government, and it shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end. 
Section 14.2. - Special election commission. 
    There is hereby created a special election commission for the special election for the adoption of this charter and for the first election of city officers. The members of the Hudsonville Charter Commission shall constitute the Special Election Commission and shall serve without compensation. The chairman of the Special Election Commission shall be John De Vree, Jr., a member of the charter commission, and the secretary of the charter commission shall act as secretary of the election commission and perform such duties as are prescribed by the commission and this charter. He may name such deputies as may be necessary to carry out his official duties; and the commission may provide for these deputies such compensation as is consistent with state law. 
Section 14.3. - [Election inspectors; board of registration; board of canvassers.] 
    The chairman of the Charter Commission shall name, subject to the approval of the commission, such election inspectors and a Board of Registration as are necessary and are provided by state law. Such inspectors and such board together with any deputies acting under then [them], shall arrange and perform all acts that are necessary for the election on this charter and vote for the officers provided therein. The Charter Commission shall designate ten (10) days or more prior to the election, three members to constitute a board of canvassers who shall be qualified electors. 
Section 14.4. - [Detailed schedule of action and events.] 
    The following detailed schedule is hereby prescribed for the actions and events necessary for the adoption of this charter and for the nomination and election of the first officers of the city. The dates and procedures provided for in this chapter shall be followed regardless of the regular nomination and election provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, such regular nomination and election provisions shall govern where not inconsistent with this chapter. It is provided further that all publications of notice required to be made in the Zeeland Record shall be made in the issue thereof published within Seven (7) days prior to the dates shown hereafter. The dates listed herein may be advanced or delayed by resolution of the charter commission, provided, the times intervening between the various dates shall be preserved in so far as possible unless the same shall fall on a Sunday, when such time will be the next succeeding day. 
    October 1, 1957-(a) Charter takes effect only for the purpose of initiating the procedure for the election on its adoption and for nominating and electing the first city officers. 
    (b) A signed copy of the charter shall be placed on file for public inspection by the election commission in the Hudsonville Village Municipal Building, together with a description of the ward boundaries for the first election, which shall be: 
First Ward: All that part of the Proposed City of Hudsonville lying South of the Center line of the C & O Railroad and that portion lying North of the said Railroad and South of the centerline of Grant Street. 
Second Ward: All that part of the Proposed City of Hudsonville lying East of a line One Hundred sixty-five (165) feet West of the center line of Barnaby Road. 
Third Ward: All that part of the Proposed City of Hudsonville lying West of a line One Hundred sixty-five (165) feet West of the center line of Barnaby and North of the center line of Grant Street. 
    October 3, 1957-(a) There shall be published in the Zeeland Record a first notice of the time for filing nomination petitions, which notice shall include at least the following: (1) The officers to be nominated on a non-partisan basis as provided in the charter, (2) The qualifications, compensation and term of such officers, (3) The method of nomination including the availability of petitions on and after the third day of October, 1957, at the Hudsonville Village Municipal Building, (4) The number of signatures required and the place and time for filing petitions, (5) The requirement for consent as provided in the Charter, (6) A very brief description of the duties of such officers, (7) A notice that a copy of the charter is available for public inspection at the office in the Hudsonville Municipal Building. 
    [(b) and (c) were skipped.] 
    (d) There shall be published in the Zeeland Record a first notice of the last day of registration for the November 5, 1957, first city election and the time and place for registration. 
    (e) There shall be made available at the office in the Hudsonville Municipal Building a supply of non-partisan petition forms and consent forms prescribed for in the Charter. 
    Thursday, October 10, 1957-There shall be published in the Zeeland Record a second notice of the time for filing nomination petitions, the last day of registration, and notice of officers to be nominated, and first notice of election and the location of the polling place. All said notices to be identical to the first notice when the said are second notices. 
    Thursday, October 17, 1957 (until 8:00 p.m.)-This shall be the last day for registering to vote in the November 5, 1957, election for adoption of the charter and election of officers as provided therein. The Board of Registration shall on such last day for registration procure from the Georgetown Township Clerk, the records of the Clerk of the persons who are registered Township electors and shall incorporate such records with their records and shall cause all such persons to be registered as City electors in the same manner as though such persons had then and there applied for registration and all such persons shall be deemed to be registered as city electors. Thereafter registrations for city election may be made only through the clerk of the Board of Registration as provided in the charter determined by state law. 
    October 17, 1957-(a) There shall be published in the Zeeland Record a third notice of the time for filing nomination petitions, identical to the first notice and there shall be published a third notice of the election of officers and adoption of the charter. 
    October 18, 1957 (4:00 p.m.) This shall be the last time for filing petitions. The filing and form of nomination petitions shall in all respects be as provided in this charter except that they shall be filed in the Municipal Village of Hudsonville. If there shall not be filed petitions for at least two (2) candidates for each of the offices (there being required four (4) candidates in each of the three (3) wards) to be filled at the first election, the nominating committee, consisting of charter commission members John Brink, Louis Smit, and Ray Van Dyke, shall serve as a nominating committee and perform the functions the said nominating committee is authorized to perform in Section 3.8 of the Charter. 
    Monday, October 21, 1957, (8:00 p.m.) By this time the charter commission shall complete the final determination as of to the validity and sufficiency of nomination petitions and whether or not the candidates have required qualifications for the several offices. 
    Thursday, October 24, 1957-There shall be published a full and complete copy of this charter in the Zeeland Record together with a final notice of election. 
    Tuesday, November 5, 1957-A special election shall be held as provided by state law of the question of adopting this charter and electing the several officers therein provided for. At this election there shall be but one (1) precinct and the polling place shall be in the Municipal Building in the Village of Hudsonville, and the proposal shall be as follows: 
    Instructions: A cross (X) in the square (?) before the word "Yes" is in favor of the proposed charter, and a cross (X) in the square (?) before the word "No" is against the proposed charter. 
    Before leaving the booth, fold the ballot so that the initials of the inspector may be seen on the outside. 
    Shall the proposed charter for the City of Hudsonville drafted by the Charter Commission elected on June 8, 1957, be adopted? 
YES ? 
NO ? 
    The charter shall be adopted if a majority of the ballots cast thereon are in favor of adoption. 
    At the first election of officers, the voters shall be entitled to vote for not more than two (2) candidates for Council, a Mayor, Supervisor and one (1) candidate for justice of the peace. The three (3) candidates for Councilman, one (1) from each of three (3) wards, who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term beginning on the effective date of this charter and ending at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in April, 1959; the three (3) candidates for councilman, one (1) from each ward, who receive the second highest number of votes shall be elected for a term beginning on the effective date of this charter and ending at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in April, 1958. The justice of the peace, Mayor, and Supervisor candidates who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term beginning on the effective date of this charter and ending at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in April, 1959. After this election the provisions contained elsewhere in this charter relative to elections and terms shall govern. 
    The Board of Canvassers shall meet as provided by law to canvass the vote and if the charter shall have been adopted, to determine the several elected offices. The Board shall notify these elected officers and call an organizational meeting, where they may take and describe constitutional oath of office. The secretary of the election commission shall certify two (2) copies of this charter together with a statement of the vote for and against it with the secretary of the State of Michigan and with the clerk of Ottawa County. The several officers shall do all acts necessary for the proper determining of the effective date of this charter and the commencement of the City of Hudsonville. 
    Moved by Ray Van Dyke, seconded by John De Vree 
As follows: 
    "Be it Resolved that the foregoing be adopted as the proposed charter for the City of Hudsonville:" 
    YEAS: John De Vree, Ted Kort, Nelson Hoezee, Henry Scholten, Louis Smit, Ray Van Dyke, John Vander Molen, Edward Wierenga, and John Brink. 
    Nays: None 
    Resolution carried. 
    Edward D. Wierenga, Secretary of the Charter Commission of the City of Hudsonvillle on the 18th day of June, 1957, the following named persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission to frame a charter for the city, namely: 
    John De Vree, Ted Kort, Nelson Hoezee, Henry Scholten, Louis Smit, Ray Van Dyke, John Vander Molen, Edward Wierenga, and John Brink, and that the annexed and foregoing charter was duly adopted by said Charter Commission by the foregoing resolution which is a true and correct copy thereof and that the said Charter Commission directed that said charter be presented to the electors of the City of Hudsonville in accordance with the requirements of this charter and the laws of the State of Michigan, Further deponent says not. 
August 22, 1957. 
Edward D. Wierenga 
Secretary of the Charter of Commission of the City of Hudsonville. 
Henry Van Harn 
Notary Public, Ottawa County 
My Commission expires: 3/18/61 
Approved 
G. Mennen Williams 
September 30, 1957 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The original charter, sections 1.1 through 14.4, is set out as adopted on November 5, 1957. The following table shows the disposition of amendments adopted subsequently. 
Adoption 
Date Section 
Amended 11- 3-81 Ch. IX 11- 3-98 3.6, 3.8  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hudsonville, Michigan." 
Charter reference- Codification authority, § 6.9. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Hudsonville, Michigan, adopted November 5, 1957, and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall denote the municipality of Hudsonville, Michigan. 
    City commission. The words "city commission" or "commission" shall mean the commission of the City of Hudsonville. 
    Code. The expressions "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Hudsonville, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions, or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Ottawa in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
    General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated respectively, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and the words in the plural shall include the singular. 
    Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City Hudsonville, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, department or other city agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, department or agency shall mean and include such officer, department or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Shall/may. Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Code it shall be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided, "may" is permissive. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction. MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Application to territorial boundaries only. 
    All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although the same may not be so limited specifically. 
Sec. 1-5. - Captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code other than the chapter, article, division, and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-8. - Rule of separability. 
    Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be separable, and the invalidity of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection, shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division, section or subsection of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-10. - References to offices. 
    Reference to a public office shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the City of Hudsonville, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)	Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance levying taxes; 
(3)	Any ordinance appropriating money; 
(4)	Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money; 
(5)	Any ordinance establishing utility rates; 
(6)	Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons; 
(7)	Any ordinance authorizing public improvements; 
(8)	Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property; 
(9)	Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory; 
(10)	Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use; 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(12)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(13)	Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees; 
(14)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(15)	Any ordinance pertaining to zoning; 
(16)	Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement of already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
(a)	Except as provided in chapter 25 hereof with respect of municipal civil infractions or unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this Code or any rule, regulation or order adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment of not more than ninety-three (93) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition or any injunctive relief or the revocation of any permit or license. 
(c)	This section shall not apply to the failure of officers and employees of the city to perform municipal duties required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 1, 9-14-10 
Charter reference- Penalties, § 6.10. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 
Sec. 1-14. - Establishment of and amendment to fees, charges and rates. 
    All fees, charges and rates charged by the city shall be established, and may from time to time be amended, by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 00-220, § 1, 6-13-00) 
Sec. 1-15. - New fees, charges and rates. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to temporarily set new fees, charges and rates which have not previously been established by resolution of the city commission, provided that such fees, charges and rates shall be approved by resolution of the city commission within sixty (60) days of the date the same has been temporarily set by the city manager. The city commission may affirm and establish, increase or decrease such fees, charges or rates by resolution. If the city commission decreases any temporary fee, charge or rate, the difference between the amount collected and the amount established by the city commission shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 00-220, § 1, 6-13-00) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal powers, Ch. II; organization of government, Ch. IV. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); community development, Ch. 8; downtown development authority, § 8-16 et seq.; economic development corporation, § 8-41 et seq.; elections, Ch. 9; offenses affecting governmental functions, § 16-26 et seq.; planning, Ch. 17; planning commission, § 17-16 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 23; administration and enforcement of zoning, App. A, Art. III; franchise, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Organization of government, Ch. IV; legislation, Ch. VI. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 

Sec. 2-16. - Regular meetings. 
    Pursuant to Section 6.1 of the Charter the city commission shall meet in regular session once a month, on the second Tuesday thereof, at 7:00 p.m. at the commission chambers in City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 1, 5-14-68) 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 
Secs. 2-17-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Officers and employees of the city, Ch. V. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq. 

Secs. 2-51-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative departments, § 4.5. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq. 

Secs. 2-101-2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Downtown development authority, § 8-16 et seq.; economic development corporation, § 8-41 et seq.; planning commission, § 17-16 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, App. A, § 3.4. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq.; Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-151-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL OFFICERS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create a local officers' compensation commission, MCL 117.5c, MSA 5.2084(3). 

Sec. 2-176. - Created. 
    There is hereby created the local officers' compensation commission. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Authority for creation, MCL 117.5c(a), MSA 5.2084(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-177. - Authority. 
    The local officers' compensation commission shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a), MSA 5.2084(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-178. - Composition. 
    The local officers' commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a), MSA 5.2084(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-179. - Qualifications. 
    Each member of the local officers' compensation commission shall be a registered elector of the city. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a), MSA 5.2084(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-180. - Terms. 
    The terms of office for members of the local officers' compensation commission shall be five (5) years, except that of the members first appointed, one (1) each shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years. Thereafter members shall be appointed before October first of the year of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a), MSA 5.2084(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-181. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the local officers' compensation commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a), MSA 5.2084(3)(a). 
Sec. 2-182. - Determination of salaries. 
    The local officers' compensation commission shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials of the city which determination shall be the salaries unless the city commission by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the city commission reject them. The determinations of the commission shall be effective thirty (30) days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city commission. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials of the city in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 2, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(b), MSA 5.2084(3)(b). 
Sec. 2-183. - Meetings. 
    The local officers' compensation commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) session days in every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall take no action or make determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. "Session days" means any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 3, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(c), MSA 5.2084(3)(c). 
Sec. 2-184. - Compensation. 
    The members of the local officers' compensation commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 3, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(c), MSA 5.2084(3)(c). 
Sec. 2-185. - Amendment of procedure. 
    The city commission shall implement this division by resolution. After one (1) year following the date this division goes into effect the procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials of the city may be changed by Charter amendment or revision. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 4, 4-11-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(f), MSA 5.2084(3)(f). 
Sec. 2-186. - In lieu of Charter provisions; authority. 
    The provisions of this division shall be in lieu of Section 5.2 of the Charter and any other provisions of the Charter, if any exist, relating to the determination of salaries of the local elected officials of the city. This division is adopted in pursuance of Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 117.5c, MSA 5.2084(3)) 
(Ord. No. 43, § 6, 4-11-72) 
Secs. 2-187-2-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TERRA SQUARE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-190. - Created. 
(a)	The Terra Square Advisory Board (the "board") of seven (7) members is hereby created to advise the city commission on matters enumerated herein. 
(b)	The mayor, with the approval of the city commission, shall appoint members to the board for staggered three (3) year terms ending on December 31. 
(c)	The terms of office for members of the board shall be three (3) years, except that of the members first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, and two (2) each shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years and three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 16-304, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 2-191. - Board membership. 
    The seven (7) members of the board shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Members of the board shall serve without compensation and shall be chosen to broadly represent the community at large. 
(2)	At least one (1) member of the board shall be a city commissioner. The person appointed to fill the city commissioner seat on the board is only eligible to hold that seat on the board so long as that person continues to hold office as a member of the city commission. 
(3)	At least one (1) member of the board shall be a downtown development authority ("DDA") board member. The person appointed to fill the DDA seat on the board is only eligible to hold that seat on the board so long as that person continues to hold office as a member of the DDA. 
(4)	At least one (1) member of the board shall be a current farmer's market vendor at Terra Square. 
(5)	Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 16-304, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 2-192. - Meetings and procedure. 
(a)	The board shall be subject to and shall comply fully with the provisions of the Michigan Open Meetings Act, MCL §15.261 et seq. 
(b)	The board shall meet as often as necessary to carry out the functions described herein, but shall meet at least quarterly, at a time and place convenient for its purposes. 
(c)	At its first meeting of each calendar year, the board shall select a chairperson and a vice-chairperson to serve in such offices for the duration of that calendar year. The chairperson shall preside over meetings of the board, and the vice-chairperson shall preside over meetings of the board if the chairperson is absent. If both the chairperson and vide-chairperson are absent, the board members shall choose one (1) of their members to preside over the meeting. 
(d)	The board may adopt such rules of procedure for its meetings as it may deem appropriate, and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. If the board adopts rules of procedure for its meetings, then those rules shall apply. If the board does not adopt rules of procedure, or if a question or issue is not addressed in such rules of procedure, then the board shall follow Robert's Rules of Order with regard to questions of procedure. 
(Ord. No. 16-304, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 2-193. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The board shall be an advisory committee with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)	On an annual basis, recommend a budget for Terra Square to the city commission; 
(2)	Oversee any lease agreements with the tenants in Terra Square; 
(3)	Develop short-term and long-term planning recommendations for Terra Square; 
(4)	Develop recommendations for rental rates, rental agreements, and policies for event space and work space at Terra Square; 
(5)	Develop recommendations for vendor rates, market contracts, and policies for the farmer's market at Terra Square; 
(6)	Make staffing recommendations for Terra Square; 
(7)	Undertake such special studies or projects as the city manager or the city commission may request; and 
(8)	Undertake such other duties and responsibilities related to Terra Square as directed, from time to time, by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 16-304, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Secs. 2-194-2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-200. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Act means the Michigan Emergency Management Act, Act 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severs damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made cause, including but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ices storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
    Disaster relief force means all agencies of county and municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees, and all other persons or groups of persons identified in the Ottawa County Emergency Operations Plan as having duties to perform or those called into duty or working at the direction of a party identified in the plan to perform a specific disaster or emergency related task during a local state of emergency. 
    District coordinator means the Michigan Department of State Police District Emergency Management Coordinator. The coordinator serves as liaison between local emergency management programs and the Michigan State Police, Emergency Management Division in all matters pertaining to the mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery of emergency and disaster situations. 
    Emergency management director or EMD means the person appointed to coordinate all matters pertaining to emergency management within the city. This person shall serve at the direction of the Ottawa County Emergency Management Director. 
    Emerency management program means a program established to coordinate mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities for all emergency or disaster situations within a given geographic area made up of one or several political subdivisions. Such a program has an appointed emergency management director and meets the program standards and requirements established by the department of state police, emergency management division. Because the city is under ten thousand (10,000) in population, it is part of the Ottawa County Emergency Management Program. 
    Emergency operations plan or emergency actions guidelines means the plan developed and maintained by Ottawa County and political subdivisions included in the emergency management program area for the purpose of responding to all emergency or disaster situations by identifying and organizing the disaster relief force. 
    Governor's state of disaster means an executive order or proclamation by the Governor of the State of Michigan that implements the disaster response and recovery aspects of the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the county or municipal programs affected. 
    Governor's state of emergency means an executive order or proclamation by the governor of the state that implements the emergency response and recovery aspects of the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the county or municipal programs affected. 
    Local state of emergency means a declaration by the mayor or city manager pursuant to the act. This declaration authorizes certain actions as described in this article. 
    Vital records means those records that contain information needed to continue the effective functioning of a government entity (jurisdiction, agency, department) and for the protection of the rights and interests of persons under emergency conditions in the event of an emergency or disaster situation. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-201. - Emergency management director; appointment. 
(a)	By the authority of this article there is hereby established an emergency management director for the city for the purpose of coordinating all mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities within the city. He/she shall receive administrative direction from the city manager and, according to the act, serve at the direction of the county emergency management director on matters pertaining to emergency management. He/she shall have the personal attributes and experience necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities of this position. 
(b)	The mayor or city manager, with the approval of the city commission, shall appoint a minimum of two (2) persons as successors to the position of the emergency management director who shall serve at their pleasure. The line of succession shall be provided to the county emergency management director. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-202. - Emergency management director; duties. 
    The emergency management director shall accomplish the following: 
(a)	Coordinate municipal emergency management activities with those of the county and adjacent jurisdictions. 
(b)	Coordinate all preparedness activities. 
(c)	Encourage departments/agencies within the city to identify and implement procedures to mitigate the effects of potential disasters. 
(d)	Identify city resources and forward information to the county emergency management director for inclusion in the county resource manual. 
(e)	Assist the county emergency management director in conducting training programs for city employees assigned emergency preparedness/response duties. 
(f)	Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements. 
(g)	Assist in the assessment of the nature and scope of the emergency or disaster and collect damage assessment information and forward to the county. 
(h)	Comply with the standards and requirements for the training and professional development of emergency management directors promulgated by the Michigan State Police, Emergency Management Division. 
(i)	Develop city standard operating procedures for disaster response that are consistent with the Ottawa County Emergency Operations Plan. 
(j)	Assist in educating the population as to actions necessary for the protection of life and property in an emergency or disaster. 
(k)	Coordinate the recruitment, appointment, and utilization of volunteer resources. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-203. - Mayor or city manager; powers and duties. 
(a)	On an annual basis, the mayor or city manager shall review the eligibility and performance of the emergency management director(s) and make recommendations to the city commission. 
(b)	When circumstances within the city indicate that the occurrence or threat of occurrence of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property from natural or human-made cause exists the mayor or city manager may declare a local state of emergency. Such a declaration shall be promptly filed with the county emergency management office, who shall forward it to the department of state police, emergency management division. This declaration shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except with the consent of the city commission. 
(c)	If the mayor or city manager invokes such power and authority, he/she shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the city commission for one (1) or more emergency meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Act to perform its normal legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and will report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the city commission unless specifically provided herein. 
(d)	The mayor or city manager may do one (1) or more of the following under a local state of emergency: 
(i)	Direct the emergency management director to implement the emergency action guidelines. 
(ii)	Direct the city disaster relief effort in accordance with the emergency action guidelines and city standard operating procedures. 
(iii)	Issue directives as to travel restrictions on local roads within the city. 
(iv)	Relieve city employees of normal duties and temporarily reassign them to other duties. 
(v)	Activate mutual aid agreements. 
(vi)	Notify the public and recommend in-place or evacuation or other protective measures. 
(vii)	Request a state of disaster or emergency declaration from the governor as described in section 2-204. 
(viii)	When obtaining normal approvals would result in further injury or damage, the mayor or city manager may, until the city commission convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the following: 
(1)	For a period of up to seven (7) days, send city employees and resources to the aid of other communities as provided by mutual aid agreements. 
(2)	For a period of up to seven (7) days, appropriate and expend funds from the disaster contingency fund created in section 2-207 up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(3)	For a period of up to seven (7) days, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposed. 
(4)	Employ temporary workers. 
(5)	Purchase and distribute supplies, materials, and equipment. 
(6)	Make, amend, or rescind ordinances or rules necessary for emergency management purposes, which supplement a rule, order or directive issued by the governor or a state agency. Such an ordinance or rule shall be temporary and, upon the governor's declaration that a state of disaster or state of emergency is terminated, shall no long be in effect. 
(e)	If a state of disaster or emergency is declared by the governor, assign and make available for duty the employees, property or equipment of the city within or without the physical limits of the city as ordered by the governor or the director of the department of state police in accordance with the act. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-204. - Governor declaration request. 
    If a disaster or emergency occurs that has not yet been declared to be a state of disaster or a state of emergency by the governor, and the mayor or city manager determines that the situation is beyond control of the city, the mayor or city manager may request the governor to declare that a state of disaster or state of emergency exists in the city. This shall be done by immediately contacting the county emergency management director. The Ottawa County Emergency Management Director shall immediately contact the district coordinator. The district coordinator, in conjunction with the emergency management director, shall assess the nature and scope of the disaster or emergency, and they shall recommend the state personnel, services and equipment that will be required for its prevention, mitigation or relief. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-205. - Volunteers; appointment and reimbursement. 
    Each city department, commission, board or other agency of municipal government is authorized to appoint volunteers to augment its personnel in time of emergency to implement emergency functions assigned in the Ottawa County Emergency Operations Plan. Such individuals are part of the disaster relief force and shall be subject to the rules and operational control set forth by the respective department, commission, board or agency through which the appointment was made, and shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-206. - Rights of disaster relief force. 
    In accordance with the act, personnel of the disaster relief force while on duty shall have the following rights: 
(a)	If they are employees of the city or other governmental agency regardless of where serving, they shall have the powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities and receive the compensation incidental to their employment. 
(b)	If they are not employees of the city or other governmental agency, they are entitled to the same rights and immunities as are provided for by the act. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-207. - Disaster contingency fund. 
    A disaster contingency fund is hereby created within the fund balance of not less than five (5) percent of the annual general operating budget. Money may be expended from the fund when a local state of emergency has been declared for the purpose of paying the disaster relief force, purchase of supplies and services, repair costs, or other needs required specifically for the mitigation of the effects of, or in response to, the emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-208. - Liability. 
(a)	As provided for in the act and this article, the city or the agents or representatives of the city shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage sustained by the disaster relief force. In addition, any member of the disaster relief force engaged in disaster relief activity shall not be liable in a civil action for damages resulting from an act of omission arising out of and in the course of the person's good faith rendering of that activity, unless the person's act or omission was the result of that person's gross negligence or willful misconduct. The right of a person to receive benefits or compensation to which he or she may otherwise be entitled to under the worker's compensation law, any pension law, or act of congress will not be effected as a result of said activity. 
(b)	As provided for in the act, any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons or for any other disaster related function during a declared local state of emergency or during an authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 2-209. - Annual review of article. 
    This article shall be reviewed annually by the city commission and revisions shall be made if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Editor's note- Provisions of Ord. No. 02-237, § 1, adopted July 9, 2002, designated as §§ 2-209 and 2-210 pertained to severability and repeal of conflicting ordinances. Those sections were omitted from codification as being covered by general provisions of the Code, see Ch. 1, and provisions designated as § 2-211, requiring an annual review of this article, were redesignated as § 2-209. 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-264, adopted Mar. 11, 2007, amended Ch. 3, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Ch. 3, §§ 3-1-3-6, pertained to alcoholic liquors and derived from Ord. No. 129, § 2, adopted Sept. 19, 1989. 
Cross reference- Disorderly intoxication, § 16-163. 
State Law reference- Liquor Control Act, MCL 436.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - LICENSES FOR SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-1. - Interpretation. 
    This chapter sets for the requirements for the issuance of licenses (as identified in section 3-3) for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises and off-premises and shall be interpreted in harmony with Act 58 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1998, as amended ("Act 58"), and the rules promulgated thereunder, and where the provisions of this chapter and Act 58 or the rules promulgated thereunder conflict, the provisions of Act 58 or the rules promulgated thereunder shall control. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 08-268, § 1, 6-10-08) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
    All terms and phrases used in this chapter and not otherwise defined herein shall be interpreted using the definitions provided in Act 58. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-3. - Application for license and payment of fee. 
(a)	Where Act 58 and the rules promulgated thereunder require the approval of the local legislative body for the issuance of a liquor license as identified by the classifications set forth in section 3-33 for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises and off-premises consumption or for the transfer, change of classification or other modification of such liquor license, the person requesting the issuance, transfer, change or modification of the license shall make an application for such action to the city commission by filing an application with the city clerk. 
(b)	Upon the filing of an application as provided for in this section, a fee as established from time to time by the city commission shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 08-268, § 2, 6-10-08) 
Sec. 3-4. - Un-issued licenses. 
    Notwithstanding the terms and conditions of this chapter, the city commission is under no obligation to issue any of the remaining un-issued licenses available at any given time. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-5. - Reservation of authority. 
    No applicant for a liquor license has the right to the issuance of such license to him, her, or it. The city commission reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if any, shall be entitled to the issuance of such license. Additionally, no applicant for a liquor license has the right to have such application processed and the city commission further reserves the right to take no action with respect to any application filed with the city commission. The city commission further reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants and to review the same when, in its discretion, it determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interest of the city at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-6. - Establishments open during prohibited hours of sale. 
    Any licensee licensed by the state liquor control commission to sell alcoholic beverages who shall remain open for business during the hours of any day when such sales are prohibited, shall at all times during such hours of prohibited sales, securely lock, remove from the retail sales area, or otherwise secure any alcoholic beverages so as to prevent their sale or possible sale during such hours. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-7. - Requirements for SDD and SDM licenses. 
    Premises issued a SDD and/or SDM license shall have no more than twenty (20) percent of its retail floor space devoted to the display and sale of alcoholic beverages, including, as applicable, beer, wine, spirits and mixed sprits. For purposes of this section, retail floor space shall only include that floor space in a premises that is devoted to the retail sale of goods and commodities and shall exclude that floor space in a premises used for office space, restrooms, closets, mechanical rooms, storage space, entrance and hallway access areas and any other area of the premises not devoted to retail sales. When determining whether the twenty-percent limitation is met, that floor space occupied by shelving, coolers, storage cartons or bins and displays containing alcoholic beverages or upon or within which alcoholic beverages are located shall be included. The applicant for such license shall, at the time of applying for the license, demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that such requirement will be met. 
(Ord. No. 08-269, § 1, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 08-271, § 1, 11-11-08) 
Sec. 3-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-308, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 2017, repealed § 3-8, which pertained to Sunday a.m. sales prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 10-278, § 1, 12-14-10. 
Secs. 3-9-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage includes any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquid or compound, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. 
    Applicant means any person who seeks approval from the city commission to sell alcoholic beverages. 
    Conference center means a building or any portion which, in the judgment of the city commission, is a bona fide conference center and meets the following requirements and such other requirements as the city commission deems appropriate: 
(1)	The conference center is used solely pursuant to a rental agreement signed in advance by a member of the organization, institution, entity or group desiring to use the conference center or any portion thereof; 
(2)	The conference center is rented predominantly for functions, such as meetings, conferences, lectures, seminars, live speaking engagements, weddings, receptions and banquets; 
(3)	The conference center has a full service kitchen used for preparing on premises and serving complete dinners and meals. 
(4)	The conference center contains a business office which maintains regular and normal business hours of operation; and 
(5)	The seating and/or table configuration in each room of the conference center is transitory. 
    Licensee means any person who has been granted a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city by the state liquor control commission. 
    Motel and hotel means buildings which, in the judgment of the city commission, are to be regularly used and kept open as such in a bona fide manner for the feeding and lodging of guests, where all who conduct themselves properly and are able and ready to pay for such services are received, if there be any accommodations for them. 
    Premises includes all of the areas used in carrying out the primary normal functions of the business of the licensee, except such areas as are specifically excluded in other provisions of this article. 
    Restaurant means a dining facility with a full service kitchen preparing on premises and serving complete dinners and meals, and shall not be construed to mean an establishment selling only sandwiches and/or other short order foods, such as, but not limited to, pizzas, hors d'oeuvres, pancakes and other specialty foods. 
    Sale includes the exchange, barter, traffic or furnishing of any alcoholic beverage. 
    Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with potable water and other substances in solution, and includes, among other things, wine containing an alcoholic content of over 16 percent by volume. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-22. - Authority of city commission. 
    This article shall not operate to limit any power or authority vested in the city or the city commission by virtue of any existing constitutional or statutory provision, and shall be considered to be only supplementary to the exercise or use of such vested authority. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-23. - Inspections. 
(a)	Authority. Inspections may be made of all premises licensed under this article in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city officials conducting such inspections may enter any licensed premises during any hours in which the premises are open to the public for the purpose of conducting an inspection, and shall be entitled to inspect all portions of the premises, including, but not limited to, those portions used for storage, or food or beverage preparation. The licensee, as well as every employee or agent of the licensee, shall give the city official conducting such inspection free access to all areas of the licensed premises. 
(b)	Basis. An inspection shall be conducted in the manner best calculated to secure compliance with this code. Inspections may be on any one or more of the following basis: 
(1)	When any inspecting city official has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of any city ordinance has occurred or is occurring. 
(2)	Periodically and at such times deemed reasonable and appropriate by the city. 
(c)	Administrative search warrant. If any person shall deny access to a city official performing an inspection pursuant to this section, the city shall be entitled to the issuance of an administrative search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The city attorney shall prepare the warrant application, which shall include the name of the business; the address of the building to be inspected; the nature of the inspection; and the facts attesting that access to the premises has been denied in contravention to this section. Upon a finding by the court that the warrant application is in proper form and in accord with this section, an administrative search warrant shall be issued forthwith. In the event of an emergency, or where probable cause exists to believe that evidence of criminal activity is present within the licensed premises, no such warrant shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-24. - Conduct on the premises. 
    No licensee or agent, servant or employee of a licensee shall: 
(1)	Either directly or indirectly sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic beverage, beer or wine to any person unless such person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years; nor shall any licensee, either directly or indirectly by himself or by any agent, servant or employee, at any time, sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the influence of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)	Refuse, fail or neglect to cooperate with any law enforcement officer in the performance of such officer's duties. 
(3)	Allow in or upon his licensed premises any improper conduct, disturbances, lewdness, indecent, profane or obscene language, songs, entertainment, literature, pictures or advertising materials; or cause to have printed or distributed any lewd, immoral, indecent or obscene literature, pictures or advertising materials. 
(4)	Suffer or allow in or upon the licensed premises the annoying or molesting of patrons or employees by other patrons or employees. 
(5)	Permit the licensed premises to be frequented by or become the meeting place, hangout or rendezvous for known prostitutes, vagrants or those who are known to engage in the use, sale or distribution of narcotics or any other illegal activity or business. 
(6)	Allow upon the licensed premises slot machines, punch or pull cards, dice games, card games, or any gambling or gambling devices, machines or apparatus, or gambling or gaming of any kind whatsoever. The presence of any such device, machine or apparatus upon the premises of any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(7)	Serve to or permit any patron to consume an alcoholic beverage unless such patron is either seated or standing at a bar or seated at a table or counter; provided, however, that the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted in hotels and motels in such areas as meeting rooms, patios, swimming pool areas and guest rooms. The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in such area as a hallway, lobby, driveway or parking lot is expressly prohibited. 
(8)	Permit the sale of alcoholic beverages upon any portion of the premises which shall have been leased, sold or the right to possession of which shall have been transferred to another person who is not licensed. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-25. - Menus. 
    Every licensee shall present, upon request, a plainly printed list or menu showing the various types and prices of alcoholic beverages which he, she or it offers for sale. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Secs. 3-26-3-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 3-31. - Applications; administrative review; determination; transferability; term; reservation. 
(a)	Applications. Applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be made in writing to the city clerk which may be of the same form(s) as that required by the liquor control commission. The city clerk shall not accept applications if no licenses are presently available. The application shall be made in the manner and on such forms as may be required by the state liquor control commission and city clerk and shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent of the applicant, if the applicant is other than an individual, and verified by oath or affidavit. The application shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)	The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual, or the name and address of the applicant in the case of a co-partnership, plus the names and addresses of each partner; or the name and address of the applicant in the case of a corporation, plus the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominee, the name and address of such person, plus the name and address of all managers and assistant managers. The social security number and driver's license number shall be provided for each individual, partner, officer, director and stockholder listed. 
(2)	In the case of an individual, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of his naturalization. 
(3)	The length of time the applicant has been in a business of that nature, or, in the case of a corporation or other entity, the date of its incorporation or formation. 
(4)	The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(5)	A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on a premises other than described in the application, and the disposition of such application. 
(6)	A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this code, or state or federal law. 
(7)	The application shall be accompanied by building and site plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control, as well as compliance with all other city ordinances. 
(b)	Administrative review. Upon receipt of the application, and if the type of license sought is available for issuance, the city clerk shall forthwith refer the application to the city manager, the law enforcement agency providing law enforcement services in the city, fire chief and other necessary departments. The city manager, the law enforcement agency providing law enforcement services in the city, fire chief and necessary departments shall each cause a thorough investigation to be made of all of the persons and the premises identified in the application, and shall prepare and forward a report detailing the results of that investigation to the city clerk. In cases where the applicant's premises are not completely built, the applicant shall also file a complete set of plans and specifications as may be necessary to enable the building inspector and fire inspector to determine whether or not such premises, when completed, will meet all the requirements of this chapter. The city clerk shall assemble the completed reports and forward them, along with the application, to the city commission. 
(c)	Determination. Upon receipt of the application and administrative investigation reports, the city commission shall make its determination with respect to the license application. The city commission's determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this article. Approval of the city commission shall require a majority vote. 
(d)	Transferability. The approval given an applicant is not transferable without the prior consent of the city commission. Once approved, the applicant may not transfer the location of the establishment for which approval was given without the prior consent of the city commission. 
(e)	Term. Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year, subject to annual renewal by the city commission upon continued compliance with the regulations of this article. Approval of a license shall be conditioned on commencement of any necessary remodeling or new construction for the use of the license within six (6) months of the action of the city commission or state liquor control commission approving such license, whichever occurs last. Failure to complete such remodeling or construction within one year may subject the license to revocation. 
(f)	Reservation. Nothing in this division shall be construed to require the city or city commission to issue or approve the issuance of a license that may be available. The decision of whether a license shall be issued shall be determined in the sole discretion of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-32. - Reasons for denial. 
    A license application shall be denied: 
(1)	For any person, partnership or corporation whose license under this division has been revoked for cause. 
(2)	For a partnership, unless each partner would qualify to obtain a license. 
(3)	For a corporation or other entity, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholder owning, in the aggregate, more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license under this division for any reason. 
(4)	For any person, partnership or corporation whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of the licensee. 
(5)	For a person who has been convicted in a court of law of a felony. 
(6)	For any person, partnership or corporation who has been convicted or found responsible for three or more liquor license violations by any administrative tribunal, such as the state liquor control commission, at any one licensed establishment. 
(7)	For a person who does not own or have an option to purchase the location for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued. 
(8)	For a location where there exists an uncorrected violation of the applicable construction, building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations or any violation of any ordinance or other applicable law, rule, regulation, order or directive. 
(9)	For a location where it is determined by a majority vote of the city commission that the premises does not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, or noise or nuisance control. 
(10)	Where the city commission determines, by majority vote, that the proposed location is inappropriate considering the desirability of establishing a location in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas; the attitude of adjacent residents and property owners; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of an inconsistent zoning classification; and accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-33. - Classifications. 
    Licenses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)	Brewpub means a license issued in conjunction with a class C, tavern, class A hotel, or class B hotel license that authorizes the person licensed with the class C, tavern, class A hotel, or class B hotel to manufacture and brew not more than five thousand (5,000) barrels of beer per calendar year and sell at those licensed premises the beer produced for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises in the manner provided for in Act 58. 
(2)	Class A hotel license means a license to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises only, which provides for the rental of, and maintains the availability for rental of, not less than twenty-five (25) bedrooms. 
(3)	Class B hotel license means a license to sell beer, wine, mixed spirit drink and spirits for consumption on the premises only, which provides for the rental of, and maintains the availability for rental of, not less than twenty-five (25) bedrooms. 
(4)	Class C license which shall mean any place, other than a hotel or motel, licensed to sell beer, wine and spirits at retail for consumption on the premises. 
(5)	Class G-1 license means license to sell at retail beer, wine, mixed spirit drink, and spirits for consumption on the premises at a golf course having at least 18 holes that measure at least five thousand (5,000) yards and which license is issued only to a facility which permits member access by means of payments that include annual paid membership fees. 
(6)	Class G-2 license means license to sell at retail beer and wine for consumption on the premises at a golf course having at least eighteen (18) holes that measure at least five thousand (5,000) yards and which license is issued only to a facility which permits member access by means of payments that include annual paid membership fees. 
(7)	Club means a nonprofit association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for the promotion of some common purpose, the object of which is owning, hiring, or leasing a building, or space in a building, of an extent and character as in the judgment of the state liquor control commission may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests, but does not include an association organized for a commercial or business purpose. 
(8)	SDD license means a license to an established business to distribute spirits and mixed spirit drink in the original package for consumption off the licensed premises. 
(9)	SDM license means a license to a merchant to sell beer or wine, or both, at retail for consumption off the licensed premises. 
(10)	Tavern license which shall mean any place, other than a hotel or motel, licensed to sell beer and wine at retail for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08, Ord. No. 08-268, § 3, 6-10-08) 
Sec. 3-34. - Renewal and revocation. 
(a)	Authority of city commission. The city commission may, by resolution, recommend to the state liquor control commission the non-renewal or revocation of an existing license governed by this division upon its determination, based upon evidence presented at a public hearing, that the licensee has violated any standard or prohibition contained within this article. 
(b)	Hearing notice; statement of findings. 
(1)	Before filing an objection to a renewal or a request for revocation of a license with the state liquor control commission, the city commission shall hold a public hearing. The city clerk shall cause a notice of hearing to be sent to the license holder, by first-class mail, mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, which notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.	A description of the proposed action. 
b.	The reasons for the proposed action. 
c.	The date, time and place of the hearing. 
d.	A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony. 
(2)	Following the hearing, the city commission may file with the state liquor control commission a written statement of its findings and determination. The city commission shall cause a copy of any such statement to be sent to the license holder by first-class mail. 
(c)	Standards for recommendations. The city commission may recommend to the state liquor control commission that a license not be renewed or that a license be revoked upon its determination, based upon evidence presented at a public hearing, that any one or more of the following has been engaged in or has been permitted to occur on the licensed premises: 
(1)	A violation of any of the restrictions on licenses provide in this division. 
(2)	Maintenance of a public nuisance. 
(3)	The licensee has provided false, fraudulent or misleading information in an original license application or in an application for a license renewal. 
(4)	The licensee has permitted the consumption of spirits on the premises during a period in which the licensee is not licensed to sell or allow the consumption of spirits. 
(5)	The licensee has permitted dancing or live entertainment, open to the public, with or without an admission charge, without first obtaining a valid dance or entertainment permit. 
(6)	The licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, has, on any portion of the licensed premises, sold, given or delivered an alcoholic beverage to any person who has not attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(7)	The licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, has, on any portion of the licensed premises, sold, given or delivered an alcoholic beverage to any person who is visibly intoxicated because of the consumption of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance. 
(8)	Any disorderly conduct, or any conduct or activity which disturbs the peace, tranquility and good order of the surrounding neighborhood, within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(9)	Any incident of prostitution or solicitation for prostitution within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(10)	Any incident of larceny or fraud involving the licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(11)	Any incident of gambling activity, including the placing of a gambling apparatus or gambling paraphernalia within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. The presence of any such apparatus or paraphernalia upon the premises of any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(12)	Any unlawful possession or use of any substance regulated by the Michigan Controlled Substance Act within or upon any portion of the premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(13)	The licensee has utilized interior lighting which is a minimum of one footcandle at tabletop level. 
(14)	Any violation of any other provision of this code, or any violation of any statute or governmental code, regulation, standard or directive, or any violation of any order of any court, commission or tribunal having jurisdiction of the premises of the licensee. 
(15)	Any nonpayment or repeated delinquent payment of any local personal property or real property tax or special assessment. 
(16)	Any nonpayment or repeated delinquent payment of any civil or criminal fine, or any city administered utility bill or administrative service fee provided by or through the city. 
(17)	Any failure by the licensee to obtain, or maintain as current, any license or permit required by the city or any unit of federal, state, county or city government. 
(18)	Any failure by the licensee to keep in good repair or maintain any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles, in full compliance with any law or standard promulgated by the city or any unit of federal, state or county government. 
(19)	Any failure by the licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to cooperate with any federal, state, county or city official acting in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(20)	Any failure by the licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee, to cooperate with any law enforcement officer in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Secs. 3-35-3-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES 

Sec. 3-41. - Generally. 
(a)	Every establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be maintained in good safe repair. Any establishment which is structurally unsafe or is not provided with adequate ingress and egress or which constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life or constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance shall not be approved as a licensed establishment. 
(b)	All licensees shall be governed by, and shall observe all regulations pertaining to, sanitation and health as promulgated by the city and/or the county. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 3-42. - Seating capacity. 
(a)	All hotels and/or motels selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises under a "class A" or "class B" license shall be required to have twenty-five (25) or more guest rooms and a restaurant having dining facilities to seat not less than seventy-five (75) persons, and if additional counter or bar space is provided for the dispensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so as not to accommodate more than twenty (20) percent of the seating capacity of the entire dining room in which the counter or bar is located. 
(b)	All establishments which are not part of a hotel, motel or conference center operation selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall have a restaurant with dining facilities to seat not less than twenty-five (25) persons, and if a bar or counter space is provided for the dispensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, such bar or counter space will occupy not more than twenty (20) percent of the seating capacity of the dining room. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 08-268, § 4, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 16-305, § 1, 11-15-16) 
Sec. 3-43. - Illumination. 
    The minimum intensity of illumination prevailing in all parts of licensed establishments providing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at tabletop level, shall be one footcandle. 
(Ord. No. 08-264, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate amusements, § 2.3(15). 
State Law reference- Offenses relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq.; offenses concurring coin-operated devices, MCL 752.811. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Mechanical amusements device is a contrivance, machine or appliance which upon the insertion of a coin or slug operates or may be operated as a game, contest or amusement. 
    Operator includes (in addition to those who would otherwise be included therein) any person conducting any event, amusement or exhibition hereinafter mentioned or profiting directly or indirectly therefrom or any person conducting or profiting directly or indirectly from any mechanical or other amusement device; and such term shall also include any person permitting any such event, exhibition or amusement device to be conducted or operated on premises owned, rented or controlled by such person whether the person is devoted to, or such property is used for, commercial, social or other purposes. 
    Other amusement device means any contrivance, other than a mechanical amusement device or an event, or amusement specifically designated herein which is operated or may be operated or conducted as a game. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 10-28-58) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Conduct on premises. 
(a)	No operator shall use or permit to be used any event, device, or amusement regulated in this chapter for the purpose of gambling, or as a lottery, or as a gift enterprise, nor permit any bet or wager to be laid in connection with or on the outcome of any game. No operator shall permit disorderly or unlawful conduct on the premises to which the license shall attach. 
(b)	Quiet and good order shall be maintained upon the premises and adjacent street, and no person shall be permitted to loiter or stand in or about the doorway in front of the premises. 
(c)	No persons under the influence of alcoholic liquors shall be permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on the premises. 
(d)	No person shall play or permit the playing of cards, or throw or permit the throwing of dice, in any billiard room, pool room or bowling alley in the city. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 8, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-3. - Closing hours. 
    Operators shall not permit the use of amusement facilities from midnight until 6:00 a.m.; provided, that no billiard parlor pool room, bowling alley or other place for playing at public games shall be open to the public from midnight Saturday night until 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 9, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-4. - Participation or attendance by minors. 
(a)	No operator shall permit participation or attendance at the licensed premises of any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years except as otherwise specifically provided herein; or except with the written consent or when accompanied by a parent of the minors or his guardian. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the operator, manager, or any employee of any theater, or moving picture theater, or show or other place of amusement, or for the parent or guardian, directly or indirectly, to permit any child of the age of twelve (12) years, or under, to remain in any theater, moving picture show, or other place of amusement within the city after the hours of 7:30 p.m. or to permit any child over the age of twelve (12) years and under the age of sixteen (16) years to remain in any theater, moving picture show, or other place of amusement within the city after the hours of 10:30 p.m.; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays a child over the age of twelve (12) years and under the age of sixteen (16) years may remain in any theater or moving picture show, in the city until midnight. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent, guardian, or an adult in whose care a parent or guardian has placed a child, to purchase an admission ticket for a child, or to assist, directly or indirectly, in any way whatsoever, any child to gain admittance into any theater, moving picture theater or show, or other place of amusement, where such admittance is unlawful under the terms of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for the operator, manager, or employee of any theater, moving picture theater or show, or other place of amusement, directly or indirectly, by himself, or another, to employ, engage or otherwise permit employment, engagement or use any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years, as an employee, entertainer, or in any other capacity, in or about the premises; provided, however, that so-called traveling road shows may engage or employ a minor under the age of sixteen (16) years, provided such employment or engagement is approved by the state department of labor and provided that minors under sixteen (16) years pursuing apprenticeship courses as part of their training may be employed when such employment has the approval of the state labor department and a permit issued by the board of education covering such employment in the city. 
(e)	In premises or establishments where the licensed amusement or other device is conducted in connection with a business to which minors may properly go for legitimate purposes unrelated to the licensed game, the prohibition attendance contained herein shall not apply so long as the minor shall actually be on the premises for such legitimate purpose and shall not in any manner participate in the game as a player or bystander. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 10, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-5. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not extend or apply to any exhibition or entertainment by the pupils of any private or public school; or to any resident musical society; or to any concert, vocal or instrumental, or to any entertainment, fair, bazaar, festival, or lecture conducted by or for the benefit of any church, municipality, school, or local public benevolent organization; or to any game of football, baseball, or other sport conducted by the schools or municipality, or as a community project not for the purpose of profit; or to any exhibition, race, contest or military exhibition given or managed by resident associations, club, or company not for the purpose of profit. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 2, 10-28-58) 
Secs. 4-6-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-21. - Required. 
    Any operator of a theater, moving picture show, public billiard hall, public bowling alley, dance hall or other place of public amusement wherein games are played or permitted; and any operator or exhibitor of a circus, menagerie, or any natural or artificial curiosity; or of any concert, vocal or instrumental, or show of any kind which an admission fee is charged; or any operator of any mechanical or other amusement device, shall obtain a license from the city commission before operating or conducting any of the events, devices or amusements mentioned above. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 2, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-22. - Application. 
    Applications for residential licenses under this article shall be addressed to the city commission on a form provided by the city clerk. Such form shall contain all information necessary for the enforcement of this chapter, including the true full name, correct residential post office address, and record of felony and misdemeanor convictions, if any, of the operators (if a partnership, of all the partners; if a corporation, of all the current officers, directors, and principal stockholders) of other persons having any financial interest in the business or undertaking, the assumed name or names, designation, or style, if any under which the business is, or is to be owned, conducted or transacted. The application shall also give the place or places where the business is, or is to be owned, conducted or transacted, and the number of devices, if any, to be there established, maintained or operated. The application shall contain an agreement upon the part of the applicant that he will accept the license, if granted, upon the condition that it may be suspended or revoked in accordance with this article; that police officers and inspection officials of the city shall upon proper identification, have the right to enter upon the licensed premises at all reasonable times for the performance of their official duties, and without being molested, hindered or interfered with by any person. Such application shall be signed by the applicant (if a partnership, by one of the partners; if a corporation, by one duly authorized) under oath administered by the city clerk; or some duly authorized person on his behalf. All applications when properly made and sworn to shall be filed with the city clerk, and he shall promptly refer the same to the chief of police who shall submit his written report and recommendation to the city commission within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 3, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-23. - Separate license for each business. 
    Separate license shall be secured for each theater, moving picture house, public billiard parlor, public poolroom, public bowling alley, amusement device and other amusements of places of amusement enumerated in this chapter specifically or included by implication which are operated in the city and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to carry on, conduct or transact the business at any place other than the one named in the license. 
(Ord. No. 9, §§ 3, 6(f), 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-24. - Issuance. 
    If the city commission is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to carry on the business; that the granting of the license will not be detrimental to the interest of the public, or in violation of any statute of the state, or in violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city, that the proposed use will not be in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city; that all of the provisions of this chapter and the applicable provisions of any public act of the state have been complied with; that the building in which it is proposed to conduct the business is in a clean and sanitary condition, contains such number of toilet facilities for males and females as is required by law; complies with the building, plumbing and electrical codes of the state, and the city, contains such safeguards against fire as are provided by law; that the applicant is of the age of eighteen (18) years and upwards; has not been convicted of any offense related to this business, it shall authorize the issuance of the respective license applied for, after the applicant has paid to the city clerk the fee or fees hereinafter fixed. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 4, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-25. - Fees. 
    License fees under this article shall be as prescribed by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 5, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-26. - Proration, rebate. 
    The fees prescribed shall not prorated when actually used for a period less than the maximum permitted nor shall any rebates be allowed except where a license is rejected in which event the entire sum advanced for payment of the license fee shall be returned after deducting a processing charge as prescribed by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 6(e), 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-27. - Renewal. 
    Annual licensees shall make application for renewal between November first and November thirtieth of each year. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 6(b), 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-220, § 2, adopted June 13, 2000, repealed § 4-28, Delinquency fee, derived from Ord. No. 9, § 6(d), adopted Oct. 28, 1958. 
Sec. 4-29. - Display. 
    The city clerk shall furnish an appropriate certificate of license which shall be publicly and conspicuously displayed by the operator and in connection with mechanical or other amusement devices the city shall furnish a serially numbered sticker which shall be affixed in a conspicuous place on the amusement machine or device and which shall bear the number of the amusement machine or device for which the license was granted. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 7, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 4-30. - Revocation; appeal. 
    Whenever upon the written complaint of the inspector or upon its own motion the city commission shall find that any licensee under this chapter is in violation; or has falsified his application and that the licensee shall have been repeatedly in violation of this chapter or is unable or unwillingly to comply with the terms hereof, the city commission shall have authority and it is hereby empowered to serve notice of revocation of license upon the licensee who shall immediately cease operation. If the licensee shall deem himself aggrieved by the action of the city commission, he may within five (5) days after service of notice request a hearing before the city commission by filing with the city clerk a claim for hearing. At the next meeting of the city commission, if within ten (10) days of the filing of the claim otherwise, at a special meeting called for that purpose within seven (7) days from the filing of the claim, the city commission shall hear the claim either before the entire city commission or a special committee appointed for that purpose. After the hearing if the city commission is satisfied that the licensee has repeatedly violated any of the provisions of this chapter or that the licensee is unable or unwilling to comply with the provisions thereof then the license shall be revoked or suspended as the commission shall decide. The action of the city commission shall be final in the absence of fraud or bad faith. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 11, 10-28-58) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION 

Sec. 4-31. - Registration required. 
    No person, corporation or entity, whether commercial or noncommercial in nature (hereafter referred to as "person"), shall operate or conduct a trade, business, profession or occupation (excluding a home occupation as defined in section 3-2 of the City Zoning Ordinance except a home occupation requiring a special use permit) within the city without first registering and re-registering with the city as provided herein; provided, however, that this registration requirement shall not apply to an employee or contractor of a person otherwise registered in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-32. - Other licenses and permits required. 
    The registration by any person operating, maintaining or otherwise carrying on or engaging in a trade, business, profession or occupation required herein to be registered shall not relieve the person so registered from the necessity of securing such other licenses or permits as may be required by this Code, except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-33. - State licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the State of Michigan to engage in the operation of, conduct of or carrying on of, any trade, business, profession or occupation shall not exempt such person from the necessity of registering with the city if such a registration is required herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-34. - Registration. 
    Unless otherwise provided for by law, every person required to register as provided for herein shall complete the registration form available from the city clerk. The registration form shall require such information as called for herein. Upon receipt of the completed registration form, the city clerk shall forward it to the various city departments to review and determine whether the registrant is in compliance with the requirements of this article. The registrant shall state under oath or affirmation that the information provided is true. No person shall make false statement or false representation on the registration form. If the registrant is in compliance with the requirements of this article, the city clerk shall issue a registration certificate. The business registration certificate shall be displayed in the business entry or lobby area. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-35. - Agreement by registrant. 
    By registering with the city the registrant agrees: 
(a)	To permit inspection of the premises and/or activity at reasonable times upon reasonable notice by any properly identified officer, employee or agent of the city for the purpose of determining the accuracy or continued accuracy of the information contained on the registration form. 
(b)	To keep aware of and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations during the term of the registration. 
    Each registrant shall sign a statement indicating that he or she has read the foregoing and agrees with its provision. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-36. - Certification required. 
    Upon the completion of a registration form, the following city officials or employees or their respective agent shall certify, based upon such inspection or investigation as may be deemed appropriate, that the requirements following the official's or employee's title have been complied with by the registrant. 
(a)	Fire chief: That the provisions of the fire code and all other applicable regulations and requirements of the city and the State of Michigan relative to fire safety have been complied with and that specifically the registrant has identified hazardous chemicals located at the premises as required by the International Fire Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)	Police chief: That public safety standards have been complied with. 
(c)	Building official: That the building requirements of this Code and of the State of Michigan have been complied with. 
(d)	Zoning official: That the zoning and other land use provisions of this Code will permit the registered activity at its proposed location. 
    To facilitate the city's officers and employees in their review, the following information shall be provided on the registration form. 
(a)	Square footage of all principal and accessory buildings; 
(b)	Nature of the business; 
(c)	Proposed hours of operation for the business; 
(d)	Nature of materials to be used on the premises; 
(e)	Presence of an indoor sprinkling system; 
(f)	Presence of any security, alarm or sensory lighting system; 
(g)	Identification of hazardous chemicals as defined in the International Fire Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-37. - Exemption. 
    The registration provisions of this article shall not apply to the governments of the United States, the State of Michigan, the County of Ottawa or the city or to any public board of education located wholly or partially within the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-38. - Exemption from fee. 
    No registration fee shall be required for any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such person shall, however, comply with all other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-39. - Fees. 
    Fees, if any, required by this article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the registration form is returned to the city clerk. Except as otherwise provided for by law or in this article, fees required shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Once paid, no fees shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-40. - Registration review. 
    It shall be the responsibility of all persons engaging in any trade, business, profession or occupation required to be registered with the city to do so prior to engaging in the trade, business, profession or occupation. Any existing trade, business, profession or occupation required to be registered shall do so within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, city officers, employees or agents may, from time to time, contact the registrant to verify the continued accuracy of the information contained in the registration form. The registrant shall cooperate with such persons in the verification of this information. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-41. - Re-registration. 
    Once registered a registrant shall re-register every two (2) years. It shall be the responsibility of the registrant to fully re-register with the city before expiration of the current registration period as indicated on the registration certificate. To assist with re-registration, the city clerk may send a re-registration form and an invoice covering any applicable fee to the registrant prior to the end of the current registration period. In addition, any changes in ownership, address or structural remodeling shall require the registrant to re-register. Upon receipt of the completed re-registration form and the appropriate fee, if any, and compliance with the requirements of this article, the city shall issue a registration certificate for the next registration period. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-42. - No transfer or assignment of registration. 
    In addition to any other penalties or actions permitted or authorized by this Code, any transfer or assignment of a registration or any attempted transfer or assignment shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Secs. 4-43-4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATION 

Sec. 4-51. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the following word shall have the indicated meaning: 
    Solicitor means any individual(s) traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares and merchandise, personal property for current or future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed currently or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such individual is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
(Ord. No. 12-287, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 4-52. - Registration. 
    No person shall engage in the business of being a solicitor without first having obtained a license. Persons desiring a license as provided for in this article shall file an application on a form prescribed or provided by the city clerk. Prior to the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this article, a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city commission shall be paid. A license shall cover a period of one (1) year from the time the license is granted for each person. Applications for permits in the form prescribed by the city clerk shall be completed in their entirety and submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the commencement of the proposed business of being a solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 12-287, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 4-53. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article, but shall be subject to the other provisions hereof: 
(1)	Any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this article by virtue of State of Michigan or federal law. 
(2)	Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, when engaged in the business of being a solicitor under the direct supervision of any school or recognized charitable organization or religious organization. 
(3)	Any person who is the duly authorized representative or agent of any church, charitable or labor organization, education or fraternal organization, or of any political group seeking funds or membership or contacting members or electors. 
(4)	Any person engaging in business solely at a city-recognized market or event, provided that all transactions are conducted solely within the confines of that city-recognized market or event and that the rules and regulations of the city-recognized market or event are observed. 
(Ord. No. 12-287, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 4-54. - Rules and procedures. 
(a)	No person, whether licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article or not, shall stop or remain in any one (1) location in any street, alley or public place within the city to conduct business as a solicitor for longer than is necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to engage in a transaction. 
(b)	No solicitor shall solicit at any dwelling or residence except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, without an appointment. 
(c)	No solicitor, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall barter, sell, or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise, or actively solicit funds on property against the wish or desire of the property owner, tenant, or occupant of such property, or group of properties as expressed through a "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign, a sign displaying words of similar import, or any other means. 
(d)	Except as permitted by the city, it shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any person on the licensee's behalf, to shout, cry, whistle, blow a horn, ring a bell, use or employ any flashing lights on any vehicle, or any other device, or use any sound device including loud speakers or sound amplifiers for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, merchandise, or services which the licensee proposes to sell. 
(Ord. No. 12-287, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 4-55. - Enforcement. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of any law enforcement officer to require any person seen soliciting who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to show proof of a license issued by the city clerk, and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating them. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of any law enforcement officer to examine all persons in their territories subject to the provisions of this article to verify compliance with this article and to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)	When the conduct of any solicitor is so adversarial to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance, any law enforcement officer shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of soliciting. 
(d)	The city clerk is authorized to revoke any license issued under this article for violation of the provisions of this article, upon written notice to the licensee at the address on the application for the permit. The licensee may reapply for a license one (1) year after the license was revoked. 
(Ord. No. 12-287, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 4-56. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Unless otherwise specified in this article, a person who violates a provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to payment of a civil fine as provided chapter 25. 
(b)	In addition to the remedies and penalties otherwise provided in this article, the city may seek temporary and permanent equitable relief to abate and enjoin violations of this article and shall have all other remedies provided by law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 12-287, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 6 of Ord. No. 153, adopted November 10, 1992, repealed Ord. No. 68, §§ 1-6, adopted November 9, 1977, from which Ch. 5, §§ 5-1-5-6, as amended by Ord. No. 94, § 1, adopted April 13, 1982, derived. Section 5-7 which pertained to swine and derived from Ord. No. 8, § 7, adopted October 28, 1958, has been deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 153. Sections 1-4 of Ord. No. 153 have been included herein as a new Ch. 5 to read as herein set out at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Carcasses of animals or fowl deemed a nuisance, § 15-2(11). 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq. 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Animal means any living organism excluding plants, bacterium and humans. All animals whether masculine or feminine shall be referred to in the neuter gender. 
    Cat means a small, soft furred domestic animal of the feline family. This does not include lions, tigers, bobcats, cheetahs, panthers, jaguars, leopards, lynxes, pumas, cougars, and mountain lions, which animals shall be considered wild or exotic for purposes of this chapter. 
    Dog means a domestic animal of the canine family. This does not include wolves, foxes or jackals, which animals shall be considered wild or exotic for purposes of this chapter. 
    Domestic animal means any animal that has traditionally lived under the dependency and control of humans and been kept as a tame pet. 
    Nuisance means: 
(1)	An animal which urinates or defecates on any public or private property without the permission of the owner of such property, other than property of its owner or a custodian of such animal. If the owner of the animal immediately removes all results of such activity by the animal, the nuisance shall be considered abated. 
(2)	An animal or bird which makes or causes unreasonably loud noises under the circumstances as defined in section 16-49(7) of this Code. 
(3)	An animal which destroys property, public or private, other than property of its owner. 
(4)	An animal which travels at large beyond the property of its owner or trespasses upon the property of one other than its owner. 
    Vicious animal means either of the following: 
(1)	Any animal which attacks, causes injury or threatens the safety of a human or another animal without provocation. An animal shall not be deemed to act without provocation if it acts against a person who is committing a trespass or criminal offense on the property of the animal's owner or custodian or if it acts in reaction to a person who or animal which attacked, teased, tormented, abused or assaulted it. Dogs duly assisting police in the line of duty shall not be considered vicious. 
(2)	Any animal which is owned or harbored for the purpose of fighting or which is trained for fighting. 
    Wild animal means: 
(1)	Any animal which has not traditionally lived under the dependency and control of humans or been kept as a tame pet; or 
(2)	Any animal which is of a nature or disposition or which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristic, could constitute a danger to property or person. 
    If an animal is a mixture of a wild animal and a domestic animal it shall be considered wild for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 96-189, § 1, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 06-257, § 1, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-2. - Ownership and custody of animals. 
(a)	Dogs. No person shall own, possess, harbor, shelter, keep, or have custody of more than two (2) dogs over the age of six (6) months on the same premises within the city, except in kennels, veterinary hospitals, clinics, pet shops, temporary police animal holding facilities or similarly used properties in properly zoned districts. 
(b)	Cats. No person shall own, posses, harbor, shelter, keep or have custody of more than three (3) cats over the age of six (6) months on the same premises within the city, except in kennels, veterinary hospitals, clinic, pet shops or similarly used properties in properly zoned districts. 
(c)	Prohibited animals. Within the city no person shall own, possess, harbor, shelter, keep or have custody of: 
(1)	Any swine; 
(2)	Any wild animal; 
(3)	Any vicious animal; or 
(4)	Any animal that has become a nuisance. 
(d)	Possession of existing wild animals. Any person who, as of the effective date of this chapter ("effective date"), owns and possesses a wild animal, so long as that animal is not otherwise prohibited, shall be excluded from the prohibition of subsection (c), only as to such existing animal, and subject to the limitations that the person must be in compliance with all laws, ordinances and other legal regulations with respect to the animal existing on the effective date. Upon the death, sale or other transfer of the exempted animal, this exception shall terminate. An owner bears the burden of proving that this exemption applies. An owner of an exempted animal must comply with these regulations: 
(1)	The animal must be contained in a pen, container or structure sufficient to keep the animal secure so that the animal may not wander or travel on its own. 
(2)	Transportation of or travel by the animal must be done under the control of an adult, and performed in such a manner that the animal cannot wander or travel on its own without restraint. 
(3)	Any offspring of the animal shall be removed completely from the city upon obtaining the age of three (3) months. 
(4)	All property where the animal is kept, harbored or possessed shall be insured with public liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage by such an animal in an amount no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in coverage. Proof of such insurance shall be submitted to the city upon demand of a city representative. 
(5)	Any animal which is determined by a Judge of competent authority to fall within the definition of a vicious animal under this chapter or under state law, shall loose the exemption and shall immediately be removed from the city. 
(e)	Leash. No person shall permit an animal to go outside its kennel, pen or other premises unless such animal is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four (4) feet in length. 
(f)	Removal of waste. Owners and custodians of animals shall be responsible for immediately removing animal waste from private property (other than the property of the owner or custodian) and public property. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 2, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 06-257, §§ 2, 3, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-3. - Care and custody of animals. 
(a)	Licensing and identification. People owning, possessing, harboring, sheltering, keeping or having custody of any animal shall comply with all licensing requirements of the State of Michigan or other governmental authority. Furthermore, all animals must, at all times, wear current licensing or identification tags or other documentation of current licensing or identification whenever the animal leaves its owner's or custodian's properly. If an animal is confiscated for failure to wear or to have current licensing or identification, it will be released only to the owner or custodian and will not be released until the owner or custodian procures or proves such licensing pursuant to applicable law or regulation or other documentation of ownership. Identification tags or other identification documentation shall at a minimum contain the name, address and telephone number of the owner or the custodian of the animal. 
(b)	Animal bites. Any person bitten by an animal or any owner or custodian of an animal having knowledge of such bite, shall immediately report the bite to the city police. The police shall contact the owner or custodian of the animal in question to check for symptoms of rabies. If the owner or custodian has reason to believe that the animal is infected with rabies, that person shall report this to the police department immediately. 
(c)	Health of animals. 
(1)	In general. People owning, possessing, harboring, sheltering, keeping or having custody of any animal shall take all reasonable steps to have the animal treated for any sickness, disease, injury or other health problem of the animal. If not able to provide for treatment of an animal, the owner must contact the humane society or other appropriate governmental agency and make arrangements for other care or for destruction of the animal. 
(2)	Injuries to animals. Any person who, as an operator of a motor vehicle or otherwise, strikes an animal, shall: 
a.	Stop and render assistance to that animal if it is not dangerous to do so; and 
b.	Immediately report the incident to the owner or, if the owner cannot be ascertained, to the city police or other appropriate governmental agency. 
(d)	Cruelty to animals. No person shall cruelly treat any animal within the city in any way, including, without limitation, inhumanly beating, underfeeding, overlading, overworking, tormenting, abandoning, killing, or otherwise abusing. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 3, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 06-257, § 4, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)	Penalties. Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(b)	Nuisance per se. Any continuing violation or a repeated violation of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance per se and may be abated by an action separately or in addition to criminal proceedings. 
(c)	Complaints. Upon a sworn complaint that an animal is a prohibited animal as provided in this chapter, or that an animal or its owner or custodian are in violation of this chapter, the city may commence proceedings to prosecute the appropriate party for commission of a misdemeanor and/or to abate the nuisance, as applicable, and to otherwise proceed under applicable law to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The owner of the animal in question is responsible for all costs incurred by the city to remove or abate the nuisance. 
(d)	Immediate seizure. Illegally possessed animals, vicious animals and animals that have become nuisances or threats to the health and safety of person or property in the city are subject to immediate seizure and retention by the city police or other appropriate law enforcement or animal control agency. Within forty-eight (48) hours after seizure, the city shall provide to owner a notice that the impound occurred. The seized animal shall be held at an appropriate facility at owner's expense until the animal is destroyed or removed from the city either by agreement of the owner and the city or by order of court. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 4, 11-10-92) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fences, Ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 11; flood damage prevention, Ch. 12; review of proposed building sites for flood damage prevention, § 12-6; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 14; storage of building materials on property deemed a nuisance, § 15-2(2); Ch. 17; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-16. - Adoption of the Michigan Building Code. 
    Pursuant to Act 245 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1999, the city hereby adopts the Michigan Building Code and the city is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of such code within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 136, § 1, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 01-232, § 1, 9-10-2001) 
Editor's note- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k) MSA 5.2073(k). 
Secs. 6-17-6-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-232, § 4, adopted Sept. 10, 2001, repealed §§ 6-17, 6-18 which pertained to references in and amendments to the BOCA National Building Code, derived from Ord. No. 111, §§ 2, 3, adopted Apr. 8, 1986; and Ord. No. 136, §§ 2, 3, adopted Nov. 13, 1990. Secs. 6-18-6-30 were nonsubstantive. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Licensed contractors, regulations of wiring, MCL 338.881 et seq., MSA 18.204(1) et seq. 

Sec. 6-31. - Adoption of the Michigan Electrical Code. 
    Pursuant to Act 245 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1999, the city hereby adopts the Michigan Electrical Code and the city is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of such code within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 1, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 149, § 1, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 00-218, § 1, 3-14-2000) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Sec. 6-32. - Fees. 
    The fees for electrical inspections shall be those established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 2, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 149, § 2, 3-10-92) 
Sec. 6-33. - Board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall serve as the board of appeals for the electrical code. 
Sec. 6-34. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the electrical code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair electrical equipment or systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the electrical official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of such code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 149, § 3, 3-10-92) 
Secs. 6-35-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Water supply system, § 23-16 et seq., sewage disposal service, § 23-76 et seq., stormwater control, § 23-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Regulation of plumbing and licensing of plumbers, MCL 338.901 et seq., MSA 14.451 et seq. 

Sec. 6-51. - Adoption of Michigan Plumbing Code. 
    Pursuant to Act 245 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1999, the city hereby adopts the Michigan Plumbing Code and the city is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of such code within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. 01-232, § 2, 9-10-2001) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Sec. 6-52. - Fees. 
    The fees for plumbing inspections and permits shall be those established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
Sec. 6-53. - Board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall serve as the board of appeals for the plumbing code. 
Secs. 6-54-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-71. - Adoption of Michigan Mechanical Code. 
    Pursuant to Act 245 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1999, the city hereby adopts the Michigan Mechanical Code and the city is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of such code within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 1, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 137, § 1, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 01-232, § 3, 9-10-2001) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Sec. 6-72. - Fees. 
    The fees for mechanical inspection and the annual boiler inspection fee shall be those established from time to time by resolution of the city. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 137, § 3, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 01-232, §§ 4, 5, 9-10-2001) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-232, § 4, adopted Sept. 10, 2001, repealed former § 6-72, enforcing agencies, derived from Ord. No. 109, § 2, adopted Mar. 11, 1986; and Ord. No. 137, § 2, adopted Nov. 13, 1990. Sec. 5 of Ord. No. 01-232 renumbered former §§ 6-73-6-75 as §§ 6-72-6-74. 
Sec. 6-73. - Board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall serve as the board of appeals for the mechanical code. 
(Ord. No. 01-232, § 5, 9-10-2001) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 6-72. 
Sec. 6-74. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the mechanical official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 4, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 137, § 4, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 01-232, § 5, 9-10-2001) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 6-72. 
Secs. 6-75-6-90. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 6-72. 
ARTICLE VI. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS AND SATELLITE RECEIVING STATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Telecommunications, Ch. 21.5. 

Sec. 6-91. - Conditions, limitations and restrictions. 
    Satellite dish antennas and satellite receiving stations now or hereafter located in the city are and shall be subject to the following conditions, limitations and restrictions: 
(1)	Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted in all districts as accessory uses provided they are not used for commercial or profit making activities. If used for commercial or profit making activities, accessory antennas shall be governed by Ordinance No. 114, Section 4.7.D.3.-7. (Zoning ordinance printed in Appendix A). 
(2)	Where the satellite dish antenna satellite is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of the zoning ordinance applicable to main or principal buildings. 
(3)	A satellite dish antenna may be erected in any required rear yard only, and shall not project forward of the rear building line of the main structure, and shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line. Moveable antennas shall not revolve closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line. 
(4)	A satellite dish antenna shall not exceed one (1) story of fifteen (15) feet in height. The total yard area devoted to an accessory antenna use shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet of yard area. 
(5)	In all cases, a satellite dish shall be fastened securely to the building or to the surface upon which it rests. 
(6)	No advertising other than the manufacturer's or dealer's logo not to exceed one-half (1/2) square foot in size is allowed in residential zones. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 10-9-84) 
Secs. 6-92-6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 124, adopted Aug. 9, 1988, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1-4 of said ordinance as Ch. 6, Art. VII, §§ 6-101-6-104 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-101. - Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8 of the State Construction Code Act (Act 230 of 1972, Compiled Laws 1948, Section 125.1501 et seq.) and any other applicable provisions of the laws of the State of Michigan permitting adoption of nationally recognized codes by reference the City of Hudsonville hereby adopts the BOCA Basic/National Existing Structure Code, 1987 Edition, as adopted by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., and the City of Hudsonville is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of said Code within the boundaries of the City of Hudsonville. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 1, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 6-102. - Deletions. 
    Sections ES 301.6 (Weeds) and ES 301.10 (Motor Vehicles) are hereby deleted. In addition, the definitions "multifamily apartment house", "one-family dwelling" and "two-family dwellings" as set forth in Section ES 201.0 are hereby deleted and the similar definitions as set forth in Article VIII of the City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference in place thereof. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 2, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 6-103. - Fees. 
    The fees for any inspections required by said code shall be those established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 3, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 6-104. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of said code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 4, 8-9-88) 
Secs. 6-105-6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-239, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2003, enacted provisions designated as Art. X, §§ 6-140, and 6-141, which pertained to the adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code as the property maintenance code for the city; therefore, Art. VIII, §§ 6-111-6-113, adopting the BOCA Property Maintenance Code, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Art. X. 

Secs. 6-111-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FIRE SAFETY AND PREVENTION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 11. 

Sec. 6-120. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Guard against the occurrence of fires; 
(2)	Protect the property and lives of the citizens, property owners, and those employed within the city against damage and accident resulting from fires; 
(3)	Govern conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion; and 
(4)	Provide for proper utilities, accessories and access required by the fire department to aid in fighting fires. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-121. - Administrative authority. 
    The fire department shall be responsible for enforcing compliance with this article. Site plans of all new construction, additions and renovations requiring site plan review shall be submitted to the fire chief for approval before site plan approval is given. The city's building inspector shall check with the fire chief prior to issuing any occupancy permit to ensure that all required fire-related improvements have been made and the provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-122. - Liability of damages. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, controlling or installing any building material, devices or equipment for damages to persons or property caused by the defect therein; nor shall the city or any of its officers, agents or employees be held as assuming responsibility for any damages to persons or property by reason of the enforcement or lack of enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-123. - Access to fire hydrants. 
    All commercial, industrial and institutional buildings in the city shall be located not more than three hundred (300) feet from a public fire hydrant by direct public or private road access. All residential buildings shall be located not more than five hundred (500) feet from a public fire hydrant by direct public or private road access. Public fire hydrants shall be located immediately adjacent to and not more than twenty (20) feet from public or private roads. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-124. - Supplemental fire hydrants. 
    Supplemental fire hydrants serving all building use types shall be provided in a ratio of at least one (1) hydrant for every one hundred sixty thousand (160,000) square feet of ground area or portion thereof involved in the development, subject to the fire flow requirements established by the fire chief. 
    Supplemental fire hydrants shall be provided for all buildings, except one- and two-family residential dwellings, that are: 
(1)	Over one hundred (100) feet in length or width or both; and/or 
(2)	Situated at a distance greater than one hundred (100) feet from a public road; or 
(3)	Of such size, construction, location or occupancy use in relationship to public roads and public fire hydrants as may be deemed by the fire chief to constitute a condition hazardous to life and property due to fire or explosion and when deemed necessary by the fire chief for the fire department to serve the premises. 
    Supplemental fire hydrants shall include water mains not less than six (6) inches in diameter and dedicated to the public use of the city. The fire chief shall determine the number and size of hydrants, gates and gate walls, and their location, as he deems reasonable and necessary in order to provide sufficient supplemental fire protection to the premises. 
    Supplemental fire hydrants shall not be located greater than five hundred (500) feet from the furthest point of the building to be served nor shall they be located greater than twenty (20) feet from an approved public or private road, public or private driveway or public or private parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 05-255, § 1, 11-15-05) 
Sec. 6-125. - Fire lane requirements and design standards. 
    The following requirements and design standards shall apply to fire lanes: 
(1)	Required fire lane locations. Fire lanes shall be required for all uses except one- and two-family residential dwellings in accordance with Table 6-1. The required number and location of fire lanes is illustrated in Figures 6-1, 6-2 and 6-3. 
(2)	Width. Fire lanes shall be twenty (20) feet wide. 
(3)	Weight standard. Fire lanes shall be constructed so that they are capable of supporting vehicles having twenty (20) tons on a single axle with dual wheels and standard road tires. 
(4)	Dual use. Fire lanes may be included within a parking lot or may be constructed as a separate facility. 
(5)	Access to building. Each side of a building where a fire lane is required shall have an entrance as close to the center of the building as possible. 
(6)	Use of maneuvering aisle or fire lane. Parking against a building with proper fire lanes may be permitted without the need for "No Parking-Fire Lane" signs under certain circumstances at the discretion of the fire chief. If permitted, the design criteria shown in Figure 6-4 shall be followed. 
(7)	Distance from building. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet and a maximum of thirty (30) feet distance from a building. 
REQUIRED NUMBER OF FIRE LANES
Building Size Required 
Sides Location of Fire 
Lane With longest side up to 150 feet 1 On longest side With longest side up to 300 feet 2 1 on longest side With longest side up to 400 feet 3 2 on longest side With longest side over 400 feet See Note 1 below  
Notes: 
1.	If the longest side is longer than 400 feet, or if the building is of an unusual shape or configuration, the fire chief shall have the authority to require additional fire lanes. 
2.	If the building is less than 12,000 square feet and fully sprinklered, only one fire lane (on the longest side) shall be required. 
(8)	Maintenance. All fire lanes must be maintained and remain unobstructed at all times. Snow removal must be maintained at the same level as the building parking lot. 
(9)	Signage. "No Parking-Fire Lane" signs shall be placed at the discretion of the fire chief, but in no event shall they be placed closer than twenty-five (25) feet apart or further than seventy-five (75) feet apart. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-126. - Construction rules. 
    Combustible building materials shall not be erected until the following has been accomplished: 
(1)	Operable fire hydrants are in place within five hundred (500) feet of the furthest point of any structure being constructed. 
(2)	An access road (twenty (20) feet wide, able to support twenty (20) tons on a single axle with dual wheels and standard road tires) must be constructed to within one hundred (100) feet of the best point of the structure. This road may be gravel, but must be maintained at all times. 
(3)	No combustible rubbish shall be accumulated on the construction site. Disposal by burning is not permitted. 
(4)	Installation of red exit signs (no green exit signs permitted). 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 17-306, § 1, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 6-127. - Key box. 
    When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire chief shall require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire chief and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire chief. Single- and two-family residential dwellings are exempt from the requirements of this section. The key box shall be mounted on the wall by the main entrance not higher than six (6) feet unless permission is given by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 17-306, § 2, 3-14-17) 
Sec. 6-128. - Tampering with fire hydrants, fire extinguishers or fire apparatus. 
    Any person who shall, without authority of the fire chief or his designee, open any fire hydrant, or who shall wantonly, maliciously, willfully or in a negligent manner tamper with, injure, destroy, damage, break, disturb or impair any fire hydrant, any fire fighting appliance or alarm, including but not limited to a supplemental fire protection system, and the constituent parts and equipment thereof, or any fire fighting equipment or apparatus or anything pertaining to the fire fighting system, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in section 6-133 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-129. - Obstructing and disobeying firefighters. 
    Any person who shall knowingly or willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance of his duties, or who shall while within the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobey or disregard any order, directive, rule or regulation of the officer commanding any fire scene activity during or after such fire, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in section 6-133 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-130. - Numbering of buildings. 
    The numbers assigned by the city in accordance with the regulations of the United States Postal Service to buildings, structures and premises in the city shall be the number to which reference is hereinafter made. 
    The placement of numbers shall be accomplished as follows: 
(1)	Every residential building/unit having a doorway to the exterior of the premises and located at a distance of ninety (90) feet or less from the closest public or private road shall display the address number on the building in Arabic numbers which shall be readily visible on the public or private road. 
(2)	Every residential building/unit having a doorway to the exterior of the premises and located at a distance greater than ninety (90) feet from the closest public or private road shall display the address number on the building in Arabic numbers and also display the address number at one (1) additional location not further than ten (10) feet from a public road or twenty (20) feet from a private road. The numbers displayed closest to the road shall be readily visible on the public or private road. A mailbox may be used to meet the requirement for display of the numbers if it is located on the same side of the street and is in front of the residential building/unit it serves. 
(3)	Every building occupied, used or intended for use as assembly, business, educational, high hazard, industrial, institutional, mercantile or storage occupancy shall have Arabic numerals displayed in such manner as to be readily visible on the public road in front of said building. 
(4)	In any case where building appurtenances, structures, or vegetation obscures the required number display, the fire chief shall have the authority to order whatever corrective action is required so that the intent of this section is achieved. 
    The size of the Arabic numbers on buildings shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height. The size of the Arabic numbers at other locations shall be determined based upon the size required to ensure readability from the public or private road. 
    The color of the Arabic numbers shall be in contrast with the immediate background on which they are mounted. The Arabic numbers shall be displayed to permit them to be visible during all hours of normal daylight. 
    All new and existing developed property shall be identified as required by this section. 
    Applicants for building permits for new construction or alterations to existing structures shall be given a copy of the requirements for numbering buildings and shall comply with such requirements prior to requesting final inspection of the project. 
    Building numbers may be spelled out on the building for decorative purposes; however, Arabic numbers must also be used in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-131. - Modification of requirements. 
    The fire chief shall have the right to modify any of the requirements of this article upon application in writing by the owner or occupant of a building, structure or premises, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in strictly carrying out the requirements of this article, provided that the spirit of this article shall be observed. The particulars of such modification shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a copy shall be furnished the person requesting such modification. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-132. - Appeal. 
    Whenever the fire chief shall not grant a modification requested pursuant to section 6-131 hereof, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this article do not apply, or that the true intent or meaning of this article has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the aggrieved person may appeal in writing to the fire chief. If still not satisfied, the aggrieved person may further appeal the fire chief's decision in writing to the safety committee of the city commission within fifteen (15) days of the date of the fire chief's decision. 
Sec. 6-133. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made hereof, and from which no appeal has been taken or if taken as been fully exhausted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 6-132 hereof, shall for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in section 1-13 of this Code. The imposition of a penalty for any violation or noncompliance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such responsible persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliances within a time limit specified by the fire chief; and when not otherwise specified, each day that a violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or enforcement of the requirements of this article by appropriate court action. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 6-134. - Fees. 
    A fee or fees may be charged for the services provided in section 6-121 hereof as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 182, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Secs. 6-135-6-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Note- See the editor's footnote to Art. VIII. 

Sec. 6-140. - Adoption by reference. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council, Inc., which is on file with the city clerk, be and is hereby adopted as the city's property maintenance code for the control of buildings and structures; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this Code as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 6-141 below. 
(Ord. No. 03-239, § 1, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 6-141. - Revisions. 
(a)	[The following revisions shall be made in the property maintenance code adopted in section 6-140: 
Section 101.1: Insert "City of Hudsonville". 
Section 103.6: Insert "$25.00 per hour". 
Section 303.14: Insert "April 1 and November 1". 
Section 602.3: Insert "October 15 and May 15". 
Section 602.4: Insert "October 15 and May 15". 
(b)	Insert "at such rates and charges established from time to time by resolution of the City Commission" in Section 101.1 of the Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-239, § 1, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 05-256, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Secs. 6-142-6-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RENTAL REGISTRATIONS AND INSPECTIONS; SMOKE DETECTORS/ALARMS 

Sec. 6-150. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
(a)	Affidavit of completion means the properly completed statement affirming that all deficiencies or violations identified on a Provisional Rental Occupancy Certificate have been corrected in compliance with the Property Maintenance Code; said statement to be on a form provided by the city. 
(b)	Agent means the property manager or other person or entity representing the owner of a rental unit. 
(c)	Certificate means either a rental occupancy certificate or a provisional rental occupancy certificate. 
(d)	City means the city department, officer or individual designated by the city manager to administer all or any part of the rental registration and inspections programs under this article. 
(e)	Immediate family means spouses, children, grandchildren, stepchildren, brothers and sisters, half brothers and sisters, parents and stepparents. 
(f)	Owner means the person or entity who/which owns a premises occupied by one (1) or more rental units. 
(g)	Property maintenance code means that code including related regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms as referenced in section 6-140 hereof as shall be in effect from time to time. 
(h)	Provisional rental occupancy certificate means a written statement issued by the city indicating the rental unit identified therein is substantially, but not entirely, in compliance with the property maintenance code. The provisional rental occupancy certificate shall identify any deficiencies or violations that must be corrected, and shall state the date on which the provisional rental occupancy certificate shall expire if those deficiencies or violations are not corrected. 
(i)	Rental unit means any residential dwelling which is in whole or in part occupied by one or more persons pursuant to either an oral or written agreement for monetary or any other consideration, but who are not acquiring an ownership interest in the dwelling. Rental unit shall include single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwelling, and rooming or boarding house, but shall exclude transient dwelling structures such as hotels, motels or bed-and-breakfasts and dwellings that are occupied only by members of the owner's immediate family. 
(j)	Rental occupancy certificate means a written statement issued by the city indicating that the rental unit identified therein is then in compliance with the property maintenance code. A rental occupancy certificate shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of the inspection that found the rental unit to be in compliance, subject to new or later-detected violations of the property maintenance code; and the expiration date shall be shown on the certificate. 
(k)	Tenant means any person, other than legal or equitable titleholder, occupying or in possession of all or any part of rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 05-251, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 6-151. - Registration. 
(a)	Every owner of an existing rental unit within the city on the effective date of this article shall register it within forty-five (45) days of the effective date. Thereafter, every owner of a rental unit shall register it with the city within ten (10) days after the date of acquiring ownership or control of a previously registered rental unit, or, in the case of a newly constructed or converted rental unit, before it is occupied. 
(b)	To register a rental unit, the owner shall: 
(1)	Provide the following information on a form provided by the city: 
a.	The name, address, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of the owner and any agent. 
b.	The street address of the rental unit along with other identification if more than one (1) rental unit has the same street address. 
c.	The number of rental units in a building if more than one (1). 
d.	The number of bedrooms in each rental unit and the intended number of occupants in each rental unit. 
e.	Such other information as is reasonably required by the city. 
(2)	Pay a registration fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)	Each owner shall notify the city in writing within thirty (30) days of any change in the information provided on the registration form. 
(d)	An owner or its agent shall notify the city in writing within thirty (30) days if any items inspected by the city pursuant to this article are altered after inspection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-251, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 6-152. - Rental occupancy certificate. 
(a)	No rental unit may be occupied without a valid certificate. 
(b)	Each certificate shall indicate the maximum number of tenants of the rental unit. No owner or tenant shall allow a rental unit to be occupied by more tenants than the number indicated on the certificate. 
(c)	No certificate shall be valid until the appropriate registration fee established as provided in this article has been paid. 
(d)	Upon request by any tenant or prospective tenant of a rental unit, the owner or agent of such rental unit shall provide the tenant or prospective tenant with a copy of the certificate related to such rental unit. 
(e)	A certificate may be transferred to a new owner of a rental unit subject to the provisions of section 6-151 hereof. 
(f)	A provisional rental occupancy certificate for a rental unit shall expire on the date indicated and the continued occupancy of the rental unit shall be unlawful if the owner or agent has not properly corrected the deficiencies and violations noted on the certificate and thereafter properly completed and returned an affidavit of completion to the city within the time allotted in such certificate. If the affidavit of completion is returned to the city within the allotted time, and absent other intervening deficiencies or violations, the city shall issue a rental occupancy certificate for such rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 05-251, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 6-153. - Inspections. 
(a)	Before issuing a certificate the city shall inspect the rental unit in order to determine whether it is in compliance with the property maintenance code and other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and laws. 
(b)	Upon written notice from the city, it shall be the owner's responsibility to schedule with the city and permit the inspection of the rental unit by the city no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current certificate. Inspection shall occur during the city's regular business hours, unless the city agrees to other arrangements. All required fees shall be paid prior to an inspection. 
(c)	A residential complex with 4 or more rental units shall have a minimum of twenty (25) percent of the units inspected during an inspection cycle. If no deficiencies or violations of the property maintenance code are observed on inspection of those units, no further inspections of the complex will be required during that inspection cycle. If deficiencies or violations are observed the city may at its discretion inspect all rental units in the complex. 
(d)	If an inspection reveals that a rental unit is not in compliance with the property maintenance code and other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and laws, the owner shall be provided a written list of deficiencies or violations that must be corrected before a rental occupancy certificate is issued. If the city determines that the deficiencies or violations do not render the rental unit uninhabitable, the city shall issue a provisional rental occupancy certificate for such rental unit. 
(e)	The city may conduct additional inspections as it deems necessary upon reasonable notice to the owner or agent, such as, for example, when a complaint is filed with the city or the city otherwise has reasonable cause to believe a rental unit is in violation of the property maintenance code or other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and laws. 
(f)	In the event the city becomes aware of a property maintenance code or other deficiency or violation subsequent to the issuance of a certificate, the city may: 
(1)	Issue a new provisional rental occupancy certificate identifying the deficiency(ies) or violation(s); 
(2)	Revoke the current certificate; and/or 
(3)	Take any other action permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-251, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 08-265, § 1, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 08-270, § 1, 10-14-08) 
Sec. 6-154. - Right of appeal. 
    All administrative action taken by the city pursuant to this article may be appealed as provided in the property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. 05-251, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 6-155. - Smoke detectors/alarms. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each rental unit to install the appropriate number of working smoke detectors/alarms, as hereinafter provided, in each rental unit it owns. All smoke detectors/alarms shall be Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. approved and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Residential Code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of the National Fire Protection Standards. 
(b)	Smoke detectors/alarms shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)	Each sleeping room. 
(2)	Outside each sleeping room in the immediate vicinity of such room. 
(3)	On each story or level of a rental unit including basements and cellars, but excluding crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In rental units with adjacent split levels without an intervening door between levels, a smoke detector/alarm installed on the upper level shall be sufficient for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
(c)	After each change of occupancy of a rental unit, the owner or agent shall certify in writing to the new tenant(s), at or before such tenant(s) occupies the rental unit, that all smoke detectors/alarms required by this section are installed, the location of each and that each such smoke detector/alarm is in proper working condition. 
(d)	No person shall tamper or interfere with a smoke detector/alarm required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-251, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Chapter 7 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public utility franchises, Ch. XII. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; telecommunications, Ch. 21.5; utilities, Ch. 23; franchises, App. B. 
State Law reference- Consent for construction in right-of-way by cable television companies required from municipalities, MCL 247.183, MSA 9.263. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Hudsonville Communications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 84, § 1.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-2. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to provide fair regulation and control (to the extent such regulation and control is not lawfully preempted by applicable state and federal statutes, rules or regulations) of cable communications service in the city in the interest of the public; to promote and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable communications service to the residents of the city; to promote and encourage harmony between cable communications companies and their subscribers; and to provide for the furnishing of cable communications system service to the residents of the city without unjust discrimination or undue preferences or advantages. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 1.2, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-3. - Rules apply to text. 
    The following listed rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)	The particular shall control the general. 
(2)	With the exception of those cases where the heading of a section is defined by that section, the headings which title a chapter or section are for convenience only and are not to be considered in any construction or interpretation of this chapter or as enlarging or restricting the terms and provisions of this chapter in any respect. 
(3)	The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)	Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary: 
a.	Words used in this present tense shall include the future tense; 
b.	Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; and 
c.	Words used in the plural number shall include the singular number. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 2.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of their use in this chapter, the following terms and words are hereinafter defined. Any word or term not defined herein shall be considered to be defined in accordance with its common or standard definition. 
    Cable communications system, cable system, cable television system, CATV or system means a system of coaxial cables or other conductors, antenna, transmitters, fixtures, converters, distribution network, studios and other equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulse whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States of America or any successor regulatory agency of the United States of America having similar jurisdiction over cable communications systems. 
    Franchisee means any person having any right, power, privilege, duty, liability or obligation under this chapter and any franchise agreement thereunder as well as all persons having or claiming any title or interest in or to a system, whether by reason of the franchise authorizing such system itself or any subcontract, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, security agreement, management agreement, operating agreement, or any other kind of agreement. 
(Ord. No. 84, §§ 2.2, 2.4-2.6, 11-23-81) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 7-5-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING FRANCHISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power to grant franchises, § 12.2. 

Sec. 7-21. - Franchise required. 
    No person shall construct, install, maintain, own or operate a cable communication system in the city without first obtaining a franchise therefor from the commission pursuant to a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. The terms and provisions of this chapter, together with any applications and supporting documentation pertaining to any applicant selected as a franchisee, shall automatically be incorporated by reference into and become a part of the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. In the event of conflict or ambiguity between the franchise agreement and this chapter, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-22. - Application and fee. 
    Any person desiring a franchise to construct, install, maintain, own or operate a cable communication system in the city shall prepare and file a written application therefor with the city clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as determined by resolution by the city commission. The entire application fee shall be retained by the city and no refund shall be made to an unsuccessful applicant. The entire application fee received from a successful applicant shall be retained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.2, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-23. - Contents of application. 
    Any application filed pursuant to this article shall contain sufficient information to show the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to be a franchisee. Such application shall contain, as a minimum, the following information: 
(1)	If the applicant is not an individual, a certified copy of the partnership agreement, articles of associations, articles of incorporation, or other agreement or documentation governing the organization of the applicant; 
(2)	If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of its authorization to do business in the state; 
(3)	A copy of applicant's current balance sheet listing all assets and liabilities, as of a date not more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of application, such balance sheet to be certified as to accuracy by the applicant's chief financial officer; 
(4)	If a loan or other credit arrangement is to be utilized to finance the construction, installation or operation of the proposed system, full particulars relative thereto, including the identity and address of the lender; 
(5)	A statement of the construction, installation and technical particulars which will be met in order to insure the rendition of good system service, including the type and kind of facilities to be employed and the technical standards to be followed, including copies of any contracts, agreements, or arrangements relating to any of the above; 
(6)	A statement as to the location of the antenna site and the location of any place of business which are to be maintained in connection with the system, if the same have been ascertained; 
(7)	A statement as to any affiliated corporations or business organizations engaged in providing cable communications service and as to any interlocking directorships or ownerships held by any owners, officers or directors of the applicant with any other business engaged in providing cable communication service; 
(8)	A detailed statement as to the arrangements and timetable by which the applicant proposes to construct and complete the cable communication system including detailed descriptions of the portions of the city projected for service by the system within eighteen (18) months, two (2) years, thirty (30) months, three (3) years, and forty-two (42) months after the filing of the notice of registration with the FCC; 
(9)	The programming services and public services which the applicant proposes to provide, including, but not limited to, the off-air signals to be carried initially, the number of channels to be offered, and the projected development of customer and community services, indicating priorities in development and the estimated time schedules therefor; 
(10)	Cost estimates for the construction, installation, and maintenance of the system, including, but not be limited to, the proposed cost of acquisition of the system where approval of a transfer of the franchise has been requested; 
(11)	Revenue forecast for the first five (5) years the system will be operational; 
(12)	A proposed schedule of rates for installation charges, monthly service fees, relocation charges, and all other customer fees or charges; 
(13)	Such other information and materials as the city commission may request. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.3, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-24. - Consideration of application. 
    Upon the filing of an application and the payment of the fee prescribed, the city commission shall consider the application and may request such additional information and materials as it may deem necessary to establish the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide cable communication services in the city and to determine whether or not a franchise should be granted to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.4, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-25. - Granting of franchise. 
    If the city commission shall determine to grant a franchise to an applicant, and if it shall reach agreement with the applicant with respect to the terms and provisions of a franchise agreement, the city commission may, by ordinance, issue the applicant a nonexclusive franchise, provided, that no franchise shall be issued until the franchise application therefor has been on file and available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk for at least thirty (30) days. In addition, the city commission shall, before issuing a franchise, but after the expiration of the thirty (30) days period, hold at least one (1) public hearing on such application. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication at least twice in the Grand Valley Advance or other newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first such publication to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.5, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 95, § 1, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 7-26. - Acceptance of franchise by franchisee. 
    The applicant awarded a franchise by the city commission shall execute and deliver to the city the franchise agreement. Which has been previously negotiated and agreed upon with the city commission, within thirty (30) days after the passage of the commissions' resolution granting the franchise. In addition, such applicant shall, within thirty (30) days after the date of passage of the resolution, file with the city clerk a copy of the filed version of the applicant's registration notice with the FCC. Failure of the franchisee to execute the franchise agreement or to file the application within the thirty (30) day time limit shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any rights the applicant may have in the franchise and for forfeiture and retention by the city of the applicant's entire application fee. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.6, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-27-7-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE 

Sec. 7-41. - Rights granted with franchise. 
    A franchise shall grant to the franchisee the right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in or upon, under, above and across all city streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks, bridges, easements, rights-of-way and other public ways, as now existing, and all extensions and additions thereto, all necessary wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduit, manholes, and/or radio conductors and fixtures required for the sole purpose of maintaining and operating a cable communication system in the city. However, all such rights shall be exercised only in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement executed pursuant hereto, and shall be subordinate to the extent that they conflict with any preexisting rights granted by the city or any other governmental entity to any public utility. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-42. - Franchise term. 
    If the franchise is not terminated pursuant to any other section of this chapter or pursuant to the franchise agreement, then it shall expire by its own terms at the expiration of fifteen (15) years from the date of the resolution of the city commission granting the franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city commission shall have the right to terminate at will any franchise which has not been previously approved by the electors of the city voting thereon. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.2, 11-23-81) 
State Law reference- Franchises limited to thirty (30) years, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 30. 
Sec. 7-43. - Franchise election request. 
    The franchisee may at any time prior to the expiration of its franchise, or within thirty (30) days after its franchise has been terminated at the will of the city commission, request that the question of the approval of the franchisee's franchise be submitted to the electors of the city at the next regular election or at a special election called for that purpose; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall prevent or reverse any termination of a franchise on a basis other than a termination at will pursuant to section 7-42. If any franchise election is held pursuant to the provisions of this section, the franchisee shall pay all of the election costs and expenses if the franchise is the only matter submitted to the electors at the regular or special election or, if there are other matters considered at the same election, then it shall pay its proportionate share of the election costs and expenses. The city commission may, in its discretion, require that the franchisee deposit with the city a reasonable sum to defray the election costs and expenses prior to the commencement of the procedures necessary to conduct the election at which the franchise question is to be submitted to the electors of the city. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.3, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-44. - Territorial scope. 
    The franchise agreement shall specifically delineate the portion of the city in which the franchisee is authorized to operate. If a cable communications company has a franchise to operate in the city and offers, in writing, to provide service to any portion of the city within the territory of another franchisee which is not then being served by the franchisee, then the city shall give notice to the franchisee of the particulars of the area to be served. If the franchisee does not provide service for that area within six (6) months of the giving of such notice, then the commission may, at any time thereafter, withdraw from such franchisee's territory all or part of the portion of the city covered by the offer. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.4, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-45. - Franchise not exclusive. 
    Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and the city reserves the right to grant similar franchises to any other person at any time. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.5, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-46. - Franchise subject to other city ordinances. 
    All franchises shall at all times be subject to all other city ordinances including, without limitation, all ordinances based upon the city police power, zoning power, and plat regulation power. Regulation by the city, pursuant to other ordinances, may include a requirement that all or any part of the franchisee's system be installed and maintained underground. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.6, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-47. - Transfer of franchise. 
(a)	No transfer of control of the cable system shall take place whether by forced or voluntary sale, lease, mortgage, assignment, encumbrance or any other form of disposition, without prior written notice to and approval by the city commission by resolution, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The franchisee shall give notice to the city commission of the proposed transaction, such notice to include full identifying particulars of the proposed transaction. The city commission shall have ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice in which to approve or disapprove a transfer of control. If no action is taken within such ninety (90) days, city commission approval shall be deemed to have been given. However, nothing contained in this section shall alter or interfere with the right of the city to purchase the system pursuant to Article VII of this chapter. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, the term "control" is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. 
(c)	If the franchisee is a corporation, a rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten (10) percent of the voting shares of the franchisee. 
(d)	No mortgage, pledge or grant of a security interest in system equipment or any part thereof or lease by a franchisee from another person of system equipment or any part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise, unless as part of a transaction involving a substantial amount of other property not used as part of the system owned by the franchisee, shall take place without prior written notice to and approval by the city commission by resolution, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The franchisee shall give notice to the city commission of the proposed transaction, such notice to include full identifying particulars thereof. The city commission shall have ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice in which to approve or disapprove the proposed transaction. If no action is taken within such ninety (90) days, city commission approval shall be deemed to have been given. 
(e)	In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city commission shall not approve any transfer before completion of construction of the initial phase of system construction, as specified in the franchise agreement. 
(f)	By accepting any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the franchisee specifically grants and agrees that any transfer occurring in violation of this section shall constitute a violation by the franchisee of the franchise and of the franchise agreement. 
(g)	The city commission reserves the right to review the purchase price of any transfer of the system; and if the city commission deems any negotiated purchase price unreasonable, such purchase price will not be considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for rate increases by the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.7, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-48. - Renewal. 
    Not less than eight (8) months nor more than twelve (12) months before expiration of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk a written notice of intent which shall specify the franchisee's intention to seek or not to seek renewal of the franchise. Thereafter, the franchisee shall, if it seeks renewal of the franchise, file its application for renewal within the time and the manner prescribed for other applicants, if any, seeking the franchise. A franchisee seeking renewal of a franchise shall, when reasonably justified and warranted, be given first consideration for a successor franchise. In determining whether or not to grant a renewal franchise, the city commission shall, in addition to the considerations elsewhere prescribed in this chapter, consider whether or not the franchisee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the franchise based upon the performance of the system, the technical development of the system, programming, other services offered, cost of services, the franchisee's annual reports to the city and the FCC, industry performance on a national basis, community comment, and any other matters which relate to the general performance of the franchisee. All such applications, whether for renewal or otherwise, shall be considered and reviewed, and any renewal or other franchise shall be granted pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter which govern the original granting of a franchise. If a renewal franchise is not terminated pursuant to any other provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement, then such renewal franchise shall expire by its own terms at the expiration of fifteen (15) years from the date of the resolution of the city commission granting the renewal franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city commission shall have the right to terminate at will any renewal franchise which has not been previously approved by the electors of the city voting thereon. All other terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to a renewal franchise in the same manner and on the same basis as they apply to an original franchise. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.8, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-49. - Review. 
    In order to provide full opportunity for the city commission and members of the public to review with the franchisee all aspects of the operation of the system, the franchisee shall attend with appropriate and qualified personnel any regular or special meeting of the city commission provided the franchisee is given at least ten (10) days' advance notice of such meeting. At such meeting the franchisee shall respond to questions and generally discuss the system as the city commission shall request. Potential topics for question and/or discussion shall include, but not be limited, to the following: service rate structures; free or discounted services, application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy in human rights; amendments to this progress; and judicial and FCC rulings. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.9, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-50-7-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 7-66. - Compliance with applicable standards. 
    All construction, installation, maintenance and operation of the system and the facilities employed in connection therewith shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Act, the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, Bell Telephone System's Code of Pole Line Construction, any standards issued by the FCC or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and all regulations applicable to other persons operating in the public right-of-way in the city, and shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-67. - Technical requirements. 
    The system shall in its entirety conform to all technical requirements specified in the franchise agreement and to any and all applicable standards or codes which are presently in force in the city or which may hereafter be adopted by the city commission. The system shall also conform in its entirety to all applicable regulations and requirements of the FCC as the same may be promulgated and/or amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5.2, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-68. - Standard of service. 
    Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall install, construct, maintain and operate its system in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, in conformity with the state of the art, and any standards of operation or maintenance for a system which may be established or issued by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5.3, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-69. - Public emergencies. 
    The franchisee shall make its system available, without charge, to the city, the county, the state, the United States of America and/or other emergency operations agencies for prompt communication to subscribers and the public within the city of any information resulting from or required by war, threat of war, natural catastrophe, riot, insurrection or any other matter affecting life or property. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5.4, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-70. - Local office. 
    The franchisee shall have a business office located within the city or in such other place as shall be specified in the franchise agreement which shall be suitably staffed for the purpose, among others, of receiving and investigating complaints, dealing with subscribers, receiving payment for service, and otherwise conducting business. The days and hours of operation, staffing requirements, and other pertinent matters pertaining to the local office shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5.5, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-71-7-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FRANCHISE FEES, RATES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - FRANCHISE FEE 

Sec. 7-86. - Paid annually. 
    During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the franchisee shall pay to the city an annual franchise fee as specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 6.1, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-87-7-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 7-87-7-89, which pertained to rates and charges and derived from Ord. No. 84, §§ 6.2-6.4, adopted November 23, 1981, were deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 93-159, included to read as herein set out as Ch. 7, Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 7-90-7-105.3 at the discretion of the editor. 
DIVISION 2. - CABLE TV RATE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7-90. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this division, "Act" shall mean the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time; "FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission; "FCC rules" shall mean all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act; "basic cable service" shall mean "basic service" as defined in the FCC rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC rules; "associated equipment" shall mean all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.923; and an "increase" in rates shall mean an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services as provided in the FCC rules. All other words and phrases used in this division shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 1, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-91. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)	Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and 
(2)	Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This division shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 2, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-92. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the City of Hudsonville shall follow all FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 3, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-93. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)	A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and FCC rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC rules. The cable operator shall file ten (10) copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this division, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten (10) copies have been received by the city clerk. The city commission may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations as allowed by law prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)	In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to subsection (a) above, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the city manager that is related and helpful in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city manager may establish reasonable deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)	A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC rules including, without limitation, 47 USC § 543 and 47 CFR §§ 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 4, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-94. - Proprietary information. 
(a)	If this division, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 7-93(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 7-93(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that non-disclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, (1) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or (2) the cable operator may seek review within five (5) working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)	Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)	The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR § 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 5, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-95. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten (10) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 7-94(a) above, the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: 
(1)	The filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying; and 
(2)	Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven (7) days after the public notice is published. 
The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city commission shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three (3) days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city commission, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three (3) days before the meeting at which the city commission shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 6, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-96. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after thirty (30) days from the date of filing under section 7-95 above unless the city commission (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the thirty (30) day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within thirty (30) days of the date of filing. The city commission may toll the thirty-day deadline for an additional ninety (90) days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional one hundred fifty (150) days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 7, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-97. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of thirty-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 7-96 and 47 CFR § 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 7-93 of this division. In addition, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional ninety-day or one hundred fifty-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: 
(1)	The date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held; 
(2)	Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and 
(3)	Copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
The public notice shall be published not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 8, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-98. - Staff or consultant report, written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the city commission which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the city commission pursuant to section 7-99. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than twenty (20) days before the city commission acts under section 7-99. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten (10) copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 9, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-99. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city commission shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC rules. If the city commission issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within ninety (90) days of the tolling order under section 7-96 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within one hundred fifty (150) days after the tolling order under section 7-96 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 10, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-100. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city commission may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR § 76.942. Before the city commission orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven (7) days written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city commission shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 11, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-101. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city commission pursuant to section 7-99 or section 7-100 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city commission, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: 
(1)	Summarize the written decision; and 
(2)	State that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 12, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-102. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 7-93, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 13, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-103. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this division shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city commission so long as there is substantial compliance with the division. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 14, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-104. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this division, the city commission may, in its sole discretion, hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city commission shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 15, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-105. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC rules, and this division shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 16, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-105.1. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this division, any requirements of this division, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this division, any requirements of this division, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 17, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-105.2. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sections, and clauses of this division are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this division shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 18, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 7-105.3. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this division and the provisions of any prior ordinance or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with a cable operator, then the provisions of this division shall control. 
(Ord. No. 93-159, § 19, 9-20-93) 
ARTICLE VI. - TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE 

Sec. 7-106. - Failure to commence construction. 
    Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall expire without further proceedings one (1) year after the date of the city commission resolution granting the franchise in the event the franchisee has not commenced construction of the system within such period. However, if circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the franchisee have prevented the franchisee from commencing construction of the system within such one (1) year time period or any extended time period, then the commission may, one (1) or more times, after receiving information from the franchisee as to such circumstances at a public hearing, extend the time deadline for commencement of construction for such time period as the city commission shall determine to be reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-107. - Failure to provide service. 
    If a franchisee fails to provide cable communication service within and throughout the franchise areas as required under the terms of its franchise agreement, the franchise shall be deemed revoked without the necessity of city commission action on the first anniversary date of the filing of the notice of registration with the FCC by the franchisee following the period during which the cable communication service has not been extended as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, unless prior to the date, the franchisee has applied to the city commission and the city commission has, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction or service periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.2, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-108. - Bankruptcy of franchisee. 
    Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be terminated and cancelled without further proceedings one hundred and twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the franchisee whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other actions or proceedings unless such receivership or trusteeship shall been vacated prior to the expiration of the one hundred and twenty (120) day period, or unless such receivers or trustees shall have, within the one hundred and twenty (120) day period after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and of the franchise granted pursuant hereto, remedied all previous defaults under the franchise, and executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation pursuant to which any such franchise has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.3, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-109. - Failure to comply with ordinance, application or franchise agreement provisions. 
    The city commission shall have the right to revoke and terminate the franchise if the franchisee fails to comply with any material or substantial provision of this chapter, the representations made in its franchise application, the franchise agreement, or any reasonable order, direction or permit issued by the city commission pursuant to such a material or substantial provision, or any rule or regulation promulgated by the city commission which is reasonable in light of, and consistent with, any provision of this chapter of the franchise agreement. The city commission shall give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow the franchisee ninety (90) days to comply. At the expiration of this ninety (90) day period, the franchise shall be deemed terminated and revoked, without further city commission action, unless the franchisee requests a public hearing before the city commission upon its alleged failure to substantially comply with any material provision or requirement of this chapter, representations made in its franchise application, the franchise agreement, or any orders or directions issued pursuant thereto. The franchisee shall be permitted to fully participate therein including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and at the conclusion thereof, the city commission, if it finds that the franchisee has not substantially complied with any such applicable provision or requirement, may terminate and revoke the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.5, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-110. - Surrender of franchise. 
    The franchisee may surrender its franchise by written notice of intent to surrender filed with the city clerk not less than one (1) year prior to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice, all rights, privileges, and authority under the franchise shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.6, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-111. - Removal of property. 
    The franchisee shall have a period of six (6) months after the expiration, cancellation, or other termination of the franchise to remove its towers, poles, wires, cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places, unless the system will continue to be operated by the city, a transferee, a successor in interest, or any other person. If the city commission exercises its option under section 7-112, the six (6) month period established in this section shall commence on the date the mandatory continuation by the franchisee required by section 7-112 terminates. At the expiration of the six (6) month period, any property not removed by the franchisee shall become the property of the city to do with as it may choose. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.7, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-112. - Continuity of service. 
    During the period following any expiration, cancellation or other termination of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and before award to and commencement of operations by a successive franchisee, a franchisee having had its franchise expire or otherwise terminated shall, at the sole option and discretion of the city commission, continue to provide services to the public to the same extent and in the same manner as if its franchise were still in effect. Such mandatory continuation of service shall not, however, exceed six (6) months in duration. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.8, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-113-7-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ACQUISITION OF SYSTEM BY CITY 

Sec. 7-131. - Right of city to purchase CATV system. 
    Upon the expiration of the term of any franchise, or upon any other termination thereof, as provided for herein or as otherwise provided by law, or upon receipt of application for prior approval of acquisition or transfer as provided in section 7-47, the city commission at its option and upon payment to the franchisee in the amount and manner hereinafter provided, shall have the right to purchase and take over the system. The city commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing before it exercises its right to purchase and take over the system. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication at least twice in the Grand Valley Advance or other newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 8.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-132. - Transfer of the system to city. 
    Upon the exercise of this option by the city commission and its service of notice of such action upon the franchisee, which notice shall state a time and place of the closing, which shall not be more than ninety (90) days following the date of the notice, and upon payment of the purchase price as hereinafter provided, the franchisee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and title to all facilities and properties, real and personal, of the system and business, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city commission in lieu of some portion of the purchase price as established hereinafter, and the franchisee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary for this purpose. The franchisee shall make it a condition of each contract entered into by it with reference to its operations under any franchise or franchise agreement that the contract shall be subject to the exercise of this option by the city commission and that the city shall have the right to succeed to all privileges and obligations thereof upon the exercise of such option. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 8.2, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-133. - Purchase price of system. 
    If the city commission elects to purchase and take over the system, as provided in section 7-132, the purchase price shall be determined as follows: 
(1)	Upon expiration of the franchise or any renewal thereof, the city shall acquire the system at its then fair market value as a going concern. If the city commission and the franchisee are unable to agree as to the system's fair market value, it shall be determined by a panel of three (3) appraisers. One (1) appraiser shall be appointed by the city commission, one (1) appraiser appointed by the franchisee, and the two (2) appraisers thus appointed shall appoint a third appraiser. The fair market value shall be determined by a majority of the three (3) appraisers. If no two (2) appraisers can agree, the fair market value shall be the average of the fair market values of each appraiser. 
(2)	If the two (2) appraisers first appointed cannot agree on the appraiser to be appointed by them, or if the city commission or franchisee refuse to appoint an appraiser, the appraiser shall be appointed by the senior judge of the administrative and not a judicial capacity. The fees and expenses of the appraiser appointed by the city commission shall be paid by the city; the fees and expenses of the appraiser appointed by the franchisee shall be paid by the franchisee; and the fees and expenses of the third appraiser shall be paid one-half by the city and one-half by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 8.3, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-134. - Setoff by city. 
    The city shall be entitled to a setoff against the purchase price for any sums remaining due it by the franchisee and for any damage or losses incurred or sustained by it in connection with any default or violation of this chapter or the franchise agreement by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 8.4, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-135. - Revocation of franchise for cause. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7-133, upon revocation of the franchise or any renewal thereof for cause, as established in sections 7-106-7-109, the city may acquire the system at a price equal to the original cost of the tangible system property less depreciation computed ratably over the useful life of the tangible system property, regardless of what method of depreciation may be used for federal income tax or other purposes by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 8.5, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-136-7-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7-151. - Delegation of authority. 
    The city commission may by resolution delegate all or any portion of its duties and functions, as established in this chapter or the franchise agreement, to any other board, committee, or city official. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9.1, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-152. - Employees. 
    The franchisee shall at all times have sufficient employees to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9.2, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-153. - Administrative immunity. 
    The franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city or its officers, boards, commissions, committees, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of the granting of the franchise, the operation of the system by the franchisee, any provision or requirement of this chapter or any franchise agreement, or because of any enforcement of the same. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9.3, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-154. - Time of the essence. 
    Time shall be the essence for any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. The franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9.4, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-155. - Notices. 
    All notices, designations, consents, offers, requests, acceptances or any other communication provided for in this chapter shall be given in writing by registered or certified mail or by personal delivery which shall be addressed to the franchisee at its business address and to the city at the city hall, unless otherwise agreed by the city and the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9.5, 11-23-81) 
Sec. 7-156. - Severability. 
    If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or rendered invalid or inoperable by regulation, rule or determination of the FCC, state public service commission or any other governmental regulatory body having appropriate jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not effect the validity and enforceability of the remainder of this chapter; provided, that the provision held invalid or made inoperable shall be renegotiated by the city and the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9.6, 11-23-81) 
Secs. 7-157-7-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 7-166-7-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MULTI-CHANNEL VIDEO PROVIDERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98-205, § 1, adopted June 9, 1998, enacted provisions which pertained to multi-channel video providers. Such provisions were designated as Ch. 26, §§ 26-1-26-3. For purposes of classification, the editor redesignated those provisions as Art. X, §§ 7-181-7-183. 

Sec. 7-181. - Need for consent agreement of franchise. 
    All multi-channel video providers shall obtain a consent agreement or franchise from the city prior to providing service to any resident, business or person within the city, and shall have a consent agreement or franchise in full force and effect at all times while such service is being provided. 
(Ord. No. 98-205, § 1, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 7-182. - Definition of multi-channel video provider. 
    Multi-channel video provider as used in this article shall be defined to mean a person or entity who meets one (1) or more of the following tests: 
(1)	The provider is a "cable operator" as such term is defined in the Federal Cable Act, being Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or is otherwise required to obtain a "franchise" as such term is defined in such act. 
(2)	This provider is the operator of an "open video system" as such term is defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 and implementing regulations, as amended. 
(3)	Any person or entity who provides multi-channel video service to a resident, business or person within the city, where such service is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross any public right-of-way within the city. The preceding sentence shall apply whether the provider owns, leases or otherwise obtains the right to use such wires and lines, including wires or lines of a telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such purpose. "Multi-channel video service" as used herein shall mean multiple channels of video programming where the individual video channels are generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station or by a direct home satellite service. 
(4)	A person or entity providing multi-channel video service is otherwise required to obtain a consent agreement or franchise under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 98-205, § 1, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 7-183. - Violations. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity which violates this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to payment of a civil fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus costs for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate civil infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as follows: 
First repeat offense-Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
Second or subsequent repeat offense-Four thousand dollars ($4,000.00). 
The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 98-205, § 1, 6-9-98) 
Chapter 8 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; planning, Ch. 17; special assessments, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq., MSA 5.3057(1) et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq., MSA 5.3058(1) et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-151 et seq. 
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq. 

Sec. 8-16. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as now in effect or hereafter amended. 
    Authority means the downtown development authority of the city created by this article. 
    Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 2, 6-14-83) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-17. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city commission hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 3, 6-14-83) 
Sec. 8-18. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197 a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Hudsonville." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 4, 6-14-83) 
Sec. 8-19. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the following described territory in the city, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this ordinance and Act 197: 
SECTION 28 T6 R13 
    COMM AT THE SW CORNER OF SEC 28 TH E 540' ALG THE S LI OF SECTION 28 TH N TO THE CENTER LINE OF CHICAGO DR TH SW'LY ALG THE CENTER LINE OF CHICAGO DR TO THE PT OF INTERSECTION ON THE S LI OF SECTION 28. 
SECTION 33 T6 R13 
    BEG AT THE NW COR OF SECTION 33 TH E 366' TO CL OF PLEASANT AVE TH S 183' TH W 183' TH S 98' TH W 183' TO THE W LI OF SD SECTION, TH N TO THE PT OF BEG 
SECTION 32 T 6 R13 
    BEG AT THE NE COR OF SEC 32 TH S 393' TH W 150' TH S 350.6'; TH SE'ly 92' TH E 72.5', TH S 64.1', TH W 167', TH S 186' ALG THE W LI OF LOT 53 OF Ohlman's Assrs Plat No. 1, TH SE TO THE NE CORNER OF LOT 48 OF SD PLAT, TH S 264', TH E 130.6', TH S 526.3' TH W 300' TH S 164', TH W ALG THE N BOUNDARY OF PEASLEY'S SUB TO THE NW CORNER OF LOT 13 OF SD SUBDIVISION, TH S 170.15' TO THE CENTER LINE OF KELLY ST TH E 86' TH S 165' TO THE SE CORNER OF LOT 31, TH W TO THE NW COR OF LOT 21 OF PLEASANT VIEW SUB TH 165'S TH W 424' ALG THE CENTER LINE OF ALLEN ST TH S 165' TO THE 1/2 SEC LI OF SEC 32 TH W TO A PT 256' W OF THE 1/2 SEC LI (36TH AVE.) SW 1/4 SE TH S 72' TH W 204.4' TH S 210.83' TH W 140' TH SW'LY 134.16' TO THE CENTER LINE OF 37TH AVE. TH SE'LY 186.58' ALG THE CENTER LINE OF 37TH AVE. TH W 203' TO THE W BOUNDARY OF LOT 4 OF HUDS IND CENTER PLAT 
    TH 10'S TH W ALG THE S BOUNDARY OF LOT 2 OF SD PLAT EXTENDED 198.85' TH N TO THE S ROW OF M-21 (CHICAGO DR) TH NE'LY ALG SD ROW LI TO THE INTER OF THE W BOUNDARY EXT S OF LOT 2 OF OHLMAN'S ASSESSORS PLAT NO 1 TH N TO THE SW COR OF LOT 7 OF SD PLAT TH E 113.5' TH N TO THE N SEC LI TH E TO PT OF BEG. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 5, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 117, § 1, 12-22-86) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Ord. No. 97-201, adopted Dec. 9, 1997, amended the boundaries of the downtown district as set forth in Exhibit A to such ordinance. Such Exhibit A is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 8-20. - Board of directors. 
(a)	The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of directors consisting of the mayor and not less than eight (8) or more than twelve (12) members as provided by Act 197 and the bylaws of the authority. The members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by the city commission and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197 and the bylaws. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. 
(b)	The authority may employ and fix the compensation of a director, subject to the approval of the city commission, and a treasurer and secretary. The director shall furnish bond in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the treasurer in such amounts as prescribed by the board. The bonds shall be in such form as may be approved by the board including coverage in the form of a blanket policy carried by the authority or the city. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 6, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 174, § 1, 8-9-94) 
Sec. 8-21. - Powers of the authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this article, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and this article. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 7, 6-14-83) 
Sec. 8-22. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)	The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on January first (1st) of each year and end on December thirty-first of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b)	The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the city commission on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by the Charter to be submitted to the city commission. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the city commission. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)	The authority shall submit financial reports to the city commission at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors of the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 8, 6-14-83) 
Sec. 8-23. - Approval of development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
(a)	The city commission has made the following preliminary findings: 
(1)	That a public hearing was held on December 22, 1986, on the proposed amended development plan and amended tax increment financing plan for the downtown development area, following the giving of notice thereof, all in accordance with Act 197; 
(2)	That there are no findings or recommendations of a development area citizens council, there having been no statutory requirements to form a development area citizens council; 
(3)	That the proposed amended development plan and amended tax increment financing plan meet the requirements set forth in Act 197, specifically section 17(2) thereof; 
(4)	That the proposed method of financing the proposed development is feasible and the downtown development authority has the ability to arrange for financing; 
(5)	That the proposed development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197; 
(6)	That any land included within the proposed development area which is to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of Act 197 in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner; 
(7)	That the proposed amended development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city; 
(8)	That public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the proposed project areas; 
(9)	That changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the proposed project and for the city. 
(b)	The city commission has made the following findings and determination: 
(1)	That based upon the foregoing findings, it is hereby held and determined that the amended development plan and amended tax increment financing plan for the downtown development area constitutes a public purpose; 
(2)	That the amended development plan and amended tax increment financing plan for the downtown development area is hereby approved; 
(3)	That the original development plan and tax increment financing plan for the downtown development area which was adopted by the city commission on June 11, 1985 by the adoption of Ordinance No. 108, as amended by this section, shall remain in full force and effect until such time as it may be further amended in the future in accordance with Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 108, §§ 1, 2, 6-11-85; Ord. No. 118, §§ 1, 2, 12-22-86) 
Secs. 8-24-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-151 et seq. 
State Law reference- Economic development corporations act, MCL 125.1601 et seq.; MSA 5.3520(1) et seq. 

Sec. 8-41. - Approval of application and articles of incorporation. 
    The application dated March 14, 1978, and proposed articles of incorporation for the economic development corporation of the city, are hereby approved and adopted. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 1, 4-11-78) 
Sec. 8-42. - Filing of certified copy; incorporation. 
    A certified copy of this article is directed to be filed with the secretary of state in accordance with Section 5 of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1605, MSA 5.3520(5)), and the following May 16, 1978, the applicants in the application dated March 14, 1978, are authorized to incorporate the economic development corporation of the city as an economic development corporation pursuant to Sections 28 through 36 of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1628-125.1636, MSA 5.3520(28)-5.3520(36)), as amended through June 30, 1976. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 2, 4-11-78) 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, Ch. III. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Laws, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-1. - Adoption of odd-year elections. 
    The city has determined to conform to Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1954 (MCL 168.644a et seq.), as amended, and provide for elections to be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year for all elective city officers. 
Sec. 9-2. - Terms. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 644g.(3) (MCL 168.644g(3), the city shall continue to elect part of its governing body at each election and the length of terms now provided by Charter for commissioners is hereby increased to four (4) years in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 239of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970. The term of Mayor is also increased to four (4) in accordance with a City Charter amendment adopted on November 3, 1998. 
(Ord. No. 41, § 1, 3-9-71; Amend. of 11-3-98, § 2) 
Chapter 10 - FENCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, adopted July 9, 2002, amended Ch. 10, Fences, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly Such chapter pertained to the same subject matter derived from Ord. No. 45, §§ 1-6, adopted Sept. 12, 1972. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 

Sec. 10-1. - Defined. 
    A "fence," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean any partition, structure, hedge or gate as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Sec. 10-2. - Permits. 
    Except as provided in section 10-3(h) hereof, no fence shall be erected or altered without first obtaining a compliance permit from the zoning administrator. A fee for such permit shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Sec. 10-3. - Placement and height. 
(a)	Front yard. No fence shall be erected in the building setback area from any public right-of-way or private street which exceeds three (3) feet in height or be placed within a distance of one (1) foot from the inside sidewalk line. 
(b)	Side yard. No fence shall be (i) erected in the side yard which exceeds six (6) feet, four (4) inches in height; provided, however, that no fence exceeding three (3) feet in height above established grade or (ii) erected or maintained nearer the front property line than the front line of the main dwelling thereon. 
(c)	Rear yard. No fence shall be erected in the rear yard which exceeds six (6) feet, four (4) inches in height. 
(d)	Corner lots. Except as provided in the following sentence, no fence over thirty (30) inches in height above the established sidewalk grade shall be permitted within a clear vision area that is formed by a straight line joining points on the two (2) street/right-of-way lines twenty (20) feet from their intersecting point. A fence is, however, permitted up to three (3) feet in height within the clear vision area if it consists of at least seventy-five (75) percent open space uniformly distributed along its surface and vision through the fence is not obstructed from any angle so as to obstruct the view of vehicular traffic on adjacent streets. 
(e)	Driveways. Except as provided in the following sentence, no fence over thirty (30) inches in height above the established sidewalk grade shall be permitted within a clear vision area that is formed by a straight line joining points on the street/right-of-way and each driveway side line fifteen (15) feet from their intersecting point. A fence is, however, permitted up to three (3) feet in height within the clear vision area if it consists of at least seventy-five (75) percent open space uniformly distributed along its surface and vision through the fence is not obstructed from any angle so as to obstruct the view of vehicular traffic on adjacent street or driveway. 
(f)	Adjacent fences. When erecting a fence next to an existing fence, the maintenance of the area between the fences shall be the responsibility of the person erecting the later fence. Fence panels of the later fence shall be raised four (4) inches above grade, where necessary, for maintenance of the area between fences. 
(g)	Screening. Fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height above the top of a swimming pool wall, the walking surface of a deck, a patio or other area to be screened. 
(h)	Recreational, school and public sites. A fence up to ten (10) feet in height above the established grade is permitted without obtaining a compliance permit to enclose tennis or basketball courts, school or church playgrounds or similar recreational areas, provided that all yard setbacks are maintained as provided in this chapter and no obstruction in visibility is created. A fence up to four (4) feet in height above the established grade is permitted without obtaining a compliance permit within the front yard of school property, public playgrounds or other public property provided that no obstruction in visibility is created. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Sec. 10-4. - Position of finished side. 
(a)	The finished side of any fence shall face away from the dwelling unit to be fenced in or, in other words, the finished side of the fence shall face the neighboring property. 
(b)	All cyclone fences shall have the finished edge on the top side. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Sec. 10-5. - Barbed wire fence. 
    A special use permit is required for a barbed wire fence in zoning districts: Central Business District-Two, (CBD-2); Industrial District-I-1 and Industrial District-I-2. A barbed wire fence is prohibited in all other zone districts. A barbed wire fence shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Sec. 10-6. - Fence maintenance. 
    All fences shall be maintained in a manner to prevent rust, corrosion and deterioration and so as not to become a nuisance, dilapidated or a danger to adjoining property and the public. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Sec. 10-7. - Variances. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any decision or determination made by the zoning administrator and may, in its sound discretion and in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, alter the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-236, § 1, 7-99-2002) 
Chapter 11 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire safety and prevention, § 6-120 et seq.; garbage and trash, Ch. 13; use of hydrants, § 23-25. 
State Law reference- State Fire Prevention Act, MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq., MSA 28.397 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq., MSA 28.437 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 11-16. - Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8 of the State Construction Code Act (Act 230 of 1972, compiled Laws 1948, Section 125.1501 et seq. as amended) and any other applicable provisions of the laws of the State of Michigan permitting adoption of nationally recognized codes by reference the City of Hudsonville hereby adopts the International Fire Code and the National Fire Protection Agency Code as published by the International Code Council as may be amended, from time to time, and the city is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of said code within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 112, § 1, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 138, § 1, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 96-188, § 2, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 17-307, § 1, 3-14-17) 
Editor's note- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Sec. 11-17. - Fees. 
    Any fees required in said Code shall be those established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 112, § 2, 3-11-86; Ord. No. 138, § 2, 11-13-90) 
Secs. 11-18, 11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SAFETY AND FIRE EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 11-20. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of city resources in response to certain public safety or fire emergency incidents, this article authorizes the imposition of charges to recover actual costs incurred by the city in responding to such incidents. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-21. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Assessable costs means those costs for services incurred by the city in connection with a response to a public safety or fire emergency incident, including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs of the city (including, without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs of material disposal and costs of contracted labor) whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a third party on behalf of the city; service charges and interest; attorneys' fees, litigation costs and any costs, charges, fines or penalties to the city imposed by any court or state or federal governmental entities. 
    Bomb threat means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device which if discharged as threatened would violate a federal, state or local law. 
    Emergency assistance means emergency medical, public safety, police, fire and civil defense services. 
    Excessive requests for emergency assistance means any request for emergency assistance made to a particular location or premises if such location or premises has requested emergency assistance more than five (5) times in the preceding thirty (30) days. 
    False alarm means any automated or manual device designed to request or summon emergency assistance which device is activated intentionally or otherwise, in the absence of an actual need for emergency assistance. The determination that there was no actual need for emergency assistance shall be made by the most senior person responding to a false alarm. Provided, however, a false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if (i) caused by an act of God, i.e., a lightening storm, (ii) it originates from a motor vehicle alarm system or (iii) has not occurred more frequently than three (3) times in a calendar month or four (4) times in a calendar year. 
    Hazardous materials means those elements, substances, wastes or by-products, including, but not limited to, combustible liquid, flammable gas, explosives, flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable reactive matter, water reactive matter, petroleum products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which are or are [can be] potentially harmful to the environment or human or animal life, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or property, or to the ecological balance of the environment as determined by the fire chief or the senior fire official of the city in charge at the scene. 
    Hazardous material incident or emergency means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of hazardous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the fire chief or his or her designee has so declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous material incident or emergency. 
    Illegal fire means a fire set or determined to have been set in violation of a federal, state or local law and shall include an arson fire and a fire set in violation of a "no burning" ban or order. An illegal fire does not include an unintentional fire or fire caused by an act of God, i.e., a lightning storm. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on the public streets, roads and highways to transport passengers or property which is required to be registered for use upon such public streets, roads and highways and for the purposes hereof all trailers or appurtenances attached to any motor vehicle. 
    Public safety or fire emergency incident means (i) excessive requests for emergency assistance, (ii) a false alarm, (iii) a hazardous material incident or emergency, (iv) an illegal fire, (v) bomb threats, (vi) threats of harm to oneself or others, (vii) a structure demolition, or (viii) a utility line failure. 
    Release means any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment, including, but not limited to, the air, soil, groundwater and surface water. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity responsible for a public safety or fire emergency incident or any owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of real and personal property from which, onto which or related to, which there is a public safety or fire emergency incident and their heirs, estates, successors and assigns. 
    Structure demolition means the tearing down of a structure damaged by fire which must in the opinion of the fire chief or his or her designee be promptly demolished following the fire to protect public safety. 
    Threats of harm to oneself or others means the verbal or written threat of physical harm to oneself or another or another's property which if carried out would be a violation of federal, state or local law. 
    Utility line failure means the disabling of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television and stereo signals or electronic impulses), water or sanitary or storm sewage if the owner or party responsible for the maintenance of such utility line does not respond within one (1) hour to a request to repair or correct such failure. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-22. - Cost recovery authorization and procedure. 
(a)	The city may recover all assessable costs in connection with a public safety or fire emergency incident from any or all responsible parties jointly or severally. 
(b)	The city manager or his or her designee shall determine the total assessable costs and shall in consultation with other city personnel involved in responding to a public safety or fire emergency incident determine whether to assess any, all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such determination, the following shall be considered: 
(1)	The total assessable costs; 
(2)	The risk the public safety or fire emergency incident imposed on the city, its residents and their property; 
(3)	Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property; 
(4)	Whether the public safety or fire emergency incident required evacuation; 
(5)	The extent the public safety or fire emergency incident required an unusual or extraordinary use of city personnel and equipment; and 
(6)	Whether there was any damage to the environment. 
(c)	After consideration of the factors in (b) immediately above, the city manager may allocate assessable costs among and between responsible parties, including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally against more than one responsible party regardless of whether a responsible party has other legal liability therefor or is legally at fault. 
(d)	If the city manager determines not to assess all or part of assessable costs against a responsible party, such determination shall not in any way limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to other parties. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-23. - Billing and collection of assessable costs. 
    After determining to assess assessable costs against a responsible party, the city treasurer shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address. Such invoice shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing and any amounts unpaid after such date shall bear a late payment fee equal to one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof that the amount due and any previously imposed late payment fee remains unpaid. If a responsible party shall appeal assessable costs pursuant to section 11-24 hereof, such costs, if upheld, in whole or in part, shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the date of determination of the appeal and any late payment fees shall apply thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-24. - Procedure for appealing assessable costs. 
    Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable costs shall have an opportunity to meet with the city manager or his or her designee to request a modification of assessable costs. The responsible party shall request in writing such meeting within seven (7) calendar days of the date of invoice assessing the assessable costs. If, after meeting with the city manager or his or her designee, the responsible party is still not satisfied, he or she may request an opportunity to appear before the city commission to further request a modification of assessable costs. A responsible party who desires to appear before the city commission must first meet with the city manager or his or her designee as provided above and shall file a written request to appear before the city commission with the city clerk within seven (7) calendar days of the date of the meeting with the city manager. Upon receipt of such request, the city clerk will place the responsible party on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city commission meeting, which meeting is at least fourteen (14) calendar days after the date on which the responsible party files the request to appear. Any filed request to appear shall specifically identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the assessed costs should be modified. Any reason, basis or argument for modification of assessable costs not set forth in the request to appear shall be deemed waived by the responsible party. Failure to timely file a written request to appear shall constitute a waiver of the responsible party's right to appear before the city commission; and shall further constitute the responsible party's agreement to pay the assessable costs invoiced. After a responsible party has been given an opportunity to appear before it, the city commission shall promptly determine whether to confirm, modify or void the payment of assessable costs invoiced. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-25. - Assessable costs a lien upon property. 
    Assessable costs assessed against a responsible party not paid when due, including late payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible party in the city, from which, upon which or related to which the public safety or fire emergency incident occurred. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city charter for city real property taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The city treasurer shall, prior to March 1 of each year, certify to the city assessor the fact that such assessable costs are delinquent and unpaid. The city assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-26. - Other remedies. 
    In addition to the remedy set forth in section 11-25 above, the city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 11-27. - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of assessable costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 96-187, § 1, 10-8-96) 
Secs. 11-28-11-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 11-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Act 256 means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2011 as amended from time to time. 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as provided in Act 256. 
    Consumer fireworks mean fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling requirements promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission and are identified as such in Act 256. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks mean large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or deterioration and are identified as such in Act 256. 
    Fireworks mean any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks mean ground and handheld sparkling devices as provided in Act 256. 
    Minor means any individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    National holiday means the following legal public holidays: 
(1)	New Years' Day, January 1. 
(2)	Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January. 
(3)	Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February. 
(4)	Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
(5)	Independence Day, July 4. 
(6)	Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
(7)	Columbus Day, the second Monday in October. 
(8)	Veteran's Day, November 11. 
(9)	Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
(10)	Christmas Day, December 25. 
    Retailer means a person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks for resale to an individual for ultimate use. 
    Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera production or live entertainment. 
    Wholesale means any person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks to a retailer or any other person for resale. Wholesaler does not include a person who sells only display fireworks or special effects. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-41. - Sale of consumer fireworks. 
    A retailer or other person may not sell consumer fireworks within the city unless such person has obtained and has in effect a valid consumer fireworks certificate issued by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs and otherwise complies with the requirements of Act 256 and any rules and regulations promulgated thereto including those related to storage. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-42. - Sale of low-impact fireworks. 
    A retailer or other person may not sell low-impact fireworks unless such person is actively registered, in accordance with Act 256, with the low-impact fireworks retail registry maintained by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-43. - Compliance with applicable ordinances and codes. 
    A retailer or wholesaler of fireworks located within the city must comply with the applicable requirements of the city's zoning ordinance and building codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-44. - Use of consumer fireworks. 
    A person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks in the city on the day proceeding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday, except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. local time. On any other day, no person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 13-294, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 11-45. - Fireworks safety. 
    No person shall endanger the life, health or safety of any other person by the sale, use, possession, transport, display or discharge of any fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-46. - Prohibition on or near certain property. 
    No person shall, at any time, ignite, discharge, use or display, except under the terms and conditions of a permit issued to this section, any fireworks upon another person's property or within fifteen (15) feet of another person's property without such property owner's permission. No person shall, at any time, ignite, discharge, use or display, except under the terms and conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this section, any fireworks in a public street or right-of-way, a public park, school property or any other place of public assembly without the approval of the owner of such property or, in the case of a public park, street or right-of-way, the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-47. - Permits. 
    Provided the applicable provisions of Act 256 are complied with, upon application in accordance with this section, the city may issue a non-transferrable permit for the use of agricultural or wildlife fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects manufactured for outdoor pest control or agricultural purposes or for public or private display. After a permit has been issued, the sale, possession or transportation of fireworks for the purposes described in the permit only may be made. A permit may not be issued to a person under eighteen (18) years of age. The issuance of a permit shall be approved by the city commission and shall be based on the competency and qualifications of the operator of such fireworks as required by Act 256 and the time, place and safety aspects of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-48. - Permit application. 
    An application for a permit, on the form prescribed by the city, shall be made for use of fireworks requiring a permit at least forty-five (45) days in advance of such use. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-49. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a fireworks permit as established from time to time by the city commission shall accompany the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-50. - Proof of financial responsibility. 
    In order to receive a permit for articles pyrotechnic or a display fireworks use, the applicant shall furnish proof of financial responsibility by a bond or insurance in an amount, character, and form deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission on the part of the applicant or an agent or employee of the applicant, and to protect the public. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-51. - Storage of fireworks. 
    The storage of fireworks by retailers and wholesalers shall at all times be in compliance with the requirements of Act 256. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-52. - Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. 
    A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 12-285, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Chapter 12 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord.No. 11-282, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2011, amended Ch. 12 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 12, §§ 12-1-12-17, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90, §§ 1-16, adopted Jan. 12, 1982; Ord. No. 105, §§ 1-5, adopted Nov. 13, 1984. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Soil conservation districts law, MCL 282.1 et seq., MSA 13.1781 et seq.; water resources commission, MCL 323.1 et seq., MSA 3.521 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Enforcing agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended ("Act 230"), the city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the enforcing agency (the "enforcing agency") to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230. The city shall assume responsibility for the administration and enforcement of Act 230 within the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-282, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 12-2. - Enforcement. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code will be enforced by the enforcing agency within the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-282, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 12-3. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Ottawa County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated December 16, 2011, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map ("FIRM") panel numbers of 26139C; 0245E, 0263E, 0264E, 0332E, 0351E, 0352E, and 0355E dated December 16, 2011, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the state construction code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-282, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Chapter 13 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 13, §§ 13-1, 13-2, was deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 135, adopted Sept. 11, 1990, §§ 1-5 of which were included as a new Ch. 13, §§ 13-1-13-5, at the discretion of the editor. Former Ch. 13 pertained to garbage and trash and derived from Ord. No. 35, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 10, 1970 and Ord. No. 115, § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 1986. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 11; refuse and debris regulations in mobile home parks, § 14-20; nuisances, Ch. 15; storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse deemed a nuisance, § 15-2(3); littering, § 16-71; utilities, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.241 et seq., 123.361 et seq., MSA 5.2661 et seq., 5.2726(1) et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
    Garbage as used in this chapter means waste resulting from the handling, preparation, storage, cooking, consumption and sale of food or produce. 
    Trash as used in this chapter means any material or substance capable of being burned, including brush, branches, and twigs, but excluding garbage and leaves. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 161, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 13-2. - Description of offenses. 
(a)	No person, firm or corporation, individually or through any agent or employee, shall burn any garbage within any premises in the city, or burn or bury garbage on or under any land within the city. 
(b)	No person, firm or corporation, individually or through any agent or employee, shall burn any leaves on any premises in the city. 
(c)	No person, firm or corporation, individually or through any agent or employee shall burn any trash on any land within the city, except as provided in section 13-4 hereof. No person, firm or corporation, individually or through any agent or employee, shall keep on any land within the city, burning barrels or outside trash barrels. This prohibition shall not extend to those containers normally used to accumulate refuse and kept within an enclosure or temporarily placed outside for pick-up. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 2, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 161, § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 13-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 161, adopted December 14, 1993, repealed § 13-3, which pertained to special permits for burning and derived from Ord. No. 35, § 3, adopted September 11, 1990. 
Sec. 13-4. - Fires permitted. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prohibit small fires used solely for recreational purposes, such as barbecues or campfires, or highway flares or smudge pots, or for any fire within an incinerator which has been licensed or certified by a state or federal agency for approved use. Provided, however, a member of the fire department or police department may order or cause any such fire extinguished which, in his sole judgment, is hazardous or a nuisance to the general public or neighboring occupants or premises and the person, firm or corporation responsible for such fire shall immediately comply with such order. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 4, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 161, § 4, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 13-5. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, or its or their agent or employee, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days in the county jail, or in any place provided by the city for detention of prisoners, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. The city may also seek injunctive relief in any court of record. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 5, 9-11-90) 
Chapter 14 - MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention regulations for mobile homes, § 12-13; planning, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Mobile home commission act, MCL 125.1101 et seq., MSA 19.855(1) et seq.; campgrounds, MCL 333.12501 et seq., MSA 14.15 (12501) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mobile home commission act, MCL 125.1101 et seq., MSA 19.855(1) et seq. 

Sec. 14-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Effective width shall be used to determine the width of all lots bounded by side lot lines not perpendicular to the street line. To determine the effective width of a lot, a line shall be drawn at right angles to the side lot line having the greatest divergency from perpendicular to the street line, so that it extends through the midpoint of the minimum required setback line from the street. The length of this line shall be the effective lot width. 
    Health officer means the full-time administrative officer of an approved city, county or district board or department of health. 
    License means a written license issued by the commissioner of the state department of health and the city health officer, allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this article and regulations issued hereunder. 
    Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling of forty (40) feet, or more in length, and ten (10) feet, or more, in width, which is constructed to be moved on its own chassis, is capable of being connected to public utilities, and is designed for year-round living as a single family dwelling unit without the necessity for a permanent foundation. The term shall not include pick-up campers, travel trailers, converted buses or tent trailers. 
    Mobile home lot or site means a parcel of land for the placement of a single living unit and the exclusive use of its occupants within a licensed mobile home park. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes. 
    Mobile home stand means that part of an individual site which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions. 
    Permit means a written permit issued by the department of health, permitting the construction, alteration, or extension of a mobile home park under the provisions of Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 125.1101 et seq., MSA 19.855(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Service building means a structure housing laundry facilities or storage facilities and such other facilities as may be required by this article. 
    Special use permit means a written permit issued by the planning commission, permitting the construction, alteration or extension of a mobile home park, under the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 1, 3-16-70) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-17. - Permits and licenses. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless the activity complies with the terms of this article and unless the person holds a valid special use permit issued by the planning commission in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(b)	No mobile home park will be constructed, altered or extended until a construction permit has been issued by the state department of health in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended, nor until a city permit has been issued and the annual city license fee paid. The application for a city permit shall contain the same information as is required to be furnished on the application for the state permit. The annual city license fee shall be determined by the city commission. 
(c)	No permit for occupying any completed mobile home dwelling unit site shall be granted until all basic elements (utilities, parking, access, streets, curbs, walkways) and all appurtenances (landscaping, recreation areas, swimming pools) indicated on the approved plan have been inspected and approved or a performance bond equal to the estimated cost of these items has been posted. In all mobile home parks where less than seventy-five (75) sites are planned, all sites shall be prepared and approved for use prior to human occupancy of any site. In all mobile home parks where more than seventy-five (75) sites are planned, at least twenty-five (25) percent of all sites shall be prepared and approved for use prior to human occupancy of any site. 
(d)	No person desiring to purchase or rent a dwelling unit site shall be required, as a condition of such purchase or rental, to purchase a mobile home from the owner or operator of the park as long as the mobile home intended to be located on such purchased or rented site conforms in size, style, shape, price, etc., as may be required by any reasonable rules and regulations governing the operation of the mobile home park. 
(e)	No person shall maintain, conduct or operate a mobile home park without an annual license from the state department of health and the city. 
(f)	The health officer or building inspector may make an inspection of all construction at any reasonable time to determine whether the work is being done according to the approved plans and specifications. The park owner shall make available any records, test data or other information essential to the determination. 
(g)	The zoning administrator shall be charged with enforcing this article and any other applicable regulations as stated in the special use permit. A regular inspection shall be conducted once each year and a fee charged therefor as set by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 2, 3-16-70) 
Sec. 14-18. - Environmental open space and access requirements. 
(a)	General: 
(1)	Conditions of the soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants, or to adjoining properties, as determined by the county health department. 
(2)	Exposed ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be maintained in a reasonable dust-proof condition. 
(3)	The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surfaces of water to the satisfaction of the city. 
(b)	Use of park areas for nonresidential purposes: 
(1)	No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes except such areas that are required for the direct servicing and well being of the park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park; provided, however, that retail sales of new or used mobile homes may be made from the park by the owners of the park, or the sole licensee or agent of the owners, but all mobile homes held for sale shall be displayed on regular mobile home sites of the park and the mobile homes on display shall be limited to fifteen (15) percent of the available sites in the park. 
(2)	Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of the mobile home located on a mobile home stand by the individual owner or his agent, or those home occupants as permitted in the zoning ordinance. 
(c)	Required separation between mobile homes. No mobile home shall be permitted to occupy any mobile home site if the home is either longer or wider than would permit compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)	The boundaries of every mobile home site shall be clearly and permanently designated according to the dimensions and locations shown on the approved plot plan. 
(2)	There shall be open spaces of at least twenty (20) feet between the sides, ends or side and end of any two (2) mobile homes. In parks incorporating a cluster arrangement, the required distance between mobile homes may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet at one (1) end provided that the average distance between homes is not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(3)	No mobile home shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet to any park vehicular drive or street. 
(4)	No mobile home shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any park boundary line abutting other than a public street. 
(5)	A greenbelt planting strip of not less than thirty (30) feet in width of yard areas shall be placed or located along the perimeter of the mobile home park not bordering on a street and/or where it abuts an area zoned in a residential classification. The greenbelt shall be developed with a mixture of hardy deciduous and coniferous plant material and maintained in a neat and orderly manner. Excluded from the planting shall be the following trees: Ailanthus (tree-of-heaven), box elders, elms, poplars, soft maples, and willows. 
(6)	All mobile homes, occupied or vacant, shall be set back at least forty (40) feet from any public roadway or set back the distance required by the setback requirements of the "Master Plan for Major Streets and Highways, City of Hudsonville, Ottawa County, Michigan" for the type of street on which it fronts or sides, whichever is the greater distance. 
(7)	No motor vehicles shall be parked within the open space required between mobile homes or closer than ten (10) feet to any other mobile home. 
(d)	Park street system: 
(1)	All mobile home parks shall be provided with at least two (2) points of safe and convenient vehicular access from an abutting street. No entrance to a park shall be located closer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the point of intersection of the proposed rights-of-way of any two (2) streets. 
(2)	Each individual mobile home site shall abut, face, or have clear, unobstructed access to a drive, road or street, within the park. All streets shall have an approved cross section and the paved surface shall not be less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. No park shall provide or have direct access through any recorded single-family subdivision. Owners or renters of home sites shall not park on any street within the park. 
(3)	All streets or drives, shall be provided with a smooth, graded, drained, and paved durable surface commencing from the public street to and throughout the park. All street surfaces shall be maintained free of holes and other hazards. All streets shall have adequate street lighting. 
(e)	Required parking areas: 
(1)	Paved, off-street parking shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of occupants and guests. Parking spaces shall be at least the ratio of two (2) car spaces, not less than ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet in size, for each mobile home site. 
(2)	No motor vehicle shall be permitted to be parked or stored within open space between mobile homes or on any drive or street within the park. The park developer or owner shall also provide a separate area either fenced, screened or enclosed, within the park for the storage of tenants' camping trailers, boats, snowmobiles, and other similar recreational equipment, and such items shall not be stored in any other area of the park. 
(3)	Paved parking bays or off-street parking spaces shall be provided within the forty (40) foot setback area between interior park streets and the mobile home provided that no parking space shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any other mobile home. 
(4)	If carports are provided, they shall comply with all setback and open space requirements for mobile homes. 
(5)	Additional parking, equal to one (1) space for four (4) mobile homes shall be provided for storage of park equipment, recreation and service areas and extra guest parking. 
(f)	Walks: 
(1)	Generally. All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use. Such access shall be durable and convenient to maintain. 
(2)	Common walks. A common concrete or paved walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet. 
(3)	Individual walks. All mobile homes shall be connected by concrete or paved individual walks, not less than two (2) feet in width and to common walks and parking areas. 
(g)	Mobile home stands. All mobile home stands shall be a reinforced concrete pad measuring at least four (4) inches in depth, twelve (12) feet in width, and fifty (50) feet in length. 
(h)	Minimum size dimensions: 
(1)	The mobile home site shall have a minimum effective lot width of forty-five (45) feet and an area of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
(2)	Parks so designed as to provide clusters utilizing common open space areas for recreation, etc., may reduce for those lots abutting on the common space, the area of the individual lots by fifteen (15) percent that the common open space must be at least equal to the total area by which abutting lots have been reduced. 
(3)	The planning commission may authorize up to ten (10) percent variances of any required site dimensions, provided that the average dimensions of all lots is in compliance with the minimum required dimensions required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 3, 3-16-70) 
Sec. 14-19. - Utilities. 
    Every mobile home park shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	All utilities shall be underground. 
(2)	All lots shall be provided with municipal public sanitary sewer service, and all mobile homes, or other structures shall be connected thereto, which shall be connected with a state and city approved public sanitary sewer system. All expenses of installation and connection shall be borne by the owner or operator of the mobile home park. The city shall have the option to acquire the system for the sum of one dollar ($1.00) at its sole discretion. 
(3)	All lots shall be provided with municipal water service, and all mobile homes or structures shall be connected thereto, properly connected with a state and city approved public water system. All expenses of installation and connection shall be borne by the owner and operator of the mobile home park. The city shall have an option to acquire the system for one dollar ($1.00) at its sole discretion. 
(4)	The mobile home park shall provide sufficient storm sewer facilities, independent of sanitary sewers, to prevent flooding of other streets or lots. All storm drainage and surface drainage facilities shall be approved by the county drain commissioner. 
(5)	Each mobile home park shall provide fire hydrants connected to a public water supply system, having at least a capacity of five hundred (500) gallons flow per minute, and fire hydrants shall be located so that the maximum distance between each hydrant shall be five hundred (500) feet, and no mobile home unit shall be located farther than three hundred (300) feet from a fire hydrant. 
(6)	Each park shall contain a central television antenna with service to each mobile home site. Such individual antennas on mobile homes shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 4, 3-16-70) 
Cross reference- Utilities generally, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 14-20. - Refuse and debris. 
(a)	Refuse: 
(1)	Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer and in a manner designed not to create a nuisance or a menace to health. 
(2)	All refuse and garbage shall be collected at least once weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this service. Refuse burning shall be prohibited in the park. 
(b)	Debris: 
(1)	Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(2)	Construction materials storage areas for the park shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pine and other building material shall be stored within a structure or fenced-in storage area. 
(3)	Storage of any flammable materials under any mobile home shall be prohibited. 
(4)	The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled by the owner or operator of the park. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 5, 3-16-70) 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash generally, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 14-21. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Any use of land, mobile home or other structure maintained in violation of any provisions of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se. 
(b)	Every person who violates any provision of this article, or any lawful order issued pursuant to this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	The criminal sanctions herein imposed shall be in addition to civil remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 6, 3-16-70) 
Chapter 15 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to require property owners to abate public hazards and nuisances, § 2.3(19). 
Cross reference- Fences which are nuisances, § 10-5; garbage and trash, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Air pollution act, MCL 336.11 et seq., MSA 14.58(1) et seq.; environmental protection act, MCL 691.1201 et seq., MSA 14.528 (201) et seq. 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the word "nuisance" is hereby defined as any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, commission, condition or thing either: 
(1)	Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or 
(2)	Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
(3)	In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(4)	Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others; or 
(5)	Causes substantial interference with the use and enjoyment of private property by the owner of that property. 
(Ord. No. 96-189, § 2, 1-14-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-2. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)	Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation; 
Cross reference- Weeds generally, § 24-16 et seq. 
(2)	The storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such property and such building materials are intended for use in connection with such construction; building materials shall include but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure (all unused building materials shall be removed from the premises by the contractor prior to issuance of any occupancy permit or final acceptance of the building inspector); 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 6. 
(3)	The storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except domestic refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other cast-off material of any kind whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use; 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash generally, Ch. 13. 
(4)	Storage of any property of junk vehicles except in a completely enclosed building; for the purpose of this chapter the term "junk vehicle" shall include any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason such as being in a state of disassembly, disrepair, stripped, dismantled, unregistered or unlicensed; 
Cross reference- Inoperable vehicles generally, § 22-66 et seq. 
(5)	Reserved. 
(6)	Reserved. 
(7)	Reserved. 
(8)	Reserved. 
(9)	All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises; 
Cross reference- Barking, howling, etc., dogs, § 5-6. 
(10)	All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches; 
(11)	The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death; 
Cross reference- Animals generally, Ch. 5. 
(12)	The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances; 
(13)	Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained; 
(14)	Reserved. 
(15)	Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(Ord. No. 8, §§ 2-6, 8, 10-28-58; Ord. No. 124, § 5, 8-9-88; Ord. No. 139, § 5, 11-13-90) 
Sec. 15-3. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 1, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 15-4. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city, the chief of police shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 12, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 15-5. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(1)	An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)	The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary; 
(3)	A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)	A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; 
(5)	A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 12, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 15-6. - Service of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 12, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 15-7. - Abatement by city. 
    Upon failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same, the chief of police shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 12, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 15-8. - Emergency abatement by city. 
    When, in the opinion of the chief of police, there is actual and immediate danger to the public or occupants of a particular premise caused by a nuisance on such premises, the chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered, without any notice or hearing, to order and require such premises to be vacated. The chief of police shall immediately post the premises, warning of the dangerous condition, and shall then abate such nuisance and prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 12, 10-28-58) 
Sec. 15-9. - City's costs. 
    Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provision of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which costs shall be collected as ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 13, 10-28-58) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 164, adopted December 14, 1993, amended Ch. 16, Arts. I-VIII, §§ 16-1-16-8, 16-26-16-34, 16-51-16-56, 16-71, 16-86-16-88, 16-101, 16-102, 16-121-16-127, 16-141-16-146, 16-161-16-171, 16-186-16-194, 16-211-16-213, 16-226-16-232, to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 17, § 1, adopted October 12, 1965; Ord. No. 54, § 1, adopted November 28, 1973; Ord. No. 61, § 1, adopted January 13, 1976 and Ord. No. 83, § 9(a), (b) adopted September 9, 1980. 
Charter reference- Power to enforce local police regulations, § 2.3(17). 
State Law reference- Crimes, MSA Title 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Alcoholic beverage shall mean any spirituous, vinous, malt, fermented liquor, beer, wine, spirits, alcoholic liquids and compounds whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented and by whatever name called, containing one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
    Dangerous weapon shall mean any weapon likely to produce death or great bodily injury; or, any weapon which, because of the manner in which it is used or attempted to be used, endangers life or inflicts great bodily harm. 
    Drug shall mean any drug, controlled or other substance, the sale, distribution or possession of which is prohibited or restricted by federal or state law. 
    Drug paraphernalia shall mean equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as provided for in Act No. 368 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)	Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting marijuana or any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)	Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)	Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)	Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)	Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
(8)	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons or mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)	Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for us in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)	Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)	Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(12)	Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as, but not limited to: 
a.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.	Water pipes; 
c.	Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.	Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.	Roach clips, which are objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.	Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.	Chamber pipes; 
h.	Carburetor pipes; 
i.	Electric pipes; 
j.	Air-drive pipes; 
k.	Chillums; 
l.	Bongs; 
m.	Ice pipes or chillers. 
    Hunt or Hunting means the act of pursuing or trapping animals, for the purpose of killing or catching them, by whatever means. 
    Litter shall mean all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Obscene shall mean that language or conduct which: 
(1)	The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; 
(2)	Depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct; and 
(3)	Taken as a whole, lacks serous literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
    Person shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity. 
    Principal, unless the context calls for a different interpretation, shall mean any principal of any elementary, secondary or high school, or chief administrative officer of any elementary, secondary or high school. 
    Public place shall mean any parking lot, street, alley, park, sidewalk, public building, school, any place of business open to the public or frequented by the public or any portion thereof, and any other place, or any portion thereof, which is open to public view or to which the public has access. 
    Prurient interest means a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion. 
    School shall mean any pre-elementary, elementary (grades K-6), secondary grades (7-12), high school or combination thereof. 
    Sexual conduct means either or both of the following: 
(1)	Representations or descriptions or ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 
(2)	Representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals. 
    Simulated means the explicit depiction or description of any of the types of conduct set forth in the definition of sexual conduct which creates the appearance of such conduct. 
    Ultimate sexual acts means sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anal intercourse, or any other intrusion, however slight, of any part of a person's body or of any object into the genital or anal openings of another person's body, or depictions or descriptions of sexual bestiality, sadomasochism, masturbation, or excretory functions. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 96-189, § 3, 1-14-97) 
Sec. 16-2. - Rules of construction. 
    The rule that a penal statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply to this chapter or its individual provisions. All provisions of this chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-3. - General provisions. 
    The following general provisions shall apply in all prosecutions for offenses provided for in this chapter: 
(1)	Any person who aids, abets, counsels, procures, commands, persuades or assists in the commission of any offense prohibited by this chapter shall be punished as a principal or as if he or she committed or perpetrated the actual offense. 
(2)	Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this chapter, and in such attempt shall do any substantial act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, shall be punished as if the offense were actually perpetrated or committed. 
(3)	Any person who conspires with one (1) or more other persons to commit any act prohibited by this chapter shall be punished as if such offense were actually perpetrated and shall be punished as a principal. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Secs. 16-4-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 16-21. - General offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Commit an assault or an assault and battery upon another person, with or without a weapon. 
(2)	Verbally, electronically, by use of the mails or by placement in any mailbox whether public or private and of whatever nature, communicate a threat of any physical violence or harm to any other person or member of such person's family. 
(3)	Recklessly endanger the life, health or well-being of another person. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 96-189, § 4, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 14-297, § 1, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 16-22. - Dangerous, offensive, and misleading solicitation. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection: 
(1)	Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his or her person, or upon property in his or her immediate possession. 
(2)	Solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining donations. For purposes of this section, solicitation does not include the sale of goods or services. 
(3)	Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to solicit from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(4)	Misleading conduct means knowingly making a false statement or visual representation or intentionally omitting information from a statement in a way that causes the statement to be misleading. Misleading conduct includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.	Stating that a donation is needed to meet a specific need, when the person already has sufficient funds to meet that need and does not disclose that fact; 
b.	Stating that a donation is needed to meet a need that does not exist; 
c.	Stating that the person is from out of town and stranded when that is not true; 
d.	Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military service, when the person is neither a present nor former member of the service indicated; 
e.	Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability when the person does not suffer the disability indicated; 
f.	Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity; or 
g.	Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), it shall be a violation for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)	Within fifteen (15) feet of an automated teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within fifteen (15) feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	Within any public transportation vehicle, or within fifteen (15) feet of any bus stop, taxi stand or rapid transit stop; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; 
(7)	From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(c)	Notwithstanding subsection (b), the following acts shall not be considered violations of this section: 
(1)	Soliciting assistance with a vehicular emergency from an operator of a motor vehicle in traffic on a public street; 
(2)	Soliciting money or other things of value on private property with the consent or invitation of the property owner; or 
(3)	Soliciting money or other things of value from the occupant of a residential unit, when such solicitation occurs at the front entrance of the residential unit and the occupant has not asked the person not to solicit on the property or posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome. 
(d)	In addition to the violations listed in subsection (b), it shall also be a violation of this section for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)	Accosting another; 
(2)	Forcing oneself upon the company of another; or 
(3)	Engaging in misleading conduct. 
(Ord. No. 14-297, § 2, 3-18-14) 
Secs. 16-23-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 16-31. - Trespass. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Wilfully trespass, or enter or remain upon the premises of another without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. 
(2)	Prowl about the private premises of another, or any alley abutting the same, either by day or night, without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. 
(3)	Drive or park a motor vehicle on private property, knowing the same to be private without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. 
(4)	Enter into any place, area or building or any part thereof without, where applicable, having first paid any fee, charge or other consideration required for admission or failing to pay for services as required before leaving. 
(5)	Break and enter, or enter without breaking, any public or private building, structure, vehicle, boat or similar property, whether occupied or unoccupied, without the express permission of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property. 
(6)	Swim, bathe or wade in any creek, stream, pond, lake or any other body of water not designed for the public use or not open to public at that time, or swim, bathe or wade in water on private property not owned or lawfully occupied by such person, without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-32. - Destruction of or interference with property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Interfere with, move, disconnect or carry off any property not his or her own, without the express consent of the owner of such property. 
(2)	Willfully, wantonly or recklessly destroy, mark, damage, deface or tamper with any property, private or public, not his or her own. 
(3)	Place any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any lamppost, electric light, railway, telegraph, telephone or other utility pole, shade tree, fire hydrant, bridge, pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or public building without the consent and authorization of the appropriate official. This shall not be construed as preventing any public officer or official from doing any lawfully authorized act. 
(4)	Mutilate, deface, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by the city unless permission is given by a city officer or employee to remove such notice. 
(5)	Destroy, damage or in any manner alter or deface any drinking fountain or public toilet or restroom, or deposit or throw any substance in any public toilet which causes or may cause damage to it or put any substance in a water fountain which may pollute its waters. For purposes of this subsection, "drinking fountain" and "public toilet" shall mean any facilities owned or operated by the city or any governmental unit as well as facilities owned by private businesses where such facilities are available for use by the public. 
(6)	Open or attempt to open, interfere with, or damage any fire hydrant without authority. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-33. - Littering and waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of any public property or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes or on city streets as directed by the city during designated cleanup periods. For purposes of this subsection, "public or private property or water" includes, but is not limited to: the right-of-way of a road or highway; a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach (including the ice above the water); city parks or playgrounds; refuge, conservation or recreation areas; and residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
(2)	Knowingly fail to remove a vehicle, of any nature, wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road, or street or fail to remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of an accident. 
(3)	Knowingly cause any litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle, of any nature, traveling the highway. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-34. - Theft offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Obtain or attempt to obtain money, goods, property or services by fraud, trick or false pretenses. 
(2)	Knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain telephone service or the transmission of a telephone message by the use of any false or fictitious telephone credit number or telephone number of another without the authority of the person to whom such credit number or telephone number was issued. 
(3)	Buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods or property, knowing the money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(4)	Refuse or willfully neglect to return a motor vehicle, trailer or other tangible property, which he or she has on a rental or lease basis under any agreement in writing providing for its return to a particular place at a particular time, after the expiration of the time stated in a written notice proved to have been duly mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to the last known address of the person who rented or leased the motor vehicle, trailer or other tangible property, and with intent to defraud the lessor. 
(5)	As the agent, servant or employee of another, or as the trustee, bailee or custodian of the property of another, or of any partnership, voluntary association, public or private corporation, or of this state, or of any county, city, village, township or school district within this state, fraudulently dispose of or convert to his or her own use, or take or secrete with intent to convert to his or her own use without the consent of his or her principal, any money or other personal property, of his or her principal which shall have come to his or her possession or shall be under his or her charge or control by virtue of his or her being such agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee or custodian. 
(6)	By use of a computer, telephone or other electronic or mechanical device obtain or gain access to any database, confidential records or other information not his or her own without permission of the owner or keeper of such information. 
(7)	Telephone in a false order to any food delivery service or a false request to any service business and request that food be delivered to a location or that services be rendered at a particular location. 
(8)	With intent to defraud, make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft, or order, in full upon its presentation, if the amount payable in such check, draft or order is for any amount. 
(9)	With intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for same when presentment is made to the drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered, or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing if the amount payable in such check, draft or order is for any amount. 
(10)	As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order payment of which is drawer, when presented in the usual course of business evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawer thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(11)	With regard to subsections (8), (9) or (10), where such check, draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Secs. 16-35-16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOL AND DRUG OFFENSES 

Sec. 16-41. - General provisions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Be intoxicated or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, any drug or any combination of alcoholic beverages and drugs in any public place and either endanger directly the safety of another person or property, or act in a manner that causes or creates a public disturbance. 
(2)	Sell, give or furnish any drug to any person without a license to sell, give or furnish such drug. 
(3)	Sell, give or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who appears to be or is reasonably suspected to be drunk or intoxicated. 
(4)	Possess or use a drug unless otherwise expressly permitted or licensed by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-42. - Possession or use of alcohol. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Purchase, consume or possess an alcoholic beverage if less than twenty-one (21) years of age. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age from possessing alcoholic beverages during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment if the person is employed by a licensee under State of Michigan law, by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or by an agent of said commission if the alcoholic beverage is not possessed for such person's personal consumption. A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions: 
a.	For the first violation, a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and, in the discretion of the court, performance of community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended, at his or her own expense. 
b.	For a second violation, a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and, in the court's discretion, participation in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense by a person or agency designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended. In addition, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator or chauffeur license of the person for a period of not less than ninety (90) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days. The court may order the secretary of state to issue the person a restricted license after the first thirty (30) days of the period of suspension, if the person, under oath, states, and the court finds, that the person is unable to take public transportation to and from his or her work location, place of alcohol drug education treatment, probation department, court-ordered community service program, or educational institution, and does not have any family members or others able to provide transportation. 
c.	For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and, in the court's discretion, participation in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense by a person or agency designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended. In addition, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person for a period of not less than one hundred eighty (180) days nor more than one (1) year. The court may order the secretary of state to issue the person a restricted license after the first sixty (60) days of the period of suspension, if the person, under oath, states, and the court finds, that the person is unable to take public transportation to and from his or her work location, place of alcohol drug education treatment, probation department, court-ordered community service program, or educational institution, and does not have any family members or others able to provide transportation. 
(2)	Knowingly transport or possess, inside or outside a motor vehicle, an alcoholic beverage if the person is less than twenty-one (21) years of age. This subsection shall not apply if the person is employed by a licensee under State of Michigan law, a common carrier designated by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or an agent of said commission, and is transporting or possessing the alcoholic beverage in a motor vehicle during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment. 
a.	Within thirty (30) days after the conviction of a person for a violation of this subsection, which conviction has become final, complaint may be made by the arresting officer or the officer's superior before the court from which the warrant was issued, which complaint shall be under oath and shall contain a description of the motor vehicle in which the alcoholic beverage was possessed or transported by the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age in committing the offense and praying that the motor vehicle be impounded as provided in this subsection. 
b.	Upon the filing of the complaint, the court shall issue an order to the owner of the motor vehicle to show cause why the motor vehicle shall not be impounded. The order to show cause shall have a date and time fixed in the order for a hearing, which date shall not be less than ten (10) days after the issuance of the order and shall be served by delivering a true copy to the owner not less than three (3) full days before the date of hearing or, if the owner cannot be located, by sending a true copy by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. If the owner is a nonresident of the state, service may be made upon the secretary of state as provided in Section 403 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended. 
c.	If the court determines upon the hearing of the order to show cause, from competent and relevant evidence, that at the time of the commission of the offense the motor vehicle was being driven by the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age with the express or implied consent or knowledge of the owner, and that the use of the motor vehicle is not needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of the owner's employment or the actual operation of the owner's business, the court shall authorize the impounding of the vehicle for a period to be determined by the court of not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days. 
d.	The court's order authorizing the impounding of the vehicle shall authorize a law enforcement officer to take possession without other process of the motor vehicle, wherever located, and to store the vehicle in a public or private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle. Appeals shall lie from the order to the circuit court of the county and the provisions governing the taking of appeal from judgments for damages shall be applicable to the appeal. This section shall not prevent a bona fide lienholder from exercising rights under a lien. A person who knowingly transfers title to a motor vehicle for the purpose of avoiding impoundment under this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(3)	Knowingly, or after failing to make diligent inquiry, sell, furnish or give an alcoholic beverage to a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. This shall not apply to alcoholic beverages given under the authority of and pursuant to the direction of a duly licensed physician. 
(4)	Furnish fraudulent identification to a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age or use fraudulent identification to falsely represent that he or she or any other person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older for the purpose of buying or furnishing any alcoholic beverage. 
a.	In addition to any criminal penalty or sanction imposed for a violation of this subsection, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend, for a period of ninety (90) days, the operator or chauffeur license of a person who is convicted of furnishing or using fraudulent identification in violation of this subsection. 
b.	A suspension under this subsection shall be in addition to any other suspension of the person's operator or chauffeur license. 
(5)	Knowingly allow or permit any other person to operate a motor vehicle or other piece of machinery owned or controlled by him or her when he or she knows or should reasonably know that the other person is intoxicated. 
(6)	A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has consumed alcoholic beverage(s) may require the person to submit to a chemical breath analysis. A legal presumption shall be made by the court that the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has consumed or possessed alcoholic beverage(s) if a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood test indicates the person's blood contained .02 percent or more by weight of alcohol. A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis as required by this subsection is responsible for a state civil infraction. 
(7)	The police department, upon determining that a person less than eighteen (18) years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Act No. 293 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968, as amended, allegedly violated subsection (1), shall, within forty-eight (48) hours, notify the parent(s), custodian(s) or guardian(s) of that person of the nature of the violation if the name of the parent(s), custodian(s) or guardian(s) are reasonably ascertainable. If a person less than seventeen (17) years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (1), the police department shall notify his or her parent(s), custodian(s) or guardian(s) immediately. 
(8)	This section shall not apply to a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who: 
a.	Is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution and consumes alcohol beverage(s) in an academic building of the institution, under the supervision of a faculty member, if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and a necessary ingredient of the course; or 
b.	Consumes sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue or temple; or 
c.	Purchases or receives alcoholic beverage(s) as part of an undercover operation under the direction of the person's employer and with the approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action; or 
d.	Purchases or receives alcoholic beverages as part of an undercover operation under the direction of the Michigan State Police, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or the city police department. The Michigan State Police, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and the city police department shall not recruit a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 184, § 1, 1-9-96) 
Sec. 16-43. - Drug paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Use or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug in violation of this chapter. 
(2)	Deliver, possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug in violation of this chapter. 
(3)	Place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(4)	This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer who, in the course of his or her duties, is required to perform certain acts in investigating illegal drug traffic, nor shall it include a person for whom marijuana has been prescribed by a physician, duly licensed by the State of Michigan, nor a person who, in the course of his business, is required to handle said items. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-44. - Possession or use of marijuana. 
    No person who has not obtained a registration from the state board of pharmacy as required by Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1971, as amended (the Controlled Substances Act of 1971), shall knowingly or intentionally possess or use marijuana. 
(1)	This section shall not apply to a person for whom marijuana has been prescribed by a physician, who is licensed by the State of Michigan. 
(2)	When any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under this chapter, or under the Controlled Substances Act of 1971, or under any statute of the United States or of any state relating to narcotic drugs, coca leaves, marijuana, or stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic drugs, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of possession or use of marijuana, the court, without entering a judgement of guilty and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place such person on probation upon reasonable terms and conditions. Upon violation of a term or condition imposed, the court may enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as otherwise provided. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against him. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without an adjudication of guilt. There may be one (1) discharge and dismissal under this subsection granted to any person. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Secs. 16-45-16-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 16-49. - Disturbance of the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Disturb the public peace by knowingly performing or uttering boisterous, vulgar, profane, blasphemous, or other conduct or language which is likely to or does incite physical violence, incite imminent lawlessness or endanger the safety or property of others. 
(2)	Disturb the public peace by knowingly performing or uttering conduct or language which is obscene as defined in section 16-1 of this Code. 
(3)	While in operation of, or passenger in a motor vehicle, willfully create, or operate a vehicle which creates, any noise which is unreasonably loud under the circumstances. Such noise will be considered unreasonably loud under the circumstances if: 
a.	Such noise is clearly audible at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet; 
b.	At a distance of twenty-five (25) feet such noise is louder than that of a normal conversation between two (2) people; and 
c.	Such noise would be unreasonably loud and disturbing to the average member of the community under the circumstances. 
(4)	Willfully create any noise originating from a residence or business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which is unreasonably loud under the circumstances. Such noise will be considered unreasonably loud under the circumstances if: 
a.	Such noise is clearly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the property line of that residence or business; 
b.	At a distance of fifty (50) feet from the property line such noise is louder than that of a normal conservation between two (2) people; and 
c.	Such noise would be unreasonably loud and disturbing to the average member of the community under the circumstances. 
(5)	Conduct the blowing of any whistle, horn or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(6)	Conduct the erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday unless specific approval is first obtained from the city police department. 
(7)	To keep any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, violates section 16-49(4) of this Code. 
(8)	To create unreasonably loud noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Such noise will be unreasonably loud if: 
a.	Such noise is clearly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet; 
b.	At a distance of fifty (50) feet such noise is louder than a normal conversation between two (2) people; and 
c.	Such noise would be unreasonably loud and disturbing to the average member of the community under the circumstances. 
(9)	To operate or cause to be operated a sound truck with radio or amplifier within the city without having first obtained a variance therefor from the city. 
(10)	Create or engage in any physical altercation in any public place, except in reasonable self-defense when attacked without reasonable provocation or in a reasonable defense of another who was so attacked. 
(11)	Without proper authority, conduct himself or herself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(12)	Disturb or unreasonably interfere with any service of worship or other assembly gathered for lawful purposes. 
(13)	Fire, discharge, display or possess any fireworks except of the type and under the conditions permitted by state law and article 4 of chapter 11 of this Code. 
(14)	By the use or means of a telephone perform any of the following: 
a.	Disturb the peace, quiet or privacy of any other person by repeated calls intended to harass or annoy the person or family to whom the calls where made; 
b.	Use obscene language, or suggest any lewd or lascivious act; 
c.	Attempt to extort money or anything of value from any person; 
d.	Threaten any physical violence or harm to any person; or 
e.	Repeatedly and continuously ring the telephone of any person with intent to disturb or harass such person. 
(15)	Disturb the public peace by brandishing an imitation or toy firearms in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 96-189, § 5, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 12-285, § 2, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 16-50. - Exceptions to subsections 16-49(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9). 
    The purpose of this section 16-50 is to maintain the present tradition of this community regarding noise levels. It is meant to exempt certain activities whose sound level is currently acceptable and eliminate the need for those activities to seek permits. This section 16-50 is not meant to advance nor inhibit religion and is enacted to avoid the excessive government entanglement that issuing permits would entail with those activities whose noise levels are currently acceptable in the community. 
    The provisions of subsections 16-49(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9) of this Code shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Those events, activities or locations which have been granted a permit by the city commission under section 16-51 of this Code; 
(2)	Emergency vehicles or warning devices, any police or fire vehicle, any ambulance or any emergency horn, siren or whistle; 
(3)	Fireworks displays and parades where the city has issued a permit for such activity pursuant to article 4 of chapter 11 of this Code; 
(4)	Fairground activities, provided, however, the provisions of section 5-17.C.3 of article 5 of the city's zoning ordinance shall continued to apply; 
(5)	Those sounds traditionally associated with institutional religious expression such as church bells, external church speakers, etc.; 
(6)	Organized sports activities conducted outdoors in appropriate venues such as schools or parks; 
(7)	Highway and utility maintenance and construction including necessary excavations in or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, or any public utility installation by or on behalf of the city, or any public utility or any agency of the state, when the public safety, welfare and convenience necessitates the performance or the work at such time. 
(Ord. No. 96-189, § 6, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 12-285, § 3, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 16-51. - Noise variances. 
(a)	The provisions of subsections 16-49(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9) shall not apply to those events, activities or locations which have been granted a variance, as hereinafter set out, by the city commission. 
(b)	The city commission shall have the authority to grant variances subject to the conditions and under the circumstances set out in this section 16-51. These variances, to be known as "noise variances," shall exclude the event, activity or location for which the permit is issued from the operation and requirements of the applicable subsections of section 16-49 of this Code, subject to the provisions of this section 16-51. 
(c)	Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this section 16-51 shall file an application with the city clerk on a form prescribed by the city manager. The application shall contain, in addition to such information as shall be required by the city manager, information demonstrating that bringing the source of noise for which the variance is sought or the activity involved into compliance with the applicable subsections of section 16-49, would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant, the community or other persons. Upon receiving an application, the city clerk shall forward it to the city manager. Upon receipt of an application, the city manager shall cause such investigation as he or she deems necessary concerning the application. This investigation may include, but need not be limited to, consulting with such city departments as he or she may deem necessary or desirable. The city manager, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section 16-51 may, in his or her discretion, cause a public hearing to be held on any application for a noise variance. If no public hearing is held, the city manager, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section 16-51, shall allow interested parties to submit written comments concerning an application for a noise variance. The applicant shall, prior to the completion of the investigation by the city manager, cause a public notice of said application to be published at least twice in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city, in a form prescribed by the city manager. 
(d)	The city manager, in addition to such other investigation as he or she may deem necessary, shall: 
(1)	Require the applicant to show that the notice requirements herein provided for have been met; 
(2)	Permit the applicant to offer such evidence as it desires to establish the applicant's position that a variance should be granted; and 
(3)	Permit those opposing the applicant's request for a variance to offer evidence in opposition to the granting of a variance. 
    The city manager may, in his or her discretion, refuse to receive or hear evidence that is merely cumulative, and may reasonably limit the time allowed to present evidence by those supporting and those opposing the application. 
(e)	The city manager shall consider all evidence received pursuant to this section 16-51 and based upon this evidence and the results of his or her investigation, shall make a recommendation to the city commission as to whether a noise variance should be granted. The city manager shall make his or her recommendation based upon the factors set out in subsection (f) of this section 16-51, and shall state the reasons for his or her recommendation in writing. The application and recommendation of the city manager shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the city commission or any special meeting called for the purpose of considering the application. In deciding whether to grant the noise variance, the city commission shall consider the factors set out in subsection (f) of this section 16-51. The city commission shall, by resolution, grant or deny the noise variance. If the noise variance is approved, the city clerk shall issue a noise variance subject to any conditions imposed by the city commission. 
(f)	The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to grant a noise variance: 
(1)	The balance of the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons in not granting the noise variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the persons adversely affected and any other effects of the granting of the noise variance. 
(2)	The number, if any, of previous variances granted to the applicant, or for the same location or activity. 
(3)	The nearness of any residence or residences, or any other use which would be adversely affected by noise in excess of the limits prescribed by section 16-49 of this Code. 
(4)	The sound level of the sound to be generated by the event or activity. 
(5)	Whether the type of noise to be produced by the event is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the variance is requested. 
(6)	The density population of the area in which the event or activity is to take place. 
(7)	The time of day or night which the activity or event will take place. 
(8)	The nature of the sound to be produced, including but not limited to whether the sound will be steady, intermittent or of a repetitive impulse nature. 
(g)	Neither the city manager nor the city commission shall consider the communicative content of the activity or event in determining whether to grant or deny a noise variance. The rights of all interested persons to due process of law and equal protection of law shall not be denied. 
(h)	Noise variances granted shall be subject to such reasonable conditions as the city commission shall require, including, but not limited to, conditions: 
(1)	Limiting the days of the week for which the noise variance is valid. 
(2)	Limiting the number of days for which the noise variance is valid. 
(3)	Limiting the hours of the day, or days, for which the noise variance is valid. 
Such conditions shall be noted on the noise variance issued to the applicant and noncompliance with any condition shall terminate the noise variance. The variance shall not be valid unless all conditions thereof are agree to by the applicant in writing. 
(i)	Any noise variance issued pursuant to this section 16-51 shall be kept at the site of the event or activity for which the noise variance was obtained. The noise variance shall be displayed, on request, to any law enforcement officer. The requirements of this subsection (i) are hereby made express conditions of the granting of the noise variance and failure to comply with these conditions shall cause the variance to terminate as provided for in subsection (h). 
(j)	The city commission, in granting or denying a variance pursuant to this section 16-51, shall be an administrative body acting in a quasi-judicial capacity, subject to review as provided in article 6, section 28, of the Michigan Constitution of 1963. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 96-189, § 7, 1-14-97) 
Sec. 16-52. - Vice offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Engage in prostitution or solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of prostitution or any illegal or immoral act. 
(2)	Engage in gambling or any game of chance for money except as otherwise expressly permitted by law. 
(3)	Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale or use of alcoholic beverages, drugs or any other illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(4)	Knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling, prostitution or in any illegal act. 
(5)	Keep, maintain or permit the use of a gambling room, table, equipment or pool tickets, to be used for gambling on any premises occupied or controlled by him or her. 
(6)	Permit or allow any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her to be occupied by persons engaging in any act of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-53. - Curfew. 
(a)	Minors under 12. No minor under the age of twelve (12) years shall loiter, idle, congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or an adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(b)	Minors under 16. No minor under the age of sixteen (16) years shall traverse, congregate or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or an adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(c)	Minors under 17. No minor under the age of seventeen (17) years shall congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(d)	Aiding and abetting violation. No person who is seventeen (17) years or over shall assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to violate the provisions of subsections (a), (b) or (c). 
(e)	Parents, guardians, etc. No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years shall knowingly allow, permit, or encourage that minor, while in his legal custody, to congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place as prohibited in subsections (a), (b) or (c). 
(f)	Juvenile arrest procedure. Arrest and prosecution of minors under the age of seventeen (17) for a violation of this section shall be in accordance with Section 17 and other provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-54. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of section 16-53 shall not apply to: 
(1)	A minor traveling to or from his or her home, place of employment or an activity sponsored or sanctioned by a school, civic group, church or licensee of the city at which no alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages are served. 
(2)	Where the minor is on the sidewalk of his or her residence or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor, so long as the neighbor does not object to the minor's presence. 
(3)	Where the minor is a resident of another municipality or the city and is in a motor vehicle with parental or legal guardian consent traveling through the city or the city is the origin or destination of such motor vehicular travel. 
(4)	Where the minor has in his or her possession a permit issued by the city police department upon application of a parent or legal guardian of such minor. The application shall be in writing and shall include: 
a.	The minor's name and age; 
b.	Identification of the point of origination and destination and the approximate travel time; 
c.	The height, weight, sex, color of eyes and other distinguishing physical characteristics of the minor; and 
d.	An explanation of the necessity of the minor to remain upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place unaccompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 00-225, § 1, 11-14-00) 
Sec. 16-55. - Miscellaneous offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Engage in any window peeping. 
(2)	Swim or bathe in the nude in any public place or on private property without the specific permission of the owner. 
(3)	Expectorate, urinate, defecate or perform any other act which creates a hazardous, unsanitary or deleterious condition in any public place or upon the property of any other person. This subsection shall not apply to the proper use of public or private restroom facilities. 
(4)	Tell or pretend to tell fortunes by person, machine or otherwise for hire, gain, reward or profit whether by means of cards, tokens, trances, inspection of the hands or skull, mind-reading, consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-56. - Weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Carry a dagger, knife, dirk, stiletto or other dangerous weapon, except hunting knives adapted and carried as such, whether concealed or otherwise, except in his or her dwelling house or place of business or other premises possessed by him or her. No person shall carry a pistol on or about his or her person, or, whether concealed or otherwise, in a vehicle operated or occupied by him or her, without a license as provided by law. If a person is in possession of a valid license for a pistol, it shall be unlawful to carry the same in a place or manner inconsistent with any restrictions upon such license, except in his or her dwelling place or place of business. 
(2)	Sell, offer to sell or have in his or her possession, any knife having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade or blades of which can be opened by the flick of a button, pressure on a handle or other mechanical contrivance. 
(3)	Possess, carry, expose, display, discharge, utilize or have any firearm or other dangerous weapon in any public place unless expressly permitted by law. 
(4)	Possess, display, expose, utilize, or have within the passenger compartment of any motor vehicle, any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or other dangerous weapon in or about any public street, park or public place unless the same is licensed as required by law and securely wrapped or encased. 
(5)	Without authority, discharge any firearm, air rifle, arrow or other dangerous weapon, within or into the city, unless in the lawful defense of his person or property, or have any such dangerous weapon in his or her possession on any public street, park or place to the general public unless the same is licensed as required by law and securely wrapped or encased. 
(6)	Possess weapons of the martial arts without a legitimate cause which is related to the person's occupation or business and except on property of which the person has lawful possession. 
(7)	Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile, or object from any moving vehicle or throw any such object toward any person, vehicle or throw any such object toward any person, vehicle or property of another. 
(8)	Fire, discharge, display or possess any fireworks except of the type and under the conditions permitted by state law. 
(9)	Hunt or trap animals within the city. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-57. - Public nudity. 
    No person shall engage in public nudity. No business establishment, including, but not limited to owners, officers, persons in charge of or in control of premises shall permit persons to engage in public nudity. 
    As used herein, "public nudity" shall mean knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals, pubic area or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. Public nudity does not include a woman's breast feeding of a baby, whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding. 
    For purposes of this section public place means, in addition to the definition contained in section 16-1 hereof, any premises used or controlled, in whole or in part, for the purpose of displaying an individual's genitals, pubic area, or anus or the nipple or areola of a female's breast for payment or promise of payment and which is open to the general public as a business club or association. 
    Any premises in which public nudity is offered, promoted, allowed or encouraged shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 178, § 1, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 97-195, § 1, 5-13-97) 
Sec. 16-58. - Snowmobile operations. 
(a)	Snowmobile. For purposes of this section, "snowmobile" is defined as any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice of a type utilizing sled-type runners or skis, or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated; but is not a vehicle which must be registered under Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended. 
(b)	Snowmobile operations. It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile within the city except upon premises owned or under the control of the snowmobile operator or upon the premises of another with that person's express permission. 
(c)	State and county programs. The prohibitions identified in subsection (b) shall not be applicable to snowmobiles operated on any state-approved snowmobile trails in any area regulated by a county-adopted snowmobile program or as otherwise expressly permitted by law. 
(d)	Speed. A person shall not operate a snowmobile at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having due regard for conditions then existing. 
(e)	Liquor and controlled substance. A person shall not operate a snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicating liquor; a controlled substance as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended; or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(f)	Lights. A person shall not operate a snowmobile during the hours from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and lighted taillight. 
(g)	Frozen public waters. A person shall not operate a snowmobile on the frozen surface of public waters within one hundred (100) feet of a person, including a skater, not in or upon a snowmobile or within one hundred (100) feet of a fishing shanty or shelter except at the minimum speed required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile or on an area which has been cleared of snow for skating purposes unless the area is necessary for access to the public water. 
(h)	Proximity to dwellings; time. A person shall not operate a snowmobile within one hundred (100) feet of a dwelling between 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., at a speed greater than minimum required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile. 
(i)	Authorizing operation of snowmobile. The owner or person in charge or in control of a snowmobile shall not authorize or knowingly permit the snowmobile to be driven or operated by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor; a controlled substance as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended; or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(j)	Accidents, notification of authorities, police report. The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident resulting in injuries to or death of any person, or property damage in the estimated amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, notify the police department. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-59. - Tobacco. 
    A person shall not sell, give, or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under eighteen (18) years of age. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
    It is an affirmative defense to a charge pursuant to this section that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, and other tobacco products to persons under eighteen (18) years of age, and that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce such policy. A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing, upon the court and the prosecuting attorney. The notice shall be served not less than fourteen (14) days before the date set for trial. 
    A prosecuting attorney who proposes to offer testimony to rebut the affirmative defense shall file and serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and defendant. The notice shall be served not less than seven (7) days before the date set for trial, and shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness. 
(1)	A person who sells tobacco products at retail shall post, in a place close to the point of sale and conspicuous to both employees and customers, a sign as required pursuant to, and in the manner provided by, the Youth Tobacco Act, Act No. 314 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1988, as amended. 
(2)	A person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Pursuant to a probation order, the court may require a person who violates this section to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program if available. A probationer who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. In addition, a person who violates this section is subject to the following: 
a.	For the first violation, the court may order the person to do one (1) of the following: 
1.	Perform not more than sixteen (16) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
2.	Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in this subsection. 
b.	For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than thirty-two (32) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
c.	For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than forty-eight (48) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
(3)	As used in this section: 
a.	"Chewing tobacco" means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco which is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. 
b.	"Tobacco snuff" means shredded, powdered, or pulverized tobacco which may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENT ORDER 

Sec. 16-61. - General provisions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Use any physical or verbal conduct which obstructs, resists, hinders or opposes any member of the police or fire department, or any other peace officer, in the lawful discharge of his or her duties. 
(2)	Knowingly furnish to any city official or employee, acting in the lawful discharge of his or her duties, a false name, address, date of birth, or a false or misleading report in connection with an arrest or the investigation of an alleged commission of any crime, misdemeanor or citation. 
(3)	Escape or attempt to escape while lawfully in the custody of any police or other peace officer. 
(4)	Impersonate a firefighter, police or other peace officer or other governmental officer or employee, without due authority. 
(5)	Knowingly report a false alarm of fire. 
(6)	When operating a motor vehicle which has been stopped in response to a police officer's signal, leave or attempt to leave the scene unless and until he or she has received permission to do so from the officer. 
(7)	Falsely indicate a lack of knowledge or when asked by a law enforcement officer, a prosecuting attorney, the city attorney or a judge, fail to disclose, or conceal knowledge of the actual commission of a violation of this chapter from a court of law or from a law enforcement officer investigating said violation. This subsection shall not be interpreted to conflict with the right of any person not to be a witness against himself or herself or any other legally recognized privilege or right. 
(8)	Willfully fail to obey the command of any properly identified law enforcement officer to stop or halt. 
(9)	Willfully fail to obey the command of any police officer who is directing traffic or engaging in crowd control. 
(10)	Willfully fail to obey the command of any law enforcement officer, school official or other authorized representative of the department of public works and/or recreation departments, to leave a public park, school grounds, playground, boulevard, swimming pool or recreation area when ordered to do so. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-62. - Offenses on school property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property in the city for any reason whatsoever, unless such person has received permission from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be in or upon or to remain in or upon such public, private or parochial school building or school property or is otherwise so permitted by law. This subsection shall not apply to persons engaging in or attending a school for an authorized activity or to persons using school playground or playground equipment after school hours, or when school is not in session, unless such entry or use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a published or posted rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or other person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit such use or entry. 
(2)	Willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed. 
(3)	Whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property who is found to be creating a disturbance in or upon any such school building or property, fail to leave the building or property, immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal. 
(4)	By violence, threats of violence or other form of coercion, force or attempt to force any public, private or parochial school student or other person to give or to lend any money or other thing of value to any person at any time. 
(5)	Damage, destroy, mark or deface any public, private or parochial school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 16-63. - Tobacco on school property. 
    Except as otherwise provided, a person shall not use a tobacco product on school property. 
(1)	A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)	As used in this section: 
a.	"School district" means a school district, local act school district or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the School Code of 1976, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended; a joint high school district formed under part 3a of Act No. 451; or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these. 
b.	"School property" means a building, facility, or structure and other real estate owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a school district. 
c.	"Tobacco product" means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed, or placed in a person's mouth. 
d.	"Use a tobacco product" means any of the following: 
1.	The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device. 
2.	The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product. 
3.	The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth. 
(3)	This section does not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air stadium, during either of the following time periods: 
a.	Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
b.	After 6 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours. 
(Ord. No. 164 § 2, 12-14-93) 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; community development, Ch. 8; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 14; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2932 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-151 et seq. 

Sec. 17-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a city planning commission which shall be known as the Hudsonville Planning Commission, the planning commission being created hereunder pursuant to Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.), as amended by Act No. 163 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 1, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Authority to create a planning commission, MCL 125.32, MSA 5.2992. 
Sec. 17-17. - Composition. 
(a)	The planning commission shall consist of nine (9) members, six (6) of whom shall represent, insofar as is possible, different professions or occupations and shall be appointed by the mayor, and three (3) of whom shall be ex-officio members, namely: the mayor, one of the administrative officials of the city selected by the mayor, and one (1) member of the city commission to be selected by it. The appointments by the mayor shall always be subject to the approval of a majority vote of the city commission. All members of the city planning commission shall serve without compensation and the appointed members other than ex-officio members shall hold no other city office. The terms of ex-officio members shall correspond to their respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative official shall terminate with the term of the mayor selecting him or with the term of his administrative office, whichever terminates first. The term of each appointed member shall be three (3) years, except that the respective terms of two (2) of the members first appointed shall be for one (1) year, and two (2) for two (2) years. All shall hold office until a successor takes office. 
(b)	Members other than the member selected by the city commission may, after a public hearing, be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The city commission may for like cause remove the member selected by it. 
(c)	Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor in the case of members selected or appointed by the mayor, by the city commission in the case of the member appointed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 2, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33, MSA 5.2993. 
Sec. 17-18. - Officers; meetings; rules and records. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chairman from amongst the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 3, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.34, MSA 5.2994; open meetings act, MCL 15.261, MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 
Sec. 17-19. - Employees; contracts for special services; source and limit on expenditures. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it deems necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion, and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. The city commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditure of the city commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated or the purpose by the city commission, and shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 4, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.35, MSA 5.2995. 
Sec. 17-20. - Master plan for physical development of city-Adoption, contents, publication, alteration. 
    The city planning commission shall make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city. The plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of the territory, including, among other things, the general location, character, and extent of streets, viaducts, bridges, waterways, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces, the general location of public buildings and other public property, and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power, and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, building, property, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the general character, extent and layout of the replanning, redevelopment of blighted districts and slum areas; as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the planning commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one (1) or more major sections or divisions of the city or one (1) or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The commission may from time to time, amend, extend or add to the plan. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 5, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.36, MSA 5.2996. 
Sec. 17-21. - Same-Surveys for basis, purpose. 
    In the preparation of the master plan the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditures of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 6, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.37, MSA 5.2997. 
Sec. 17-22. - Same-Adoption of whole or parts by resolution of planning commission, hearing, notice, certificates to city commission and register of deeds. 
    The city planning commission may adopt the plans as a whole by a single resolution or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension, or addition the planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in the official city publication, if any, and by registered United States Mail to each public company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the city affected. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six (6) members of the planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the section taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman and/or secretary of the planning commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the city commission and to the county register of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 7, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.38, MSA 5.2998. 
Sec. 17-23. - Public works-Approval by planning commission and plans for future. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the city of one (1) or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park, or other public way, ground, or open space, or public building or structure, shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and district until the location, character, and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission; provided that in case of disapproval the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to the city commission which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership, provided, however, that if the public way, ground, space, building, structure, or utility be one the authorization or financing of which does not under the law or Charter provisions governing same, fall within the province of the city commission, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission, or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by the board, commission, or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the planning commission to act within sixty (60) days from and after the date of official submission shall be deemed approval. For the purpose of furthering the desirable future the desirable future development of the city under the master plan the planning commission, after the planning commission shall have adopted a master plan, shall prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements. The planning commission shall annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six (6) years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which in the planning commission's judgement will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six-year period. The above comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, each agency or department of the city concerned with such improvements shall upon request furnish the commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 8, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.39, MSA 5.2999. 
Sec. 17-24. - Same-Recission of action by city commission. 
    Whenever the city commission shall have ordered the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the city commission shall have ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall be not rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the planning commission for a report and until after a public hearing shall have been held. The city commission shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.40, MSA 5.3000. 
Sec. 17-25. - Publicity and education, recommendations, gifts, cooperation for public officials. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic educational, professional, and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out the plan. The planning commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. The planning commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments, and marks thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote city planning, or carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 9, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.41, MSA 5.3001. 
Sec. 17-26. - Necessity for approval of plats; street system. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted that part of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision jurisdiction or part thereof, and shall have filled a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the city planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 10, 10-28-58) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.43, MSA 5.3003. 
Sec. 17-27. - Regulations governing subdivision of lands; bond to secure improvements; publications of regulations. 
    Before exercising the powers referred to in section 17-26, the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access for firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the planning commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation; but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the planning commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the planning commission. The city shall the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances and before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof, shall be certified by the planning commission to the county register of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 11, 10-28-58) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions generally, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.44, MSA 5.3004. 
Sec. 17-28. - Approval or disapproval of plats, procedure, effect. 
    The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within sixty (60) days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand, provided, however, that the applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. Any plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to the address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office and their addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the city or county. Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the municipal plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the city commission amendments of zoning ordinance or map or additions thereto conform to the planning commission's recommendations for the zoning regulation of the territory comprised within approved subdivisions. The commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinance of the city. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power and amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the zoning ordinance or map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 12, 10-28-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.45, MSA 5.3005. 
Chapter 17.5 - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 142, adopted Dec. 20, 1990, did not specifically amend this code; hence inclusion of §§ 1-10 of said ordinance as §§ 17.5-1-17.5-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; begging, § 16-3; building and building regulations, Ch. 6; community development, Ch. 8; zoning, App. A. 

Sec. 17.5-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to regulate the size, number, location, and manner of display of billboards in the city for the following purposes: 
(1)	Health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(2)	Traffic safety. It is determined that an excess amount of signs and billboards, and the improper placement of same results in a confusing backdrop for motorist to clearly see and interpret signs and signalization which are in place to regulate traffic operations. 
It is further determined that improper sizing and placement increases the risk of accidents to the motoring public. 
(3)	Ease of identifying business locations. It is determined that an excessive amount of signs and billboards, results in reduced ability of motorists to see, and consequently safely and efficiently access their desired business locations. 
(4)	To improve and protect city appearance. It is determined the appearance of the city is marred by an excessive amount of signs and billboards and improper placement of same. 
(5)	To preserve property values. It is determined that an excessive amount of signs and billboards, and improper placement of same results in lower property values. 
(6)	To implement recommendations in the city's master plan regarding signs and billboards. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 1, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-2. - Definitions. 
    Billboard means a sign directing attention to a use, activity, message, product or service which is not conducted on or related to the lot or parcel upon which the sign is located. 
    Measurement of billboard size means billboard size shall be determined by calculating the square feet contained in the smallest rectangular figure which encloses all elements of one side of the billboard exclusive of supporting poles. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 2, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-3. - Administration. 
(a)	Altered billboards: Billboards erected, altered, moved, razed, or converted, in violation of any provision of this chapter are declared to be unlawful. 
(b)	Penalty for violations: Every person, corporation, or firm who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any permit, or lawful order of the building official, zoning administrator, planning director, planning commission, or the city commission issued in pursuance of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon issuance of a zoning citation and conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction any violation shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Enforcement procedure: When a violation is initially determined by the zoning administrator or building official, it shall be the zoning administrator's or building official's responsibility to issue a notice to the owner(s) and occupant(s) of the lot or parcel upon which the billboard violation has occurred. This notice shall be issued on a special form for this purpose and shall at least include the following information pertinent to the violation: 
(1)	Date and location of each violation observed by the zoning administrator or building official. 
(2)	Name(s) and addresses of billboard owner(s). 
(3)	Specific section(s) of this chapter which has been violated. If more than one (1) violation, list each violation and each section violated. 
(4)	Length of time allowed before further prosecution of the violation(s). The length of time allowed shall not be less than ten (10) days unless the violation constitutes a clear and present danger to the health or safety of the public, in which case the violation may be prosecuted civilly or criminally without notice. 
(d)	Notice: The notice required by the above subsection may be either personally served upon an individual or upon an officer, director or resident agent of a corporation or may be served by sending a copy of the notice by certified mail with a return receipt executed by the person being served. In the event the appropriate person is not served after reasonable inquiry or attempts, the notice shall be effective upon the posting of the notice in a reasonably conspicuous place upon the property. 
(e)	Enforcement options: Upon a violation of this chapter and upon the giving of the appropriate notice, the violation may be enjoined, abated, remedied, corrected, removed or prosecuted as follows: 
(1)	The zoning administrator or building official may issue a citation to an owner, tenant or occupant of an ordinance violation appearance ticket in accordance with Act 366 of the Public Acts of 1984 (MCLA 764.9c, 764.9f; MSA 28.868(3), 28.868(6). 
(2)	The zoning administrator or building official may file a criminal complaint and seek a warrant in accordance with the Michigan Statutes made and provided. 
(3)	The zoning administrator, building official, or city attorney may institute a civil proceeding seeking to enjoin, abate, remedy, correct or remove any violation of this chapter, together with the recovery of costs and damages. The judgement may provide that city shall have a lien upon the subject real property to the extent that the city has incurred costs and expenses in the abatement, removal or correction of the violation. 
(4)	The election to pursue any of the above remedies shall not bar pursuit of the other remedies. 
(f)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter, or relocate any billboard unless a building permit shall have been first obtained from the city's building official, and a permit fee paid as set by the city commission. 
(g)	Application. An application for a building permit shall be made upon a form(s) provided by the city's building official. This application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of applicant and owner of proposed billboard if different. 
(2)	Proposed location for the billboard. Location information should include identification of the parcel on which the billboard is to be located and position of the billboard in relation to nearby buildings, structures, property lines, and rights-of-way existing or proposed. 
(3)	Two (2) copies of the plans and specifications and method of construction. Plans shall include sign dimensions and total square footage of sign area. 
(4)	Name, address, and telephone number of the sign erector. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 3, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-4. - Compliance inspection. 
    All billboards shall be inspected at original installation. The billboard erector shall notify the city's building official upon completion of installation. If the billboard is found to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the building official shall create a permanent file on the billboard, and include in this file a photograph of the billboard and the date of approval. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 4, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-5. - Periodic inspection. 
    The city's building official shall cause existing billboards to be inspected on a periodic basis as deemed necessary to determine continuation of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 5, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-6. - Correction or removal of unsafe billboards. 
    Should any billboard be found unsafe, insecure, improperly constructed or not in accordance with the requirement of this chapter, the erector and/or owner shall be required to make the billboard safe, secure and otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this chapter within thirty (30) days of a written notice. Failure to comply shall result in an order to remove the billboard within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of notification in writing. Existing billboards determined to be unsafe and an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be removed or repaired immediately at the owner's expense. If the owner or erector of the billboard cannot be reached, the city retains the right to remove or repair the billboard at the owners expense. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 6, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-7. - Spacing and location standards. 
(a)	Billboards shall only be permitted along the I-196 Freeway and shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the I-196 right-of-way line, but not greater than fifty (50) feet. 
(b)	Billboards shall not be located closer than one (1) mile (5,280 feet) from another billboard on either side of a public right-of-way. This spacing standard shall be applicable regardless of what governmental jurisdiction other billboards may be located in. 
(c)	Billboards shall not be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from a residential lot or parcel or lot platted for residential purposes. 
(d)	Billboards shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from the Hudsonville Nature Center. 
(e)	Billboards shall not be located closer than thirty (30) feet to any building. 
(f)	Billboards shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other freestanding sign. 
(g)	Billboards shall not be erected directly above any building. 
(h)	More than one (1) billboard at one location shall not be permitted. 
(i)	Billboards shall not be permitted in any public right-of-way, including railroad right-of-ways, unless approved and erected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 7, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-8. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Billboards shall use only one pole for support. 
(b)	Billboards shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in size, and shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)	Billboards shall be finished on both sides, but sign content shall only be permitted on the side of the billboard which faces oncoming traffic on the closest traffic lane. 
(d)	Billboards shall not be illuminated. 
(e)	Billboard displays using movable parts shall be prohibited. 
(f)	Billboards which require the removal of any tree which cannot be replaced by a tree of equal caliper shall not be permitted. If trees are removed, trees of equal caliper must be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 8, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-9. - Maintenance. 
    All billboard signs shall be maintained by the owner of the sign. The maintenance of the grounds surrounding the billboard may be maintained by either the owner of the billboard or the property owner, however, the city retains the right to hold both parties jointly or severally responsible for such maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 9, 12-20-90) 
Sec. 17.5-10. - Nonconforming billboards. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to encourage eventual elimination of billboards that, as a result of the adoption of this chapter become nonconforming. Elimination of nonconforming billboards are being pursued for the purposes identified in section 17.5-1. 
(b)	Continuance. A nonconforming billboard may be continued, and shall be maintained in good condition, but shall not be: 
(1)	Replaced by another nonconforming billboard. 
(2)	Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the billboard or change its configuration. 
(3)	Expanded. 
(4)	Improved or re-established under any circumstances if the estimated expense of the improvement or reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the estimated replacement cost. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 10, 12-20-90) 
Chapter 19 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, Ch. IX. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance authorizing public improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); community development, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq. 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Cost, when referring to the cost of any local public improvement, shall include the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, legal fees, interest on special assessment bonds for not to exceed three (3) years, and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Local public improvement means any public improvement which is of such a nature as to benefit especially any real property or properties within a district in the vicinity of such improvement. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 1, 5-11-82) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-2. - Authority to assess. 
    The whole cost or any part thereof of any local public improvement may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 2, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-3. - Initiation of projects by resolution of commission. 
    Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the city, the tentative necessity thereof, and the determination that the whole or any part of the expense thereof shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, provided that all special assessments levied shall be in proportion to the benefits derived from the improvements, may be commenced by resolution of the city commission, with or without a petition. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 3, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-4. - Initiation by petition. 
    Local public improvements may be initiated by petition signed by property owners whose aggregate property in the proposed district was assessed for not less than fifty-one (51) percent of the total assessed frontage of the privately-owned real property located therein, all shown by the last preceding general tax records of the city. Such petition shall contain a brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories thereof and it if shall appear that the petition is signed by at least fifty-one (51) percent as aforesaid the clerk shall certify same to the city commission. The petition shall be addressed to the city commission and filed with the clerk and shall in no event be considered directory but is advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 4, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-5. - Survey and report. 
    Before the city commission shall consider the making of any local improvement, the city commission shall cause to be prepared a report which shall include necessary plan, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment district or districts, and such other pertinent information as will permit the city commission to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The city commission shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until such report has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the city commission for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such improvement. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 5, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-6. - Determination of the project, notice. 
    After receiving the report required in section 19-5 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the city commission, and the city commission has reviewed the report, a resolution may be passed tentatively determining the necessity of the improvement, setting forth the nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, determination of benefits received by affected properties, and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected, designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits, placing the complete information on file in the office of the city clerk, where the same may be found for examination, and directing the city clerk to give notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city. The publication of notice shall be made at least seven (7) full days prior to the hearing and the mailing of notice shall be made at least ten (10) full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 6, 5-11-82) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq. 
Sec. 19-7. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the city commission may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in section 19-6. If the determination of the city commission shall be to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed estimates of cost, and directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the city commission's determination and report the same to the city commission for confirmation. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 7, 5-11-82) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq. 
Sec. 19-8. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from original plans or specifications as adopted shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city without authority of the city commission by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the city clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 8, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-9. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    The city commission shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications and estimates of cost and the publication and receipt of construction bids therefor, shall be made for the improvement, nor shall any improvement be commenced until the special assessment roll to defray the costs of the same shall have been made and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 9, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-10. - Special assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels within the designated benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of cost as approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 10, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-11. - Assessor to file assessment roll. 
    When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll he shall file the same with the city clerk for presentation to the city commission for review and certification by it. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 11, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-12. - Meeting to review special assessment roll; objections. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the city commission, by resolution, shall accept the assessment roll and order it to be filed in the officer of the city clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the commission will meet to review such special assessment roll and direct the city clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. The notice shall be given by publication once, at least seven (7) full days prior to the date of the hearing, in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or a person in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, mailed at least ten (10) full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the city commission. At this meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. The assessor shall be present at every meeting of the city commission at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 12, 5-11-82) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq. 
Sec. 19-13. - Changes and corrections in assessment roll. 
    The commission shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll, and at such meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto. The city commission may correct the roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul the assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record or such changes as the city commission deems justified, the city commission determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the city clerk and directing the city clerk to attach her warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten (10) days, therein commanding the assessor to spread and the treasurer to collect the various sums and amounts appearing thereon as directed by the commission. The roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 19-19. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 13, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-14. - Objection to assessment. 
    If at, or prior to, the final confirmation of any special assessments, the owners of privately-owned real property to be assessed for more than fifty (50) percent of the cost of an improvement, or in the case of paving or similar improvements the owners of more than fifty (50) percent of the frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings delineated by this chapter without a five-sevenths vote of the members elect of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 14, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-15. - When due. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the city commission shall make payable at a future time as provided in section 19-16, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 15, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-16. - Partial payments; when due. 
    The city commission may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed thirty (30) in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll or on such date as the city commission may determine and deferred installments being due annually thereafter, or in the discretion of the city commission, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter until all are paid. Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate per annum to be set by the city commission, commencing on such date as shall be established by the city commission. The full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. If the full assessment or the first installment thereof shall be due upon confirmation, each property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of the assessment, or the full amount of any installments thereof, without interest or penalty. Following the thirty-day period, the assessment of first installment thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent and the same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments or first assessment or first installments thereof as are provided by law to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until thirty (30) days after the due date thereof, after which time such installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on the installments shall be collected as are provided by law to be collected as on delinquent general city taxes. After the city commission has confirmed the roll, the city treasurer shall notify by mail each property owner on said roll that the roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of the city treasurer to give the notice or of such owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment thereon, nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 16, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-17. - Delinquent special assessments. 
    Any assessment, or part thereof, remaining unpaid sixty (60) days following the date when the same became delinquent shall be reported as unpaid by the treasurer to the city commission. Any such delinquent assessment shall be transferred and reassessed on the next tax roll, whether city or otherwise, in a column headed "special assessments" with a penalty of four (4) percent plus accrued interest from the due date, upon such total amount added thereto, and when so transferred and reassessed upon the tax roll shall be collected in all respects as provided for the collection of city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 17, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-18. - Creation of lien. 
    Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon from the date of confirmation of the roll shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and, until paid, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state, county and city taxes and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes constitute a lien. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 18, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-19. - Additional assessments, refunds. 
    The city manager shall within sixty (60) days after the completion of each local or special public improvement certify to the treasurer that the public improvement has been completed and the treasurer shall compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the assessor who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond therewith. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by less than five (5) percent the same shall be reported to the city commission which may place the excess in the city treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata according to the assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by five (5) percent or more, the entire excess shall be credited to owners of property as shown by the city assessment roll upon which such assessment has been levied, pro rate according to the assessment. No refunds of special assessments any be made which impair or contravene the provision of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in whole or part by such special assessments. In the case of assessments due in installments the city commission may order the refund given by credit against the installments last coming due. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the city commission may make an additional pro rata assessment after compliance with the provisions hereof, and a public hearing, but the total amount assessed against any one parcel of land shall not exceed the benefits received by the lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 19, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-20. - Additional procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the city commission shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 20, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-21. - Collection. 
    If bonds are issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments as hereinbefore provided, all collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set in a separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest on the bonds so issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used for no other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 21, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-22. - Accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvements shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 22, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-23. - Contested assessments. 
    An action may not be instituted for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of a special assessment unless: 
(1)	Within forty-five (45) days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the city commission indicating an intention to file such an action and stating the grounds on which it is claimed that the assessment is illegal; and 
(2)	The action is commenced within ninety (90) days after the confirmation of the roll. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 23, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-24. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the city commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the city commission shall have the power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 24, 5-11-82) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 9.6. 
Sec. 19-25. - Combination of projects. 
    The city commission may combine several districts into one (1) project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs. There shall be established for each district separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 25, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-26. - Division of parcels. 
    Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the treasurer and the assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots so divided, and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special roll. The city treasurer shall, within ten (10) days after such apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address by first class mail. The apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the city treasurer within twenty (20) days of the mailing of the aforesaid notice. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 26, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-27. - Deferred payments. 
    The city commission may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments from persons who, in the opinion of the city commission and assessor, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases, as a condition to the granting of such deferred payments, the city shall require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary payable on or before his death, or, in any event, on the sale or transfer of the property. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 27, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-28. - Reconsideration of petitions. 
    If the city commission shall fail to make any public improvement petitioned for under the provisions of section 19-4 during the calendar year which any petition is filed, such petition shall be reconsidered by the city commission prior to the first day of March of the succeeding calendar year for the purpose of determining whether such improvement should be made during such calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 28, 5-11-82) 
Sec. 19-29. - Savings clause. 
    All special assessment proceedings commenced prior to May 18, 1982, and conducted in conformity with the provisions of the Charter as in effect prior to the effective date of amendments thereto at the November 3, 1981 election are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed. Any special assessment roll confirmed after the effective date of the amendments to the Charter adopted on November 3, 1981, but prior to May 18, 1982, shall be conclusive, except that period for contesting such assessment roll provided in section 19-23 shall commence on May 18, 1982. All incomplete special assessment proceedings shall be continued under the applicable provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 29, 5-11-82) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to acquire public buildings, grounds, etc., § 2.3(2); power of condemnation, § 2.3((3); power to maintain and dispose of property, § 2.3(4); power to purchase or condemn franchises, § 2.3(7); power to regulate streets and other public ways, § 2.3(8); power to provide for a plan streets and alleys, § 2.3(10). 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cable communications, Ch. 7; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 17; planning for street system, § 17-26; subdivisions, Ch. 21; grading and paving of streets and subdivisions, § 21-43; sidewalk improvements in subdivisions, § 21-45; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning, App. A; franchises, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Bond of sidewalk, curb, etc., contractor. 
    Before any person engages in the construction, rebuilding or repairing of any sidewalks, crosswalks or curbs in the city, he shall apply to the city manager in writing and when required by the city manager the application shall be accompanied by a bond or deposit in such amount as determined by the city manager, conditioned on the faithful observance of all rules, regulations and ordinances imposed by the city relating to such business and occupation, and shall hold the city free from any loss, injury or damage by reason of construction, rebuilding or repairing of any sidewalk, crosswalk or curb in the city. Any bond required herein shall be renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 2, 9-9-80) 
Sec. 20-2. - Snow removal. 
    The owner or occupant of every parcel of real property within the city shall be responsible for keeping the abutting portion of the sidewalk clear from snow, ice or other obstruction which will impair or impede travel on such sidewalk. 
(1)	Fire hydrant; owner responsibility. The owner or occupant of real property within the city on which a fire hydrant is located shall keep the fire hydrant(s) clear from obstruction which would interfere with fire department operations and shall not deposit snow or ice within five (5) feet of the fire hydrant(s). 
(2)	Failure to comply; abatement by city; assessment of costs. Failure by the owner or occupant of any property to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this article. Whenever a violation is found to exist, the city may abate the violation in accordance with the following: 
a.	The chief of police shall give forty-eight (48) hours' written notice of the violation to the owner and/or occupant by posting on the premises or [by] personal delivery. 
b.	The notice to abate the violation shall require that the property be brought into compliance or a written request for a hearing be received by the city within a stated time, a description of the violation and statement that if the violation is not abated or no request for a hearing received, the city shall abate the violation and assess the costs against the property. 
c.	Upon failure to abate the violation or submit a written request for a hearing within the time stated, the city shall proceed to abate the same and prepare a statement of costs incurred in such abatement. 
d.	When, in the opinion of the chief of police, there is actual and immediate danger to the public caused by a violation of this section, the chief of police is authorized, without any notice or hearing, to order and require an abatement of the violation. The chief of police shall immediately post the premises, warning of the dangerous condition, and proceed to abate such violation and prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement. 
e.	Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a violation under the provision of this section shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such violation existed, which costs shall be collected as ad valorem property taxes. 
In addition to the abatement procedures identified above, the city may seek such other relief to prosecute a violation as permitted by law. 
(3)	Removal of snow. A property owner or occupant who removes snow or contracts with a snow removal contractor for the removal of snow from his property or the property he occupies shall not: 
a.	Deposit or cause to be deposited snow in any public right-of-way, including the (i) traveled portion of the right-of-way, (ii) the public sidewalk, or (iii) the area between the sidewalk and the curb (except snow removed from an adjacent driveway approach or public sidewalk). 
b.	Deposit or cause to be deposited snow on public or private property which he does not own or occupy without the permission of the owner of such property. 
c.	Deposit or cause to be deposited snow to be piled to a height so as to obstruct vision between his driveway and the public right-of-way. 
d.	Deposit or cause to be deposited snow on fire hydrants or in such manner as to impede access to fire hydrants. 
Except as provided elsewhere in this section, snow removed from property shall be deposited elsewhere on such property. The person owning or occupying such property shall be responsible for assuring compliance whether he removes the snow or contracts with another party for the removal of the snow. 
(4)	Responsibility; by owner; commercial removal. If a property owner or occupant has snow removed by a snow removal contractor, the contractor shall have the same obligations and responsibilities as the property owner or occupant provided in subsection (3) above. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 9(c), 9-9-80; Ord. No. 165, § 1, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 99-214, § 1, 7-13-99) 
Sec. 20-3. - Snow removal contractor. 
(a)	Definitions. The term "snow removal contractor" as used in this chapter shall mean any person who performs for hire or offers to perform for hire snow plowing services by the use of a motor vehicle. 
(b)	Licensing requirement. No snow removal contractor shall advertise its snow plowing services in the city, represent itself to be a licensed snow removal contractor within the city, solicit or enter into contracts for snow plowing services with property owners or residents of the city, or operate such service within the city without first obtaining a license from the city for each motor vehicle used for snow removal and paying an annual license fee. The annual license fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. Licenses shall cover the period from August 1 through May 1 of a calendar year and a new license for each motor vehicle must be obtained for each calendar year. 
(c)	Muffler required. All motor vehicles used in the performance of snow removal work shall be equipped with an efficient working muffler. 
(d)	Additional regulations applicable to snow removal contractors. The following additional regulations shall apply to snow removal contractors. 
(1)	Insurance. Each applicant for a snow removal contractors license shall file with the application a certificate of insurance for motor vehicle insurance for each motor vehicle it seeks to license covering the period of the license in the minimum amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per person and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) per accident for bodily injury, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for property damage, or a combined single limit coverage of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). The certificate must name the applicant as the insured and the city as an additional insured and must provide for at least a ten-day notice to the city of cancellation or termination. The certificate also must indicate that the coverage applies to commercial snow plowing operations. 
(2)	Equipment. Each motor vehicle used in snow removal operations shall be equipped with an external oscillating or flashing yellow or amber light visible at three hundred sixty (360) degrees and mounted on the rooftop of the vehicle. Such light shall be on at all times during snow removal operations. 
(3)	Repair of damage. Each snow removal contractor shall be responsible for repairing any damage to public property it causes as a result of its snow removal operations. If such contractor shall, after written demand is served upon him, fail to make repairs sufficient to place the property in the same condition as it existed prior to such damage, the city may (i) revoke the contractor's license and/or (ii) cause the damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall become a debt to the city from the snow removal contractor collectable by the city in any manner authorized by law. 
(e)	The city manager may promulgate and the city commission approve from time to time additional rules and regulations for snow removal contractors. Failure to abide by said rules and regulations shall be grounds for revocation of a snow removal contractor's license and shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-214, § 2, 7-13-99) 
Secs. 20-4-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power to require abutting property owners to construct and maintain sidewalks, § 2.3(18). 

Sec. 20-16. - Standards generally. 
    All sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired in accordance with standard practices in the industry and as established from time to time by recommendation of the city manager and approved by the city commission. Such rules and regulations shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk who shall make the same available to those involved in sidewalk construction and repair. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 3, 9-9-80) 
Sec. 20-17. - Construction and repair-Duty of property owners. 
    Each abutting property owner along public streets shall construct a sidewalk within the public street right-of-way abutting his or her property. Once constructed such sidewalk shall be kept and maintained in a good state of repair by the owners and occupants of such abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 4, 9-9-80; Ord. No. 172, § 1, 7-12-94) 
Sec. 20-18. - Same-Standards. 
    All construction of and repairs to sidewalks on public streets shall conform to the provisions, regulations and restrictions adopted by the city pursuant to section 20-16 and all such construction and repairs shall be supervised by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 6, 9-9-80) 
Sec. 20-19. - Same-Notice. 
(a)	Whenever any sidewalk is not constructed, repaired or kept in repair, as provided in this article, by the abutting property owner or the occupant (in the case of repair) of the property abutting such sidewalk, such fact shall be reported to the city commission by the city manager or his or her designee. If the city commission, by resolution, determines that the sidewalk should be constructed of repaired, the city manager or his or her designee shall serve a written or printed notice upon the owners or occupants (in the case of repair) ordering the construction or repair of the sidewalk adjacent to and abutting their respective properties. The notice shall be as follows: 
    "You will please take notice that, at a regular (special) meeting of the city commission held on ;daterule;, a resolution was adopted requiring you, as the owner (occupant) to construct (repair) and pay for the cost of construction (repair) of a sidewalk abutting on the ____________ side of your property located at ____________ Street and legally described as follows: in the City of Hudsonville. Said sidewalk shall be constructed (repaired) in all respects in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances, Chapter 20, Article II, Sections 20-17 and 20-18, and shall be completed within ;daterule; ( ____________ ) days of receipt of this notice. Upon failure to comply with this notice in the manner and time required by Chapter 20, Article II of the Code of Ordinances, the City of Hudsonville will construct (repair) the same and collect the cost thereof in the manner provided in Chapter 20, Article II of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)	The notice shall be given by first class mail (i) in the case of a property owner, to the address shown on the city's latest tax assessment records, and (ii) in the case of an occupant, to the address of the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 6, 9-9-80; Ord. No. 172, § 3, 7-12-94) 
Sec. 20-20. - Same-Procedure upon failure of property owner. 
    Any person notified to construct or repair a sidewalk shall do so within the time specified in the notice and in the manner prescribed in this article under the general supervision of the city manager or his or her designee. In case any sidewalk is not constructed or repaired within the time specified in the notice and in the manner prescribed, the city shall construct or repair the same, either with city employees or through the hiring of an independent contractor, and shall keep an accurate record of the cost and expenses of repairing the same. The amount of such expenses, properly itemized, shall be reported to the city commission. The report shall contain a description of the property in respect to which the expense occurred and the name of the owner, if known, chargeable therewith. A copy of such itemized cost of constructing or repairing the sidewalk shall also be sent to the owner and occupant (in the case of repair) of the property abutting upon which the sidewalk was constructed or repaired. If the owner or occupant (in the case of repair) of any such property fails to pay the cost of such construction or repair of the sidewalk within thirty (30) days after a statement of the costs of such construction or repair, plus an administrative fee equal to ten (10) percent of such costs, has been mailed to the owner and occupant (in the case of repair), such costs and the administrative fee shall be reported to the city assessor to be levied as a special assessment upon the property abutting such sidewalk. Such special assessment shall be subject to review by the city commission at a public hearing after proper notice is given as in all other cases of special assessment, and such special assessment, when confirmed by the city commission, shall be a lien upon the property assessed and shall be collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes or through any other manner permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 7, 9-9-80; Ord. No. 172, § 4, 7-12-94) 
Sec. 20-21. - Notice of construction or repair to nonresidents, nonoccupants, etc. 
    If property abutting any sidewalk ordered to be constructed or repaired is unoccupied by the owner, or the occupant thereof cannot be found within the city, or if the owner thereof is unknown, the city manager or his or her designee shall serve any notice required by this article by this article by posting the same in a conspicuous manner on such property. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 8, 9-9-80; Ord. No. 172, § 5, 7-2-94) 
Secs. 20-22-20-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 20-36. - Permit required. 
    Every person shall be required to obtain a permit from the city manager prior to breaking up or causing to be broken any city street for purposes of excavation for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 1, 9-9-80) 
Sec. 20-37. - Fee; bond. 
    There shall be charged a fee for the permit under this article or prescribed by resolution of the city commission, and the city manager may require a bond or deposit, in his discretion, in such an amount as he determines, to be filed with the city treasurer to assure replacement of any street to a proper condition. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 1, 9-9-80) 
Sec. 20-38. - Backfill; repaving. 
    The backfill shall be accomplished in a manner to be prescribed by the city manager. The applicant or property owner for whose benefit the excavation has been accomplished shall be responsible for the cost of replacing any paving. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 1, 9-9-80) 
Secs. 20-39-20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY PARKS 

Sec. 20-51. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume which are used for beverage purposes. 
    Child or children means any persons less than fifteen (15) years of age. 
    City park means an area or parcel of property including lake waters within said parcel, owned or administrated by the city for use as a park or for public recreational purposes and identified as a city park. 
    Firearm means any instrument used in the propulsion of a shot, shell or bullets by action of gunpowder exploded within the instrument. 
    Hunt or hunting means the act of pursuing or trapping animals, for the purpose of killing or catching them, by whatever means. 
    Motor vehicle means any car, van, truck, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, motorbike, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle or other track or wheeled vehicle propelled or powered by a motor. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-52. - Time restrictions. 
    No person shall enter, use, occupy or be present in any city park or shall traverse, park or use any motor vehicle in any city park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless otherwise posted or with the written permission of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-53. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    No person shall bring any alcoholic beverage into a city park, or possess, store or consume any alcoholic beverage in a city park, or within any area used by members of the public for park or recreational purposes, at any time. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-54. - Motor vehicle. 
    No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle, motor boat or motorized watercraft within any city park, or within any area used by the city for recreational or park purposes, that is not specifically designated for such use of motor vehicles, motor boats or motorized watercraft. Motor vehicles shall not be driven or ridden in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in any city park. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-55. - Fires. 
    No person shall start, build, use or maintain, or allow to be started, built, used or maintained any fire in a city park, except in portable or permanent grills specifically designed for cooking purposes. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-56. - Animals. 
    No person shall bring or allow any animal, other than a household pet on a leash, onto city park property. The person in possession of a household pet shall be responsible for removing from the park any pet excrement. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-57. - Firearms. 
    No person shall possess within a city park any bow, arrows, pistol, slingshot, air gun, rifle, gun, dart gun, shotguns or other firearm. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-58. - Hunting. 
    No person shall hunt within a city park. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-59. - Use of areas designated for motor vehicles. 
    No person shall walk, hike, ski, bicycle, run or jog, except for emergency purposes, along or on a road, drive or any other area that is specifically marked and prescribed for use by motorized vehicles only. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 20-60. - Seasonal parking. 
(a)	From November 1 of each year until April 1 of the following year, parking is prohibited on the street between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)	It is the intent of this section that between 6:00 a.m. on each day and until the parking restrictions provided herein go into effect at 2:00 a.m. of the following day parking is permitted on both sides of the streets to which this section applies. Necessary temporary or emergency restrictions indicated by official signs or other forms of official notice may further restrict parking during these hours. 
(c)	This section applies to every portion of every block in the city unless it is posted with signs that state otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 09-272, § 1(1), 2-10-09) 
Sec. 20-61. - Limitation on parking or storage of vehicles. 
(a)	The parking or storage in any residential zone district of commercial vehicles, and of trucks, vans, and similar vehicles that exceed the capacity or weights as specified by this section (regardless of whether or not the vehicle is a commercial vehicle), shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)	Temporary parking of commercial vehicles. 
a.	The parking or storage of commercial vehicles is prohibited in any residential zone district, except that a commercial vehicle may be parked in a residential zone district under the following circumstances: 
1.	A commercial vehicle may be temporarily parked in a residential zone district at the site where goods or services are being delivered as a part of the normal course of business, during the delivery of goods or services, but in no case longer than five (5) hours per day. 
2.	A commercial vehicle may be parked in a residential zone district as an accessory use as provided in subsection 20-61(a)(2) below. 
(2)	Trucks, vans, and similar vehicles. 
a.	The parking or storage of trucks (including, but not limited to, pickup trucks and panel trucks), vans, or similar vehicles with a rated capacity of more than one (1) ton, or with a gross vehicle weight, gross vehicle weight rating, or elected gross vehicle weight of more than nine thousand (9,000) pounds is prohibited in any residential zone district. 
b.	Truck, vans, and similar vehicles that do not exceed the capacity or weight limitations specified in subsection 20-61(a)(2)a., above, may be parked or stored in residential zone districts if they meet the following requirements: 
1.	A commercial vehicle used personally by an occupant of the premises in going to work may be parked or stored on the premises as an accessory use. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle per dwelling unit shall qualify as an accessory use. 
2.	A truck (including, but not limited to, pickup trucks and panel trucks), van, or similar vehicle may be parked or stored on the premises, provided that the truck, van, or similar vehicle is used personally by the occupant of the premises exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for nonbusiness purposes (i.e., the vehicle is not a commercial vehicle). 
(b)	Essential services. A commercial vehicle of any size or weight used to provide essential services is not included under this section 20-61 as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-273, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Chapter 21 - SUBDIVISION CONTROL AND LAND REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 168, adopted April 12, 1994, repealed Ch. 21, Arts. I-IV, §§ 21-1-21-4, 21-21-21-25, 21-41-21-45, 21-61-21-72, entitled "Subdivisions." Section 2 of Ord. No. 168 added a new Ch. 21 entitled "Subdivision Control and Land Regulation," to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 21 derived from Ord. No. 10, §§ 1.1-8.2, adopted July 12, 1960. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; review of subdivision proposals for flood damage prevention, § 12-7; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 17; necessity for approval of plats, § 17-26; planning regulations governing subdivision of lands, § 17-27; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 23; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision Control Ordinance" of the city and is adopted pursuant to the authorization of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-2. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the subdivision of land in a manner which achieves the following objectives: 
(1)	Adherence to good land use design principles; 
(2)	Allows for safe and efficient access to all properties; 
(3)	Is compatible with adopted plans and ordinances relating to development within the city; 
(4)	Identifies the design and construction requirements for infrastructure improvements associated with the subdivision of land, including the construction of streets, sidewalks, and utility lines; 
(5)	Outlines the review procedures to be used by the city for subdivision applications; and 
(6)	Adherence to sound surveying and monumentation principles. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-3. - Scope. 
(a)	Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions covered under the Subdivision Control Act of 1967. 
(b)	Relationship to other ordinances. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, or private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private easement. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations or permits, or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall, where permissible under existing laws, control. However, the provisions of this chapter shall not be controlling in circumstances where they conflict with provisions of the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended, unless said Act permits the conflicting city provision to control. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-4. - Variances. 
(a)	Variance standards. If a subdivider can clearly demonstrate that literal enforcement of this chapter will cause undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land, the city commission may permit such variances as, in its sound discretion, it believes to be reasonable and within the general purpose and policy of this chapter. 
    No variance shall be granted unless the city commission finds that: 
(1)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land. 
(2)	The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
(3)	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or be injurious to property in the area in which the property is situated. 
(b)	Application procedure. A petition for a variance shall be instituted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration by the planning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-5. - Conditions. 
    The planning commission or city commission may attach conditions as a part of any plat approval within the authority provided by Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Secs. 21-6-21-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS 

Sec. 21-10. - Purpose; chart. 
    This article describes the required review processes to receive approval for a subdivision plat. A chart illustrating the time sequence of the approval process together with identification of reviewing and approving agents is provided in Figure 2.1. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-11. - Sketch plat (optional). 
    A sketch plat for any proposed subdivision may be submitted to the planning commission for preliminary discussion before the preliminary plat is prepared. This step is recommended. As its name indicates, the sketch plat is designed to enable the proprietor/applicant and the planning commission to discuss the basic design concept for the plat, and also discuss the plat process and the requirements which will have to be met. This review is offered to provide the applicant with input from the planning commission before detailed plat plans are prepared. The sketch plat submittal and review does not constitute formal approval by the planning commission. 
    If desired the applicant should submit twelve (12) copies of the sketch plat to the city clerk one (1) week prior to the planning commission meeting at which discussion on the plat is desired. The city clerk will submit the sketch plat to the planning commission. The planning commission will review the sketch plat with the applicant, and provide the applicant with a list of comments following the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-12. - Preliminary plat-Information required. 
    The preliminary plat map should contain or comply with the following information: 
(1)	Proposed name of subdivision. 
(2)	Legal description of the land to be platted and its area in acres. 
(3)	Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the proprietor, the planner, designer, engineer, or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. 
(4)	A location map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area. 
(5)	The names of abutting subdivisions. 
(6)	Date and north arrow. 
(7)	Plat should be prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or larger. 
(8)	Layout of streets, indicating street names, right-of-way widths, proposed pavement widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets. Approximate grade and curve radii calculations should also be provided. 
(9)	Existing land use and existing zoning classifications of the proposed subdivision and that of abutting tracts. 
(10)	A map of the entire area scheduled for development, including future phases if plat is to be done in phases. All proposed roads should be shown and also their connection to existing roads. 
(11)	Layout, number, area, and dimensions of lots. Width of lot at the front yard setback line should also be included. 
(12)	The location of all floodplain or wetland areas. 
(13)	The location of all existing features affecting the subdivision, such as freeways, railroads, buildings, woodlots, and watercourses etc. 
(14)	The location of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, including the location and dimensions of proposed street systems and dedicated right-of-way or easements therefor. All proposed retention/detention basins to accommodate storm drainage should also be shown. 
(15)	Existing contours at two-foot intervals. Topography is to be based on U.S.G.S. datum. 
(16)	Copies of any proposed covenants and deed restrictions, or a statement in writing that none is proposed. If common areas are to be reserved for use of the residents of the subdivision, copies of an agreement showing how the area will be maintained shall also be submitted. 
(17)	Land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the common use of property owners in the subdivision showing location, dimensions, and purpose. 
(18)	A statement indicated the proposed use to which the subdivisions will be put if other than single-family. 
(19)	If any portion of the subdivision will not be served by both public water and public sewer submit copy of site report as described in the rules of state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-13. - Same-Tentative approval. 
    The tentative preliminary plat approval process is illustrated in Figure 2.2. The steps in this approval process are as follows: 
(1)	The proprietor has the preliminary plat prepared. 
(2)	The proprietor submits twelve (12) copies of the preliminary plat (with the information required in section 21-12) to the city clerk. The city clerk notifies the zoning administrator. 
(3)	The zoning administrator schedules a public hearing and plat review before the planning commission. 
(4)	The zoning administrator conducts a staff review and presents all comments to the planning commission prior to their meeting to consider the plat. 
(5)	The planning commission holds the public hearing and reviews the preliminary plat for tentative approval. 
(6)	Following the public hearing the planning commission shall prepare a recommendation for approval or denial for tentative approval of the preliminary plat and forward to the city commission. 
(7)	The city commission shall review the preliminary plat for "tentative approval." 
(8)	If the city commission gives "tentative approval", they shall have the city clerk sign the preliminary plat and return it to the proprietor. 
(9)	If the city commission rejects the preliminary plat for tentative approval they shall have the city clerk return the preliminary plat to the proprietor along with the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval. If the city commission rejects the plat, the proprietor may revise the plat and resubmit to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-14. - Rights bestowed by tentative approval. 
(a)	Rights and time frame. Tentative approval by the city commission shall give the applicant the right that the general terms and conditions under which the tentative approval was granted will not be changed by the city for a period of one (1) year. Tentative approval does not constitute approval to build or undertake any improvements to the property. 
(b)	Tentative approval extension. The city commission may grant an extension of tentative approval if requested in writing by the proprietor and approved by the city in writing. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-15. - Changes to preliminary plat after tentative approval. 
(a)	Major changes. If the applicant desires to make any major changes to the plat following tentative approval, the city's planning commission shall require the applicant to resubmit the plat for tentative approval so that the city and the public have an opportunity to respond to these changes. Major changes shall be defined to include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Any change which adds or deletes lots from the plat; 
(2)	Any change which adds or deletes any roads or access points; 
(3)	Any change which significantly alters the topography or drainage plan; 
(4)	Any change which alters the basic layout of the street system; and 
(5)	Any change which results in any lot or infrastructure element not meeting any city ordinance. 
(b)	Tentative approval rights revoked if major changes are made by proprietor. Major changes made by a proprietor to a preliminary plat following "tentative approval" shall void the rights referenced in subsection 21-14(a), inasmuch as major changes negate the premises upon which "tentative" preliminary plat approval was given. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-16. - Final preliminary plat approval. 
    For preliminary plats to receive final preliminary plat approval, they must be submitted within one (1) year from the date tentative approval was given by the city commission, unless otherwise extended pursuant to section 21-14(b). The review process for final preliminary plat approval is illustrated in Figure 2.3. The steps for this process are as follows: 
(1)	Proprietor submits a list of authorities to the city clerk. 
(2)	Proprietor submits preliminary plat (in form given tentative approval) to the applicable authorities. 
(3)	Authorities review the preliminary plat. 
(4)	If authorities approve, the proprietor collects approvals from all authorities. 
(5)	Proprietor submits the preliminary plat along with copies of all approvals from authorities to the city clerk. 
(6)	The clerk places the plat on the city commission agenda. 
(7)	The city commission reviews for final preliminary plat approval. 
(8)	If city commission gives final preliminary plat approval the city clerk sends notice of the approval to the proprietor. 
(9)	If the city commission rejects the plat the city clerk shall return the plat to the proprietor with the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval. 
(10)	Upon receiving final preliminary plat approval from the city commission the construction drawings for the plat's infrastructure (streets, utilities, sidewalk etc.) may be prepared (refer to section 21-19 Construction Plan Approval Process). 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-17. - Rights bestowed by final preliminary plat approval. 
    The following rights shall be bestowed on the proprietor as a result of final preliminary plat approval: 
(1)	For a period of two (2) years from the date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be chanted. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor in writing and granted by the city in writing. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the city to the other approving authorities. 
(2)	The proprietor may submit construction drawings for the plat, in accordance with section 21-19. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-18. - Final plat approval. 
    Following final preliminary plat approval by the city commission, the proprietor then has the final plat prepared. The process for final plat approval is illustrated in Figure 2.4. The steps in this process are as follows: 
(1)	The proprietor has the final plat prepared. 
(2)	The proprietor obtains final approval from reviewing authorities. 
(3)	Proprietor submits final plat and all filing fees to the city clerk. 
(4)	The city clerk puts final plat approval on city commission agenda. 
(5)	City commission reviews status of construction for infrastructure elements. 
(6)	City commission reviews the final plat. 
(7)	If the city commission approves the final plat, the city clerk signs the final plat. 
(8)	If the city commission rejects the final plat, the city clerk returns the final plat to the proprietor along with reasons for rejection and requirements for approval. 
(9)	Upon signing the final plat, the city clerk submits the final plat and all county and state filing fees to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-19. - Construction plan approval process. 
(a)	Approval process. The review process for plat construction plans is illustrated in Figure 2.5. The steps in this process are as follows: 
(1)	The proprietor prepares detailed construction drawings. 
(2)	The proprietor submits detailed construction drawings to the zoning administrator and any state or county permit authorities. 
(3)	The zoning administrator distributes construction drawings for staff review. 
(4)	Staff review is conducted by: 
a.	City manager 
b.	Police department 
c.	Fire department 
d.	Zoning administrator 
e.	Planning director 
f.	Department of public works 
g.	City engineer 
(5)	Zoning administrator collects review comments. 
(6)	If construction drawings are approved, the zoning administrator notifies the proprietor of approval. 
(7)	If construction drawings are rejected, the zoning administrator notifies the proprietor of revisions necessary. If construction drawings are rejected, the proprietor must restart the review process starting with Step 2. 
(8)	If the construction drawings are approved, the proprietor may begin construction when all required permits are obtained. 
(b)	Time frame. The city shall complete its review of the construction plans within twenty (20) days of their submission. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-20. - Computerized file or plat required. 
    The proprietor shall be required to submit the final plat to the city in an IGDS or DXF computer format using the city's file structure and layering theme. This submittal shall be in addition to the typical mylar copy of the final plat which is submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Secs. 21-21-21-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 21-30. - Generally. 
(a)	Conformance with master plan. All subdivisions shall conform to the provisions of any master plan for the future development of the city. 
(b)	Conformance with zoning ordinance. All subdivisions shall conform to all applicable requirements contained in the city's zoning ordinance. Special concern should be paid to those sections of the ordinance which specify lot dimensional requirements and driveway spacing and design requirements. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-31. - Drainage. 
(a)	Storm drainage. All plats shall provide for adequate storm drainage and disposition of storm water. 
(b)	Stormwater easements along watercourse. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drain or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse, and such further width for construction as deemed adequate by the planning commission. 
(c)	Compliance with master utility plan. All storm drainage plans shall be consistent with the master utility plan for the city (as contained within the city's master plan) and receive the approval of the city's engineer. Drainage plans shall also require the approval of the county drain commissioner and Michigan Department of Natural Resources if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-32. - Street design and standards. 
    This section provides the standards for the design and construction of streets. This section includes both the general standards contained in this section as well as the detailed specifications contained in Appendices A through E of this document. 
(1)	Surface Requirements. All streets shall be paved using either asphalt or concrete. 
(2)	Curb and gutter requirements. All streets shall be constructed using concrete curb and gutter. Curbs shall have a height and width of six (6) inches; and gutter pans shall have a width of one and one-half (1.5) feet. All curb and gutter shall comply with the detailed design specifications illustrated in Appendix A. The city may require a gutter pan of greater width for collector or arterial streets due to a higher volume of drainage flow. The city may also waive or vary this curbing requirement where unique circumstances exist. 
(3)	Conformance with existing or platted streets. All streets shall conform in width, direction and alignment with existing streets and shall connect with existing streets. All streets shall conform to all right-of-way alignments which have been platted through ordinance by the city. 
(4)	Street design speed. Streets at a minimum shall be designed for a vehicle operating speed of ten (10) mph over the proposed posted speed limit as approved by the city. 
(5)	Street grades. No street grade shall be less than .05 percent, nor greater than seven (7) percent. No street grade shall exceed three (3) percent within one hundred (100) feet of any other street. The city commission may, without requirement to follow variance procedure as outlined in section 21-4, permit variation to these street grade standards if it is determined that such variation is necessary to permit reasonable development of a property. 
(6)	Right-of-way width requirements. Right-of-way width requirements for streets shall be based on function as follows: 
a.	Local streets:        66 feet 
b.	Collector streets:        86 feet 
c.	Arterial streets:       100 feet 
Street function shall be as defined in the City of Hudsonville Master Plan. 
The city commission may reduce or increase these dimensions where unique circumstances or existing development dictate, without requirement to follow variance procedure as outlined in section 21-4. 
All streets shall comply with the design standards for local, collector, and arterial streets as illustrated in Appendices B through E. 
(7)	Cul-de-sac/dead-end street. 
a.	Length permitted. Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets shall not exceed a length of eight hundred (800) feet, however, the city commission may permit greater lengths where unique circumstances exist or limited development is proposed, without requirement to follow variance procedure as outlined in section 21-4. 
b.	Turnaround provision. Where it is anticipated that a dead-end street will be extended in the future the city commission may require that a suitable turnaround facility be constructed for the interim period. 
c.	Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter the terms cul-de-sac and dead-end street shall have the following meanings: 
1.	Cul-de-sac: A dead-end public or private street, which terminates in a circular or semi-circular section of street allowing for vehicle turnaround. 
2.	Dead-end street: A street or any street segment having only one (1) access point. 
(8)	Cul-de-sac radii requirements. The pavement radius for a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet. The radius for the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-33. - Street names. 
    Street names shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)	All names will be subject to approval of the planning commission and may be required to conform with city and county numbering system. 
(2)	Street names shall not be permitted which might cause confusion with names of existing streets in or near the city. 
(3)	Streets that will continue existing streets shall have the same names of such existing streets. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-34. - Water system. 
(a)	Connection to municipal system. All subdivisions shall provide for connection to the municipal water system of the city. Whenever it shall be unfeasible to connect to the existing city water system, the city manager, upon consultation with the city engineer, may recommend the waiving of this provision, and such provision may be waived by the city commission, subject to all other agency approvals having jurisdiction over private water supply. The city may require a site report if connection to the public water system is waived. 
(b)	Inspections. Mains and laterals shall require inspection and approval by the city, and other health agencies as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-35. - Sanitary sewer system. 
    All subdivisions shall provide for connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system of the city. Whenever it shall be unfeasible to connect to the existing sanitary sewer system, the city manager, upon consultation with the city engineer, may recommend the waiving of this provision, and such provision may be waived by the city commission subject to all other agency approvals having jurisdiction over private sanitary disposal systems. The city may require a site report if connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system is waived. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-36. - Public utilities. 
    All utility systems shall be placed underground. The city commission may permit deviations from this standard where unique circumstances dictate, without requirement to follow variance procedure as outlined in section 21-4. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-37. - Sidewalks and bicycle paths. 
    The following regulations pertaining to sidewalks and bicycle paths shall apply: 
(1)	Sidewalks shall be required along all public street frontage. Sidewalks in platted development shall be installed within three (3) years of final plat approval by the city commission. The city commission may waive sidewalk or bicycle path requirements where unique circumstances dictate, without requirement to follow variance procedure as outlined in section 1-4. 
(2)	Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet in width, unless otherwise specified by the planning commission. 
(3)	Sidewalks shall be constructed with a depth of four (4) inches except where they cross commercial or industrial driveways. Sidewalks across commercial driveways shall be constructed to a depth of six (6) inches, and those across industrial driveways shall be constructed to a depth of eight (8) inches. 
(4)	Sidewalks shall be constructed to comply with all barrier free requirements as set forth by state regulation. 
(5)	The planning commission and city commission may require an eight-foot wide bicycle path in place of the required sidewalk in those locations where bicycle paths are provided for in the city's master plan. 
All sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be constructed in conformance to the design standards as illustrated in Appendices E through G of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-38. - Driveway design standards. 
    All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards contained in Appendices H and I. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-39. - Block regulations. 
(a)	Block length. No block shall exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length. The planning commission and city commission may permit greater lengths where unique circumstances exist, or limited development is proposed, without requirement to follow variance procedure as outlined in section 21-4. 
(b)	Mid-block pedestrian access or utility easements. The planning commission may require pedestrian walkway or utility easements through a block when deemed appropriate for efficient pedestrian circulation or proper utility function. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-40. - Lots. 
(a)	Width to depth ratio. Lot depth for any lot may not exceed its width by more than three (3) times. The city commission may permit this ratio to be exceeded when the extended length is for the purpose of natural feature preservation or other unique circumstances. 
(b)	Suitability. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as excessive slope, flood conditions, or impact to drainage network, the city commission may, after adequate investigation withhold approval of such lots. The city commission may require the plat applicant to provide whatever information is needed to make their suitability determination. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 21-41. - Performance guarantee. 
    In order to ensure completion of subdivision improvements the city commission may require the proprietor to deposit a performance guarantee. The performance guarantee shall mean a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or corporate surety bond in the amount of the estimated cost of the improvements to be made as determined by the proprietor and verified by the city commission or authorized consultant. The manner in which the performance guarantee shall be processed shall be the same as stated in the Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 168 § 2, 4-12-94) 

TYPICAL CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER SECTION-APPENDIX A

TYPICAL CROSS SECTION FOR LOCAL STREET-APPENDIX B

TYPICAL CROSS SECTION FOR COLLECTOR AND ARTERIAL STREETS-APPENDIX C

ALTERNATE TYPICAL CROSS SECTION FOR COLLECTOR STREETS-APPENDIX D

TYPICAL CROSS SECTION FOR COLLECTOR STREETS WITH BICYCLE PATH-APPENDIX E

CONRETE SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS-APPENDIX F
Sidewalk Construction 
1.	Sidewalk dimensions: Concrete sidewalk shall be 5' wide and 4 inches thick except across industrial driveways it shall be 8 inches thick and across all other driveways it shall be 6 inches thick. 
2.	Base: The sidewalk must be supported on a 4 inch base of compacted sand or granular material. Remove all topsoil and tree roots to a depth of 4 inches below the bottom of the proposed concrete. Place and compact the sand to the required elevation of the bottom of the concrete. 
3.	Forms: Forms may be wood or metal but must be straight and free from warp and strong enough to resist springing during the placing and finishing of concrete. The forms shall be the full depth of the concrete. 
4.	Materials: a) Concrete must be supplied by a commercial redi-mix company and shall meet the requirements of the Michigan department of transportation specifications for type p1 concrete with 28 day strength of at least 3500 psi. The slump of the concrete shall not exceed 3.5 inches. b) Joint material: Expansion joint material shall be 1/2 inch thick asphalt coated fiber sheeting. 
5.	Joints: Joints shall be straight and perpendicular to the surface of the sidewalk. Contraction joints shall be 3/8 inch deep, constructed at right angles to the centerline of the walk and placed every 5 feet. Contraction joints shall be made with a tool designed of that purpose. Expansion joints shall be placed every 50' and at all places where the new sidewalk meets existing concrete. The expansion joint material shall extend the full depth of the concrete. 
6.	Weather: No concrete shall be placed on a frozen base or when the air temperature is less than 35 degrees Fahrenheit. The concrete shall be protected from freezing and from the rain for a period of at least 72 hours. 
7.	Pouring concrete: The base shall be made moist prior to placing the concrete. The concrete shall be thoroughly spaded along the forms before it is screened off to the required grade. 
8.	Finishing: The surface shall be floated just enough to produce a smooth uniform surface free of sags. All edges shall be rounded to a radius of 1/4 inch using a tool designed for that purpose. The surface texture of the sidewalk shall be that obtained by a coarse brooming, transverse to the slope of the sidewalk. 
9.	Curing: The concrete shall be cured for not less than 72 hours by keeping it damp (covering with plastic) or by spraying it with a white concrete curing compound designed for that purpose. 
10.	Backfilling: Backfilling shall be complete after the concrete has set sufficiently and the forms have been removed. The excess excavation at the sides of the sidewalk shall be backfilled with compacted topsoil and smoothed out to meet the existing ground. The topsoil shall then be backfilled with compacted topsoil and smoothed out to meet the existing ground. The topsoil shall then be seeded with a grass seed mixture of 30% perennial rye, 30% Kentucky Blue and 40% Creeping red Fescue. 
11.	Barricading: Lighted barricades shall be placed at each end of the newly poured sidewalk and kept in place until the concrete has cured and is able to be used. 
12.	Inspections: The City shall be notified after forms are in place. City staff will inspect forms for compliance with requirements. Work not meeting these requirements will be rejected and forms will have to be re-set to meet requirements. 
Exceptions with Prior Approval Only 

TYPICAL SIDEWALK RAMP AT STREET INTERSECTION-APPENDIX G

COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL CONCRETE DRIVEWAY APPROACH-APPENDIX H

RESIDENTIAL CONCRETE DRIVEWAY APPROACH-APPENDIX I
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-42-21-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LAND DIVISION AND COMBINATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2001, repealed former art. V, Lot splits, being §§ 21-50-21-55, derived from Ord. No. 169, § 1, adopted Apr. 12, 1994, and enacted in lieu thereof a new art. V, Land division and combination, §§ 21-50-21-56, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 21-50. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the Land Division Act to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances or the Land Division Act; to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain and promote the orderly development of the community, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions or combinations of land within the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 21-51. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms and words used herein shall have the following meaning: 
    Applicant. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. If the applicant is not the owner of record, the owner of record must also approve and sign the application. 
    Accessible, accessibility. Referring to a parcel, the parcel meets one (1) or more of the applicable following requirements:(i) if a single-family residential parcel, the parcel is located upon an existing public street constructed to the requirements of the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city, and the parcel has width not less than the minimum width for such a lot or parcel under the applicable section of the zoning ordinance; (ii) if a single-family residential parcel, the parcel is located adjacent to right-of-way which meets the minimum standards of chapter 21 of the this Code, within which a public street meeting the requirements of the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city will be constructed as a condition of the parcel division and the parcel will have frontage on a public street not less than the minimum width for such a lot or parcel under the applicable section of the zoning ordinance; (iii) if a parcel other than single family residential, the parcel has an existing driveway easement, or public or private street constructed in accordance with the minimum requirements for such access under the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city, which access leads to an existing public street; or (iv) if a parcel other than single-family residential, the parcel will have a driveway easement, or public or private street which will lead to an existing public street, which access will be constructed in accordance with the applicable minimum requirements for such access under the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city as a condition of approval of the parcel division. 
    Blighted Area Rehabilitation Act. Act 344 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945, as amended and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Certified Survey Act. Act 132 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970, as amended and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Combine or combination. The addition or joining of a parcel, tract, lot or any part of the foregoing with an existing parcel, tract, lot or any part of such area of land to facilitate development or use as a separate zoning parcel or lot under the terms of the this Code. 
    Condominium Act. Act 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Divide or division. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor of such land or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one (1) year, or of building development that results in one (1) or more parcels of less than forty (40) acres or the equivalent, and satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act. "Divide" and "division" do not include a property transfer between two (2) or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act, or the requirements of other applicable provisions of this Code. 
    Forty (40) acres or the equivalent. Either forty (40) acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than thirty (30) acres, or a government lot containing not less than thirty (30) acres. 
    Governing body. The city commission of the city. 
    Land Division Act. Act 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Subdivision Control Act. Act 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended and as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 21-52. - Request for division or combination; exemptions. 
    Land in the city shall not be divided or combined without the prior review and approval of the city assessor and zoning administrator, or other official designated by the city commission, in accordance with this article and the Land Division Act; provided that a parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the Land Division Act or a parcel which is proposed to be divided into units through an approved condominium plan pursuant to the Condominium Act shall be exempt from this requirement. A division or combination of land relating to land which has a separate legal description previously created as a result of creating a condominium in compliance with the Condominium Act or a subdivision in compliance with the Subdivision Control Act shall require review and approval under this article, unless the condominium plan or subdivision plan is approved in compliance with the applicable statute. Urban renewal plats authorized according to the Blighted Area Rehabilitation Act are subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 21-53. - Application for land division or combination requirements. 
    An application for land division or combination shall be submitted to the city assessor for review by the city assessor and the zoning administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by the following, unless deemed unnecessary by the appropriate reviewing official: 
(a)	A completed application on such form, as required by the city. 
(b)	Proof of ownership of the land proposed to be divided or combined. 
(c)	A survey map of the land proposed to be divided or combined, as prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of the Certified Survey Act by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer licensed by the state which shows the dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcels or tracts, the location of all existing or proposed structures and other land improvements, the location of any existing easements and the accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and all utilities from the existing public roads. 
(d)	Three (3) copies of a complete tentative parcel map drawn to scale, which shall be not less than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet for property totaling up to three (3) acres and at least one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet for property totaling three (3) acres or more. The parcel map shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer licensed by the state and shall include the following: 
(1)	The date of preparation, north arrow, scale, and name, address and telephone number of the individual or firm that prepared the tentative parcel map. 
(2)	Proposed lot lines and their dimensions. 
(3)	The location of proposed ingress and egress locations to any existing public or private streets. 
(4)	The location of any public or private street, driveway, or any easements located or to be located within any proposed lot or parcel. Copies of the instruments describing and granting such easements shall be submitted with the application. 
(5)	The zoning classification of all proposed parcels. 
(6)	The proposed method of accommodating storm water drainage and providing the resulting properties with public water and sanitary sewer service, including the location of public utility easements. 
(7)	If the parcel or lot which is the subject of the requested land division or combination is located at the end of a stub street, the tentative parcel map must include the design of a proposed cul-de-sac meeting the city standards set forth in the city zoning ordinance and chapter 21 of this Code, or an alternative street layout plan meeting city standards. Installation of the proposed cul-de-sac or alternative street layout must be completed prior to the approval of the land division or combination. 
(8)	An adequate and accurate legal description of all resulting parcels. 
(e)	The history and specifications of any previous division(s) and combination(s) of land of which the proposed division or combination was a part, sufficient to establish the parcel to be divided or combined, was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997. 
(f)	Proof that all taxes which are due and payable, and all special assessments which are outstanding pertaining to the land proposed to be divided or combined have been paid in full. 
(g)	Detailed description of the terms and availability of proposed division rights being transferred or retained. 
(h)	Proof that all divisions or combinations shall result in buildable parcels containing sufficient buildable area outside of unbuildable wetlands, floodplains and other areas where buildings are prohibited to be constructed, and with sufficient area to comply with all required set back provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, and maximum allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site. 
(i)	An application fee, as established by city commission resolution, to cover the costs of administrative review associated with the proposed land division or combination under this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 21-54. - Procedures for review of applications for land division or combination approval. 
(a)	Upon receipt, the city assessor shall provide a copy of the application to the zoning administrator. Upon receipt of a completed application package the city assessor and zoning administrator shall review the application for accuracy, completeness and compliance with this and all other ordinances as well as the Land Division Act. The application shall be approved or shall be approved with reasonable conditions to protect the safety and welfare of the city, or disapproved by the zoning administrator within forty-five (45) days after receipt of a complete application conforming to the requirements of this article and the Land Division Act, and the zoning administrator shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision, and if denied, the reason(s) for the denial. 
(b)	Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator may appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals. 
(c)	Approval of a division or combination is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other applicable provisions of this Code, or other regulations of the city. 
(d)	The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable for approving a land division or combination if building permits for construction on the parcels are subsequently denied because of inadequate water supply, sewage disposal facilities or otherwise. 
(e)	After a division or combination is approved by the city, the document accomplishing the division and/or transfer shall be recorded by the applicant with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds and filed with the city within ninety (90) days of such approval, or the approval will lapse. 
(f)	The city assessor or other designated official shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions, and combinations. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 21-55. - Standards for approval of land division or combination. 
    A proposed land division or combination shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)	All parcels created by the proposed division(s) or combination(s) comply with the applicable lot (parcel) yard and area requirements of the zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot (parcel) area, minimum lot width to depth ratio, maximum lot (parcel) coverage, and minimum setbacks for existing building/structures. 
(b)	The proposed division(s) or combination(s) complies with all requirements of the Land Division Act, this article and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(c)	There is adequate storm drainage and public utilities to serve the parcels created and remaining by the division or combination, as determined by the city, or as a condition of approval of the division or combination, suitable easements are provided to allow the extension of adequate storm drainage and public utilities in the future. 
(d)	The proposed division or combination shall not cause any existing building or structure to become non-conforming as to any ordinance or regulation of the city. 
(e)	The proposed division or combination complies with such additional regulations, conditions and safeguards which have been established by the city deemed to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 21-56. - Consequences of noncompliance with land division/combination approval requirement. 
(a)	Any division or combination of land in violation of any provision of this article shall not be recognized as a land division or combination on the assessment roll and no construction thereon which requires the issuance of a construction or building permit shall be permitted. The city shall have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or continuance of violation of this article. 
(b)	Violation of this article shall subject the violator to the misdemeanor penalties and enforcement actions set forth in section 1-13, of this Code and as may otherwise be provided by law, including a civil action seeking invalidation of the land division or combination and appropriate injunctive or other relief. 
(Ord. No. 01-227, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Chapter 21.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, amended Ch. 25, Telecommunications, in its entirety to read as set forth in §§ 25-1-25-18. Such provisions were redesignated as Ch. 21.5, §§ 21.5-1-21.5-18, in order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of chapter titles within the Code. Former Ch. 21.5, §§ 21.5-1-21.5-23, Apps. A, and A-1, pertained to the same subject matter, derived from Ord. No. 98-292, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1998. 
Cross reference- Satellite dish antennas and receiving stations, § 6-91 et seq.; cable communications, Ch. 7; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 21.5-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Act 48 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2002 ("Act 48"), and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under Act 48 by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with Act 48 or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-3. - Defined terms. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Act 48 means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Act 48 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2002, MCL 484.3101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of Act 48. 
    City means the City of Hudsonville. 
    City commission means the city commission of the city or its designee. This definition does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission of the State of Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in Act 48. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to Act 48 and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act 179 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1991, as amended, MCL 484.2102, et seq. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of Act 48 and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)	A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by Act 48, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)	A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-4. - Permit required. 
(a)	Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in Act 48, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)	Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of Act 48. A telecommunications provider shall file the application with the city clerk. The application shall be complete and include all information required by Act 48, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of Act 48. 
(c)	Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt public disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, Act 442 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended, MCL 15.231 et seq. ("Act 442"), pursuant to section 6(5) of Act 48, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)	Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by Act 48, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)	Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of Act 48. 
(f)	Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of Act 48, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act 179 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1991, as amended, MCL 484.2251 et seq. ("Act 179") and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of Act 179 but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this section. 
(g)	Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of Act 48, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of Act 48, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of Act 179, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this section. Pursuant to section 5(3) of Act 48, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection (g) is not required to pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00) application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection (g) shall be given up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of Act 48. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)	Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of Act 48, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 21.5-4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of Act 48, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)	Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of Act 48. 
(c)	Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of Act 48, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)	Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of Act 48, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining any applicable construction or engineering permit as required by this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of Act 48, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under Act 48 or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of Act 48, a telecommunications provider shall, within ninety (90) days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and the city. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of Act 48. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of Act 48, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in section 21.5-4(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of Act 48. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of Act 48, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of Act 48, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under Act 48, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of Act 48, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of Act 48. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of Act 48. To the extent any fees are charged to telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under Act 48, or which are otherwise inconsistent with Act 48, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of Act 48, if section 8 of Act 48 is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 21.5-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of Act 48, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. 
Sec. 21.5-14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of Act 48, if required by Act 48, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of Act 48, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of Act 48, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of Act 48, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Act 48, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)	Exempting certain route maps from Act 442, as provided in section 21.5-4(c) of this chapter; 
(b)	Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 21.5-4(f) of this chapter; 
(c)	Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five hundred dollar ($500.00) application fee, in accordance with section 21.5-4(g) of this chapter; 
(d)	Approving or denying an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 21.5-5(a) of this chapter; 
(e)	Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 21.5-5(a) of this chapter; 
(f)	Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 21.5-5(a) of this chapter; 
(g)	Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 21.5-5(b) of this chapter; 
(h)	Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 21.5-5(c) of this chapter; 
(i)	Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 21.5-5(d) of this chapter; 
(j)	Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 21.5-6 of this chapter; 
(k)	Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with section 21.5-11 of this chapter; 
(l)	Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 21.5-14 of this chapter; and 
(m)	Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 21.5-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 21.5-18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of Act 48, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 02-238, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Chapter 22 - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 03-245, adopted 12-9-03, repealed Ch. 22 in its entirety and replaced said chapter with new provisions as herein setout. Former Ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 18, § 14, adopted 10-12-65; Ord. No. 19, §§ 1, 2, adopted 12-14-65; Ord. No. 21, §§ 2, 3, adopted 5-10-66; Ord. No. 27, §§ 1, 2, adopted 6-11-68; Ord. No. 28, § 1, adopted 11-12-68; Ord. No. 29, §§ 1-7, adopted 12-10-68; Ord. No. 53, § 1, adopted 10-9-73; Ord. No. 67, § 1, adopted 8-9-77; Ord. No. 80, § 1, adopted 8-7-79; Ord. No. 98, § 1, adopted 5-10-83; Ord. No. 120, §§ 1-5, adopted 3-10-87; Ord. No. 143, § 1, adopted 3-12-91; Ord. No. 144, §§ 1, 2, adopted 9-10-91; Ord. No. 145, §§ 1-4, adopted 9-10-91; Ord. No. 148, §§ 1-6, adopted 2-11-92; Ord. No. 150, §§ 1, 2, adopted 5-12-92; Ord. No. 151, §§ 1-4, adopted 7-14-92; and Ord. No. 163, § 1, adopted 12-14-93. 
Subsequently, Ordinance No. 04-247, adopted 1-13-04, renamed Ch. 22 and Art. I of said chapter to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restriction pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 14; damaging or unauthorized tampering or meddling with motor vehicle, § 16-102; throwing projectiles from or at motor vehicles, § 16-211; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20. 

ARTICLE I. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 22-1. - Code adopted. 
(a)	The city hereby adopts the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the Department of State Police pursuant to Act 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969, as amended, and made effective on October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions thereto by reference. 
(b)	All references to "governmental unit" within such code shall mean the City of Hudsonville. 
(c)	Copies of the code shall be retained at city hall and be made available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 03-245, § 1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 04-247, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-04) 
Secs. 22-2-22-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE 

Sec. 22-10. - Code adopted. 
(a)	The city hereby adopts by reference the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended, effective January 13, 2004, and all future amendments and revisions thereto when they are effective in the state. 
(b)	All reference to "local authorities" within such code shall mean the city. 
(c)	The penalties provided by such code are adopted by referenced, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than ninety-three (93) days nor for which the offense may be punished with a fine in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)	Copies of such code shall be retained at the office of the city clerk and be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 04-247, § 3, 1-13-04) 
Chapter 23 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public utility franchises, Ch. XII. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance establishing utility rates saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cable communications, Ch. 7; garbage and trash, Ch. 13; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 14; utility requirements for mobile homes parks, § 14-19; planning, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; telecommunications, Ch. 21.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 23-1-23-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; flood damage prevention regulations for water supply systems, § 12-8; water system improvement in subdivisions, § 21-44. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-16. - Rules. 
    Every person who shall be supplied with water by the water department shall be deemed to have accepted and approved the rules of the city governing the regulating and supplying of water, and the same shall constitute a part of the contract between such person and the city. Whenever the word "consumer" shall be used in the rules and regulations, it shall mean the owner of the premises. The continuance of the consumer to take water after any amendments or changes of these rules shall be deemed an acceptance of such amendment or change. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 1, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-17. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to obtain water from the city shall make application upon proper forms to be furnished by the city and pay the prescribed fees. Applications made by any person other than the owner of the premises shall be deemed to be the agent of the owner and to have made such application with the consent of the owner. Any special agreements or conditions relative to water shall be first approved by the city commission and shall be in writing and signed by the city manager and the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 2, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-18. - Application for service due to future accessibility. 
(a)	Those areas either in the city or hereafter annexed to the city that can be serviced by the water supply system of the city because of the location of water mains or laterals may hookup to the water supply system after the effective date of any such annexation or upon application for water service, upon payment of the fee or charge hereinafter provided for. 
(b)	Owners of the premises either in the city or hereafter annexed to the city which are serviced in accordance with subsection (a) shall pay, at the time of required hook-up, a charge which shall be made on the front foot basis for such parcel abutting the water main or lateral, based on current construction costs at such time as the connection is made, as determined by the city commission, which shall be equal to the average installation cost of a six (6) inch main, plus the water hook-up fee for such installations. Such charge shall be payable in ten (10) equal annual installments with interest on the unpaid balance from time to time at a rate and from a date to be determined by the city commission, the first installment being due and payable on or before a date determined by the city commission and succeeding installments being payable on or before August fifteenth each year thereafter. Any such owner may discharge the obligation to pay such charge by payment of the total charge, without interest, in cash, on or before a date determined by the city commission. 
(c)	The charges provided for and as determined in subsection (b) shall be a lien on the premises serviced by said water supply system as of the due date of the charges, and on September first of each year the city treasurer shall certify any such charges and installments which have been delinquent ninety (90) days, or more, plus penalties and interest accrued thereon as allowed by the Charter, to the city commission, which shall cause the same to be entered upon the next city and county tax roll against the premises to which such charges shall have been rendered and said unpaid charges, with penalties and interest accrued thereon, shall be collected and said lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll. 
(Ord. No. 49, §§ 1-3, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-19. - Rates and charges. 
(a)	Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section, water furnished to each consumer shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the city. Charges for water service to each consumer within the city for each quarter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city commission. If a quarterly bill for water service shall not be paid by the 5th day of the month following the month in which the bill was issued, a late charge equal to ten (10) percent of the bill shall be applied to the current amount past due and collected therewith. 
(b)	Unmetered. Water may be delivered to unmetered consumers with the written approval of the city manager and upon payment of a fee as shall be agreed in writing. 
(c)	Tapping. The city will make water service available eight (8) feet from property and placed in the parkway, or up to and including the service box, as established elsewhere in the rules, according to the rate schedule approved by the city commission. 
(d)	Fire protection rates. Automatic sprinkler services or hose connections for fire protection purposes only shall constitute separate services and a charge shall be made for each and the rates or charge shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 3, 12-12-72; Ord. No. 160, § 1, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 23-20. - Billing. 
(a)	All bills for water consumed or services rendered shall be sent by mail unless other arrangements are made with the city treasurer. Failure to receive a bill shall not affect in any way the terms or conditions of the billing. 
(b)	The water customer is responsible for the payment of bills until the service is disconnected and the department of public works has had reasonable time to obtain a final meter reading. 
(c)	If a water bill remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after its due date, the city treasurer shall serve by first class mail a disconnect notice to the water customer. If the water customer is other than the owner of the premises to which the service is being given, a duplicate of the notice shall be served by first class mail to such owner also. 
(d)	The department of public works shall have the right to disconnect the service upon failure of the water customer to pay all bills, both current and delinquent, within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice of disconnect. 
(e)	A charge, as determined by the city commission, will be made to restore water service to a water customer whose service has been disconnected for failure to pay bills. At the department of public works' discretion, an additional deposit may be demanded before restoration of the water service. 
(f)	The above disconnect procedure and remedy shall be in addition to such other procedures or remedies to which the city is entitled by virtue of the state law or Charter. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 4, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-21. - Service connections. 
(a)	All connections to the city water supply system shall be made by authorized city employees unless otherwise permitted in writing by the city manager, or his or her designee. 
(b)	All service pipes on either public or private property shall be laid on solid ground not less than five (5) feet below the established grade immediately above the pipe. When water service is laid in the same trench with a sewer it shall be at least eighteen (18) inches distant from the sewer horizontally. 
(c)	All service pipes from the main to the meter shall be of type K copper or other material approved by the city manager or his or her designee and of size approved by the city manager or his or her designee. The minimum size of any service shall be one (1) inch inside diameter. 
(d)	The corporation cock, service pipe, service cock and stop box will be provided in place and maintained by the city after payment of the permit fee. 
(e)	The service pipe from the service cock to the meter may be installed by the customer upon written approval of the city manager or his or her designee. Such service must be left open until inspected by the city. 
(f)	The consumer shall provide two (2) gate valves, of approved type, on either side of the meter. 
(g)	No service of general supply shall be tapped from pipes intended for fire protection only. 
(h)	In all cases where water service is intended to supply more than one (1) shop, store or building, it shall be the duty of the person making such service connection, or causing the same to be made, to install a branch with a stop cock for each branch outside the line of the premises so to be supplied. Such stop cock shall be suitably protected and marked as to be easily located. In no case shall one (1) service supply more than one (1) lot, unless occupied by a single building. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 5, 12-12-72; Ord. No. 11-281, § 1, 11-15-11) 
Sec. 23-22. - Discontinuance of service. 
    If the meter cannot be read for a period of two (2) consecutive reading periods, and no satisfactory arrangement is made whereby such reading can be made within ten (10) days after the date of such scheduled second reading, the service may be discontinued and shall not be restored until the reading is made and payment for water consumed in such period plus a service fee as prescribed by resolution of the city commission is paid or other satisfactory arrangements are made with the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 6, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-23. - Meters. 
(a)	Size. Meters for ordinary domestic service shall be of five-eights by three-fourths inch size. Where application for a larger service is made, determination as to size shall be made by the city manager. Larger sizes may be required for commercial or multiple dwelling use. Water meters over five-eighths by three-fourths inch in size shall be furnished by the city at extra cost. Installation of meters of larger size shall be subject to special agreement with the approval of the city manager. 
(b)	Location. Meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner approved by the city manager. 
(c)	Access. The city shall have the right to shut off the water supply to any customer where access is not available to the meter. Qualified employees of the city shall at all reasonable hours have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed, for the purpose of reading, testing, removing or inspecting same and no person shall hinder, obstruct or interfere with any such employee in the discharge of his duties. 
(d)	Damages. Any damages to a meter resulting from carelessness or neglect of an owner, agent or tenant, to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as damages by frost, hot water, or steam, shall be paid for by the customer upon presentation of the bill therefor. The same shall be collected in the same manner as any service charge. 
(e)	Failure to register. If any meter shall fail to register properly, the city shall estimate the consumption and bill accordingly. 
(f)	Inaccurate meters. A customer may require that a meter be tested upon depositing with the city treasurer a fee as prescribed by resolution of the city commission. If the meter is found to register more than two (2) percent fast, the deposit shall be returned. 
(g)	Bill adjustments. When the city, on its own initiative, tests a water meter and finds same to register five (5) percent or more slow, the city may estimate such consumption loss and bill accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 7, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-24. - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the water department, shall turn on or off any water service without the written permission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 8, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-25. - Hydrant use. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in the case of emergency, without first securing written permission from the city, and paying such charges as may be made. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 9, 12-12-72) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 23-26. - Restrictions; liability. 
    The city manager may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water by any customer should certain circumstances seem to warrant such action. The city shall not be liable for any damages caused by the failure of a customer to receive water for any reason, including the shutting off of such supply by the city, nor shall the city be liable for any damage caused by any change in the pressure of water delivered to any customer. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 10, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-27. - Condemnation of services. 
    If service from the street to the meter is found to be deteriorated, leaking, or if a cross-connection exists in the service between the water supply of the city and any other water supply, the city manager may condemn or discontinue such service and require that the same be repaired or replaced as directed by the city and which said replacements or repairs shall be done at the expense of the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 11, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-28. - Damage to facility. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall uncover or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city water distribution system. Any person responsible for any injury to any main, pipe, hydrant or other water facility, shall reimburse the city therefor and for the loss of water caused thereby and shall be responsible or any damage caused by escaping water. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 12, 12-12-72) 
Sec. 23-29. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a maximum of ten (10) days for the satisfactory correction thereof; provided, however, that in cases of serious danger to public health, or potential damage to the sewer system, a forthwith notice to cease the violation may be served, which notice shall have immediate effect. Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished as provided in section 1-13. Such enforcement shall be in addition to any of the other remedies available to the city as outlined in the division or by law. 
(Ord. No. 47, § 13, 12-12-72) 
Secs. 23-30-23-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS-CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 23-41. - Adoption of state rules. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the water supply cross-connection rules of the state department of public being 1979 AACS R325.11401-R325.11407. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 1, 12-13-77) 
Sec. 23-42. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city department of public works and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 2, 12-13-77) 
Sec. 23-43. - Right of entry on private premises. 
    The representative of the department of public works shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time the property served by a connection to the public water supply system to the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 3, 12-13-77) 
Sec. 23-44. - Discontinuance of water service. 
    The department of public works is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 4, 12-13-77) 
Sec. 23-45. - Potable water supplies; warning sign. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
(Ord. No. 70, § 5, 12-13-77) 
Sec. 23-46. - Supplementary to state and city plumbing code. 
    This division does not supersede the state plumbing code and city plumbing code but is supplementary to them. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 6, 12-13-77) 
Sec. 23-47. - Violations. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division, or any written order of the department of public works, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. The city may in addition to the penalties, maintain any proper action for the abatement of any condition allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 7, 12-13-77) 
Secs. 23-48-23-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER USE RESTRICTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 147, adopted January 14, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 3, §§ 23-51-23-57 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 23-51. - Emergency conservation rules. 
    When weather or other extraordinary conditions place unusual water use demand upon the Hudsonville Water System hereinafter referred to as the System or when the System water supply or capacity is reduced due to mechanical failure, catastrophe or other physical limitations, and low pressure or reduced volumes threaten the public health, safety or welfare, the city manager or his or her designee is hereby empowered to make all rules necessary to conserve and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the integrity of the System. Such rules may restrict or prohibit less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate supply for essential domestic and commercial needs and for firefighting. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 23-52. - Effective date of rules. 
    Rules promulgated under this division shall become effective immediately and shall remain in effect until modified or rescinded by further order of the city manager or his or her designee or by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 23-53. - Notice. 
    Notification of rules promulgated under this division shall be by any reasonable means and may include, without limitation, public announcement by broadcast from a radio or television station with a normal operation range in the city, announcement by loudspeaker in the city, publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and/or posting in public places within the city. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 23-54. - Exceptions. 
    The city manager or his or her designee may grant exceptions to these rules in cases where outdoor irrigation is necessary to preserve nursery stock or newly established landscaping which is required by city codes or the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or where necessary to prevent imminent financial loss to the water customer. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 23-55. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any rule made pursuant to this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this division shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this division. The city may in addition to the penalties herein set forth maintain any proper action for the abatement of any condition allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 23-56. - Termination of service. 
    The city manager or his or her designee shall have the power and authority to shut off and discontinue the water service provided to any water customer who violates any rule made pursuant to this division. Water service shall only be restored at such time as the city manager or his or her designee is reasonably satisfied that future violations of rules promulgated pursuant to this division will not occur and when the water customer has paid the then current charge for water reconnection service. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 23-57. - Injunction. 
    The enforcement of any rules promulgated under this division may be by injunctive action. The imposition of criminal penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting an appropriate action to prevent violation of any rules promulgated under this division. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 1-14-92) 
Secs. 23-58-23-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; flood damage prevention regulations for sanitary sewage systems, § 12-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 23-76-23-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 23, Art. III, Div. 2, was deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 141, adopted Oct. 31, 1991, Arts. I-X of which were included as new Art. III, Div. 2, at the discretion of the editor. Former Ch. 23, Art. III, Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 75, Arts. I-X, adopted Nov. 14, 1978, and Ord. No. 76, adopted Sept. 26, 1978. Attached to Ord. No. 141 was Exhibit A, rates of surcharge and limits for sewerage and industrial wastes, was not codified and put on file in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 23-91. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act which are used interchangeably in this division and refer to Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended by Public Law 95-217 in 1977, and any succeeding amendments. 
    Alternative discharge limit means any limits set by the city in lieu of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standards, for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined wastestream formula as set by the EPA. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)	A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)	A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the sewage discharge inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer. It shall begin five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. It is also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact, and temperature. 
    City means the City of Hudsonville or its designated officials. 
    City commission means the City Commission of Hudsonville. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewaters (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly-owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Composite sample means a series of representative samples taken over a specific time period and combined into one sample. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    County means the County of Ottawa, State of Michigan and also the Ottawa County Road Commission, which may act for and on behalf of the county. 
    Debt service charges means the charges levied to users of the wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the sewage works. 
    Environmental protection agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, its administrator or other duly authorized official. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Incompatible pollutants means any pollutants which are not compatible pollutants. 
    Industrial wastes means wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their employees' domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Infiltration means any waters entering the system from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective septic tanks, pipes, pipe joints or connections. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Infiltration/inflow means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow. 
    Inflow means any waters entering the system through such sources as, but not limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas, and storm drain cross connections. 
    Inspector means any person or persons authorized by the city or the county to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers, septic systems, or service laterals and their connection to the system. 
    Integrated facilities means industrial facilities combining process waste streams prior to treatment. 
    Interference means inhibition or disruption of the sewage works processes or operations which contribute to a violation of the sewage works' NPDES permit or reduce the efficiency of the sewage works. The term also includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the sewage works. 
    Laboratory determination means measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time of any such measurement, test, or analysis of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, " a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation in accordance with any other method prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this division. 
    Manager means the city manager or his or her authorized representative. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    New source means any source of sewage, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of this division. 
    Normal domestic sewage (NDS) means wastewater which when analyzed shows daily average concentrations of not more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l BOD, or two hundred (200) mg/l suspended solids. 
    Operator means the agent of the city or county designated as being responsible for the operation of the sewage works. 
    Operation and maintenance (O & M) means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other effort required to operate and maintain the sewage works and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Order of determination means a written order of the city establishing the allowable wastewater discharge characteristics or requirements for any given user. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, agency of government, society, trust, receiver, cooperative, corporation, partnership, joint venture, personal representative, group or equivalent entity or a combination of any of them. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any of the various chemicals, substances, and refuse materials such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes which impair the purity of the water and soil. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment facilities means devices or structures for use in providing pretreatment for industrial waste prior to entry into public sewers. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement for treating of a waste prior to inclusion in the sewage works. 
    Pretreatment standards means National categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal, state, or local standards, whichever are applicable. Local pretreatment standards shall be promulgated by resolution of the city commission. 
    Private sewage works means any sewage works or part thereof not connected to a public sewer, specifically including, but without limitation, septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits. 
    Public sewer means a sewer which is owned and controlled by a public authority. 
    Replacement means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not admitted. 
    Septic tank means an underground tank in which waste matter is decomposed through bacterial action. 
    Sewage or wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated. 
    Sewage works means all municipal facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer service charge means the sum of any applicable user charges, surcharges and debt service charges. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant violation means any violation which remains uncorrected forty-five (45) days after notification of noncompliance, or which is a part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period, or which involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance, or which results in the exercise of the sewage works' emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f) (2) (vi) (B). 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent means the Grandville wastewater treatment plant superintendent or his duly authorized representative. 
    Surcharge means an extra charge to cover the cost of treating extra strength sewage. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to public health or environment, including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under the provisions of section 307(a) of the Act. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewage works. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of O & M of sewage works pursuant to section 204(b) of the Act and includes the cost of replacement. 
    User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including but not limited to residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental. 
(1)	Residential user means a user of the system whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multi-family dwellings (transit lodging is not included, it is considered commercial). 
(2)	Industrial user means any user who discharges "industrial waste" as defined in this division. 
(3)	Commercial user means an establishment that is involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the superintendent, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user. 
(4)	Institutional user means any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a determination by the superintendent, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(5)	Governmental user means any federal, state, or local government user of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    The particular shall control the general. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; and words used in the plural number shall include the singular number. 
    Words imparting masculine gender shall apply to feminine and also to firms, companies, associations, agencies of government, societies, trusts, receivers, cooperatives, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, personal representatives, groups or equivalent entities or a combination of any of them. 
    Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)	BOD-Biochemical oxygen demand 
(2)	CFR-Code of federal regulations 
(3)	COD-Chemical oxygen demand 
(4)	EPA-Environmental protection agency 
(5)	l-Liter 
(6)	MDNR-Michigan Department of Natural Resources 
(7)	mg-Milligrams 
(8)	mg/L-Milligrams per liter 
(9)	NPDES-National pollutant discharge elimination system 
(10)	O & M-Operation and maintenance 
(11)	SIC-Standard industrial classification 
(12)	SS-Suspended solids 
(13)	USC-United States Code 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. I, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-92. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city any garbage, sewage, pollutant, industrial waste or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any waters of the state any sewage or industrial wastes, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private sewage works or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage or industrial wastes. 
(d)	Every owner of a house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary or combined sewer, is hereby required to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(e)	The proprietor of any lands hereafter platted in this city, abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is then located a public sanitary or combined sewer, shall at its own expense cause a public sewer to be installed in each of such plats of such construction and capacity as may be directed by the manager and shall cause same to be connected with the public sewer in the manner directed by and under the supervision of the manager. 
(f)	The city shall have authority to contract to provide sewer services at rates established by this division to any person and to guarantee capacity in its sewer system whenever the city commission determines it to be in the best interests of the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. II, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-93. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)	No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the manager. 
(b)	There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: one (1) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes and one (1) for all other user classes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the manager. The city shall establish the permit fees by resolution. The permit fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)	All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner, or the person installing building sewer for the property owner, shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, connection, and maintenance of the building sewer. 
(d)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no separate building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and whole considered as one (1) building sewer. The building sewer shall be maintained by the property owner. 
(e)	Existing building sewers may be used as elements of the system only when they are found, on examination and tested by the inspector, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)	Where the building sewer is located within ten (10) feet of a water service pipe, is exposed to damage by tree roots, or is installed in filled or otherwise unstable ground, the use of vitrified clay pipe or cement asbestos pipe for that part of the sewer so situated is prohibited. The building sewer shall not be located closer than three (3) feet on a horizontal plane to any other utility service. 
(g)	The size, slope, alignment and materials for construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling, shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes of the city, and all other applicable rules, regulations and specifications of the city and county. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
    Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the inspector before installation. 
(h)	The size of the building sewer shall not be less than four (4) inches when cast iron is used and six (6) inches when clay pipe is used. The slope shall not be less than one-eight ( 1/8 ) inch per lineal foot. 
(i)	No building sewer shall be laid within three (3) feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth of the building sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe or with long-radius fittings with a cleanout at each curved pipe. 
(j)	In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the building sewer, sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by means approved by the inspector and discharged to the building sewer. 
(k)	All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the inspector. No backfilling shall be performed until the work has been inspected and approved by the inspector. Under no circumstances shall cinders be used as backfill. 
(l)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall at his expense install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the inspector. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such a connection with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The inside crown line of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the inside crown line of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the inspector. 
(m)	The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the inspector within forty-eight (48) hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) of receipt of notice by the inspector. 
(n)	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(o)	Connection now or hereafter of any premises to the sewage disposal system as now existing or hereafter enlarged, by or through a building sewer, shall constitute by and from any person having or claiming any interest in the connecting premises as owner, tenant, purchaser, seller, mortgagee, lien holder or other claimant, now owned or hereafter acquired, a permit to the city, county or any operator of the system to enter at all reasonable times upon the connecting premises to install, inspect, maintain, operate, repair, replace or otherwise deal with the building sewer under or adjacent to such premises. Such permit shall remain and be in full force and effect so long as sewage disposal services are provided or available to the connecting premises from the system and shall be binding upon all successors in interest in such premises. 
(p)	The city may by contract or other satisfactory arrangement delegate to any third party or parties any or all of its duties, rights, powers, responsibilities or discretionary authority under this division. Such third party or parties shall, in all respects, have the same authority and power of the city when exercising their delegated duties, rights, powers, responsibilities or discretionary authority. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. III, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-94. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)	General discharge prohibitions. 
(1)	No person shall discharge or contribute or cause to be discharged or contributed, directly or indirectly, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted air conditioning water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer. 
(2)	Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the manager, Ottawa County Drain Commissioner, Michigan State Water Resources Commission, and/or any other governmental agencies having jurisdiction. Industrial cooling water, unpolluted air conditioning water, or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the manager, and, where provided by law, upon approval of the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner, Michigan State Water Resources Commission, and/or other governmental agencies having jurisdiction, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(3)	No user shall discharge or contribute or cause to be discharged or contributed, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances into the sewage works: 
a.	Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage works or to the operation of the sewage works. 
b.	Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the sewage works. 
c.	Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works. 
d.	Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause injury or interference with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage works, or exceed the limitation set forth in the national categorical pretreatment standard, or any other applicable federal, state or county standards. 
e.	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or health or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
f.	Any substance which may cause the sewage works' effluent or any other product of the sewage works, such as residue, sludge or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or cause interference with the reclamation process. 
g.	Any substance which will cause the sewage works to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
h.	Any wastewater with objectionable color that will not be removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
i.	Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage works resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature that exceeds one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit when it is first introduced into the sewage works. 
j.	Any slugload, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (B0D, etc.), released in a single extraordinary discharge episode, of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the sewage works. 
k.	Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
l.	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
m.	Any contaminant in excess of those contained in an order of determination. 
(b)	Limitations on wastewater strength. 
(1)	Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal or state limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division and shall be considered part of this division. The city manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements and new limitations. 
(2)	State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply whenever they are more stringent than national categorical pretreatment standards or limitations specified in this division. Neither state nor national requirements are subject to the appeal procedures set forth in Article VI of this division. 
(3)	The manager shall, by written order of determination, establish the relative strength of sewage and industrial waste to be received into the public sewer from all significant commercial and industrial users and any user for whom the manager shall determine an order of determination is appropriate. 
(4)	Each order of determination may be reviewed yearly or more often and, the maximums adjusted to compensate for increased flows in the entire system or increased contribution of toxic, poisonous or objectionable substances by other users of the system. It shall be the duty of the manager to attempt to apportion to each industry its fair share of toxic waste discharge, such that the combined wastes of all users will not endanger the system or treatment processes. 
(5)	Any order of determination issued by the manager pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be considered as a part of this division for the specific industrial user or other user involved and shall be enforceable in the same manner as this division. 
(6)	No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this division. Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in section 401C, but only upon prior written approval of the manager. 
(7)	Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction. Each user shall complete construction of these facilities within a time period specified by the manager. No new user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until approved accidental discharge facilities have been constructed. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
a.	Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works or damage to any person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
b.	A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or permit an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(c)	Administration. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to the waters of the state, within the city, or to the system, any wastewater except as authorized by the manager in accordance with the provisions of this division, except as provided by an NPDES permit. 
(2)	Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. Such interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(3)	Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the national pretreatment regulations and as required by the city. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
The city shall annually publish in the local newspaper having the largest city circulation a list of the users with significant violations of any national categorical pretreatment standards during the twelve (12) previous months. The list shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. 
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or MDNR upon request. 
(4)	Information required: All nondomestic users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewage works shall submit information on their processes and wastewater to the city before connecting to or contributing to the sewage works. All existing industrial users connected to or contributing to the sewage works shall submit this information upon request of the manager. The information submitted must be sufficient for the city to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the sewage works and the need for pretreatment. The user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
a.	Name, address and location (if different from the address). 
b.	SIC number. 
c.	Wastewater constituents and characteristics listed in the order of determination as established by a reliable analytical laboratory determination. 
d.	Time and duration of contribution. 
e.	Average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
f.	Industries identified as significant industries or subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards or alternative discharge limits or those required by the city must submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
g.	Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
h.	The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional pretreatment and/or O & M is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
i.	If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, provide the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
1.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, including, but not, limited to, dates related to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this division. 
2.	No increment referred to in subsection (c)i.1. shall exceed two (2) months. 
3.	Not later than fifteen (15) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the manager including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than three (3) months elapse between such progress reports to the manager. 
j.	Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production. 
k.	Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day. 
l.	Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
m.	Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works. 
(5)	Within six (6) months after the promulgation or revision of a pretreatment standard, all affected users shall submit to the city the information required by paragraphs 8 and 9 of section 403 D. 
(6)	Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, charges and fees established by the city. The city may: 
a.	Set unit charges, surcharges, or a schedule of other charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the sewage works. 
b.	Limit the average and maximum/minimum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
c.	Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or establish requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
d.	Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
e.	Establish specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
f.	Establish compliance schedules. 
g.	Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
h.	Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge, as specified by the city; the city shall have access to and the right to copy these records. 
i.	Require notification of the city for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
j.	Require notification of slug discharges. 
k.	Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
(7)	Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(8)	Any industrial user or new source discharging into the sewage works, which is subject to a pretreatment standard, shall submit to the manager semiannually, unless required more frequently in pretreatment standard or to the superintendent, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standard. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow previously reported pursuant to paragraph 403 D of this section. At the discretion of the manager, and after consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the manager may alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. The manager may also impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by this paragraph shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(9)	The city may require to be provided and operated at the user's expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility will normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city. The facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all local building codes and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(10)	All industrial sewer customers shall either have approved meters on all water sources that ultimately discharge into the sewage works, or they shall meter the liquid wastes at the point of discharge into the sewage works. 
(11)	Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user and that such information is exempt from disclosure under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act. 
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not to the extent permitted by the Michigan Freedom of Information Act be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the NPDES permit, or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(d)	Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(e)	All users subject to this division shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of any enforcement or litigation activities brought by the manager pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(f)	No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. IV, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-95. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 204, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with all requirements of the county health department, and, where appropriate, the Michigan Department of Public Health, and the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)	A permit signed by the manager shall be required for all installations, construction of or alterations to private sewage works. 
(c)	Application for a permit shall be in writing and shall be signed by the applicant. Such application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the description of the property on which the construction, alteration, or extension is proposed and a complete plan of the proposed disposal system with such substantial data as the manager may require. A fee shall accompany each application. If the proposed construction meets the requirements of this division, a permit shall be issued to such applicant. 
(d)	The manager shall make an inspection of each sewer, septic tank, disposal field, or other underground appurtenances before the same are covered, and it shall be the duty of the permit holder to request such inspection which shall be made within the time limits established by section 313. 
(e)	The manager may condemn any existing private sewage works, where the effluent therefrom is exposed to the surface or is permitted to drain on or to the surface of the ground or into any waters of the state, or where the seepage of effluent therefrom may endanger a public or private water supply or where a public or private nuisance is created by a system improperly constructed or maintained. 
(f)	The owner shall operate and maintain any private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, without the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(g)	No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Michigan Department of Public Health or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
(h)	The provisions of this division shall not be applicable in those cases where physical size or shape of the premises make their application an impossibility. In such event the owners of such premises may construct, or cause to be constructed, private sewage works upon such premises under the direction of manager. In granting variances and modifications, the manager may require such conditions as will, in his judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(i)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by private sewage works, as provided in section 204, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage works shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. V, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-96. - Board of appeals. 
(a)	In order that the provisions of this division may be reasonably applied and substantial justice done in instances where unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out the strict letter of this division, the city commission shall serve as a sewage board of appeals. The duty of such board shall be to consider appeals from the decision of the officials charged with the enforcement of the division and to determine in particular cases whether any deviation from the strict enforcement of the division will violate the intent of said division and public health and safety be jeopardized. 
(b)	Appeals from the rulings of any official charged with the enforcement of this division may be made to the city commission acting as a sewage board of appeals within a period of thirty (30) days after the date of the order. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved. The appellant shall file with the official from whose decision said appeal is taken and with the board, a notice of appeal, specifying the ground therefor. The official from whom said appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board a summary report of all previous action taken. The board may at its discretion call upon the official from whom said appeal is taken to explain his action. The final disposition of the appeal shall be in the form of a resolution, either reversing, modifying, or affirming, wholly or partly the decision or the determination appealed from. In order to find for the appellant, a majority of the members of the board present at the meeting must concur. 
(c)	The sewage board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to such persons as it deems to be interested parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. Within the limits of its jurisdiction, hereinabove prescribed, the said board of appeals may reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may make such order, requirements, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the case under consideration and to that end shall have all the powers of the official from whom said appeal is taken. The decision of said board shall be final. 
(d)	The sewage board of appeals shall meet at such times as the board may determine. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings showing the action of the board and the vote of each member upon each question considered. The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. VI, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-97. - Enforcement. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the manager to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(b)	The manager may suspend water and/or wastewater treatment service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the manager, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, may cause interference to the sewage works or may cause the violation of any NPDES permit applicable to the sewage works. 
(c)	Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate his discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate suspension of water service and/or the severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage works or endangerment to any individuals. The manager may reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(d)	Where it is not possible for a user or prospective user to bring its wastes within the limits prescribed by this division and any orders of determination made hereunder, the manager may discontinue or deny service to such user or prospective user. 
(e)	Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the city may, but shall not be required to, serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(f)	Show cause hearing. 
(1)	Any user subject to an order of determination may request a hearing before the manager within ten (10) days of receipt of notification of order. A hearing shall then be held by the manager concerning the order and the reasons for its issuance. At the hearing, the user shall show cause why the proposed order or enforcement action should not be implemented. 
(2)	The manager may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any officer or employee to: 
a.	Issue in the name of the manager notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
b.	Take the evidence. 
c.	Transmit a written report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the manager for action thereon. 
(3)	At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of a reasonable charge. 
(4)	After the manager has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, and that said devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(5)	The manager shall also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the city for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment works due to any violations of this division. 
(6)	Any action by the manager may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of this division. 
(g)	Following the entry of an order by the manager with respect to the conduct of a discharger contrary to the provisions of this division, the city attorney may, following authorization of the manager, commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief, including injunctive relief, in the appropriate court. 
(h)	Any user which experiences an upset in operations which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division or an order of determination shall inform the manager thereof at first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the user with the manager within five (5) days. The report shall specify: 
(1)	Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a user's compliance status. 
(2)	Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and time of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3)	All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the city or the manager against a user for any noncompliance with the division or an order of determination, which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. VII, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-98. - Sewer charges. 
(a)	The complete sewage works of the city, including all main and lateral sewers, and all facilities, instrumentalities or properties used or useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes, as same now exists, and as may hereafter be improved and expanded, shall be operated and maintained on a rate basis. 
(b)	Any person desiring to connect a building sewer to a public sewer shall first make application to the manager for permission to do so pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(c)	In order to pay for the cost of O & M, repair, and enlargement of the sewage works, there is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having any sewer connection with the sewage works system of the city, and the owners of said premises shall pay such sewage service rates and charges as are determined by resolution of the city council. The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying the property serviced, but such billings shall in no wise relieve the owner or owners from liability in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of property served which are occupied by tenants shall have the right to examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of determining whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office in which the records are kept and during the regular business hours of such office. Each sewer service charge levied pursuant to this division is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land or premises served by the connection to the sewage works, and if the same is not paid within thirty (30) days after it shall become due and payable, it shall be certified by the city clerk to the city assessor. The charges shall then be collected as other city taxes are collected. The official record of this city shall constitute notice of penalty and of said lien as herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from bringing any action in any proper court for a judgment for the account of any such delinquent charges, and the commencement of any such action shall not destroy the lien therefore. 
(d)	At least biennially, the city shall cause to be reviewed the rates and charges, including all charges for O & M, applicable to the sewage works and shall adjust such rates to assure that the costs of the sewage works shall be recovered from the customers proportionately to the cost of providing service to them. 
(e)	Reserved. 
(f)	Sewer rates, surcharges, fees and penalties for pretreatment program: In order to provide for the payment of fees from users of the sewage works to compensate the city for the cost of administration of the pretreatment program established by this division, charges and surcharges for the use of the sewage works, all penalties, fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, fees for permit applications, fees for filing appeals as provided in this division, fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction, and any other fees authorized by this division or deemed necessary by the city commission shall be set by resolution of the city commission. If a quarterly bill for sewage service shall not be paid by the 5th day of the month following the month in which the bill was issued, a late charge equal to ten (10) percent of the bill shall be applied to the current amount past due and collected therewith. 
(1)	Surcharges: All nondomestic users of the city sewage disposal system shall pay a surcharge for effluent containing compatible pollutants in excess of normal domestic sewage or as listed in the orders of determination and as established by resolution of the city commission. For suspended solids, BOD, phosphorus, grease and oil, or other specific pollutants, the city may accept payment in lieu of the owner meeting orders of determination. Nondomestic users shall be required to take samples of the effluent at least once a week or more frequently if deemed necessary by the manager and shall submit a report of said samples and their analyses to the city on a monthly basis. The city shall have the right to split the samples taken or to have samples taken by an independent company qualified to make such tests at the expense of the user. 
Surcharges for compatible pollutants shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(2)	Surcharge methods: The city shall collect three (3) composite or grab samples from such designated sampling point once each billing period and base the surcharge cost upon such samples. If the user cannot agree with the sampling method of the city, the city may agree to an independent company taking such samples, at the user's expense, under such conditions and standards as determined by the city. The surcharge shall be calculated and billed quarterly by the city. 
No city employee or city official shall be involved directly or indirectly in any independent company performing any tests on any samples where such tests are to be used by the city. 
(3)	Penalties: In addition to surcharges, penalties shall be as determined by the city commission. Payment of penalties does not constitute compliance with the orders of determination. In addition to such penalties, continued, habitual or gross violations or those caused by negligence or failure to install and operate proper pretreatment facilities will be enforced under Article VII. 
(g)	Whenever any person shall become delinquent in the payment of any sewer service charge, the city may sue in an appropriate court of law to collect the amount so due. In addition, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for, the nonpayment of the sewer service charges when due. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. VIII, 10-31-91; Ord. No. 160, § 2, 11-9-93) 
Sec. 23-99. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The manager and all other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division and the Act. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. IX, 10-31-91) 
Sec. 23-100. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who shall violate any term of this division or who shall cause or permit the violation of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be penalized an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day in which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner, tenant or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains any violation of this division may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city, county, or any private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this division. 
(b)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(c)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this division may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Ord. No. 141, Art. X, 10-31-91) 
Secs. 23-101-23-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER CONTROL[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 04-249, adopted 12-14-04, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein setout. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 92, Arts. I-XI, adopted 7-13-82. 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 6-51 et seq.; drainage improvements and subdivisions, § 21-42. 

DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-110. - Statutory authority. 
    This article is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, Act 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909, as amended; the Drain Code of 1956, Act 40 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956, as amended; the Land Division Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended; the Revenue Bond Act, Act 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, as amended; the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended; Section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water Act), as amended, 33 USC 1342(p) and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123 and 124; and other applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-111. - Findings. 
    The city finds that: 
(1)	Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and downstream of the city are at times subjected to flooding; 
(2)	Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the natural resources of the city and the region; 
(3)	Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and deposition; 
(4)	Stormwater runoff produced by land development contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants; 
(5)	Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and cause deterioration of the water resources of the city and downstream municipalities; 
(6)	Stormwater runoff soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution, due to land development within the city, have resulted in a deterioration of the water resources of the city and downstream municipalities; 
(7)	Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects within the city will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely affect the city's water bodies and water resources, and those of downstream municipalities; 
(8)	Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from development; 
(9)	Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained herein and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of stormwater runoff; 
(10)	Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare; 
(11)	Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the city's water bodies and water resources; 
(12)	Illicit discharges enter the municipal separate storm sewer system through either direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm drains) or indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the storm drain system or spills connected by drain inlets); and 
(13)	Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and connections contained herein and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-112. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives: 
(1)	To reduce artificially induced flood damage; 
(2)	To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from identified new land development; 
(3)	To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and bridges, and other structures; 
(4)	To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically favorable conditions exist; 
(5)	To prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution; 
(6)	To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes; 
(7)	To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and stream bed stability; 
(8)	To reduce erosion from development or construction projects; 
(9)	To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and runoff pollution; 
(10)	To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were developed without stormwater management controls meeting the purposes and standards of this article; 
(11)	To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and, to that end, establish minimum standards to protect water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where there are insufficient stormwater management controls; 
(12)	To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(13)	To prohibit illicit discharges and connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(14)	To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance herewith. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-113. - Applicability, exemptions and general provisions. 
(1)	The provisions of this article shall apply to any development site which requires approval of a plat, a site development plan, building permit, or any other permit for work which will alter stormwater drainage characteristics of the development site, provided, however, that this article shall not apply to the following: 
(a)	The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park. 
(b)	Farm operations and buildings, except dwellings, directly related to farm operations. This exemption shall not apply to livestock production facilities as defined in this article, greenhouses and other similar structures. 
(c)	Plats with preliminary plat approval and other developments with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this article, where such approvals remain in effect. 
(2)	The provisions of this article shall apply to all discharges entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-114. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise: 
(1)	Authorized enforcement agency. The city manager or persons designated by the city manager to enforce this article. 
(2)	Base flood. A flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(3)	Base flood elevation. The high water elevation of the base flood, commonly referred to as the "100-year flood elevation". 
(4)	Base floodplain. The area inundated by the base flood. 
(5)	Best management practices (BMP). A practice, or combination of practices and design criteria that comply with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Guidebook of BMP for Michigan Watersheds, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this article (including, but not limited to minimizing stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater) as determined by the city's engineer, and, where appropriate, the standards of the drain commissioner. 
(6)	Building opening. Any opening of a solid wall, such as a window or door, though which floodwaters could penetrate. 
(7)	Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251, et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(8)	Construction site stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff from a development site following an earth change. 
(9)	Detention. A system which is designed to capture stormwater and release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. 
(10)	Developed or development. The installation or construction of impervious surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to State law or local ordinance, the city's approval of a site plan, plat, site condominium, special land use, planned unit development, rezoning of land, land division approval, private road approval or other approvals required for the development of land or the erection of buildings or structures; provided, however, that for purposes of division 2 hereof only, developed or development shall not include the actual construction of, or an addition, extension or modification to, an individual single-family or a two-family detached dwelling. 
(11)	Developer. Any person proposing or implementing the development of land. 
(12)	Development site. Any land that is being, or has been, developed, or that a developer proposes for development. 
(13)	Discharger. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly discharges stormwater from any property. Discharger also means any employee, officer, director, partner, member, contractor, or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission which is or results in a violation of this article. 
(14)	Drain. Any drain as defined in the Drain Code, Act 40 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956, as amended, other than an established county or inter-county drain. 
(15)	Drain commissioner. The Ottawa County Drain Commissioner. 
(16)	Drainage. The collection, conveyance, or discharge of ground water and/or surface water. 
(17)	Drainage-way. The area within which surface water or ground water is carried from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel or to adjacent land. 
(18)	Earth change. A human made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cut and fill activities. Earth change includes, but is not limited to, any excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative roots. Earth change does not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for the purpose of crop production. 
(19)	EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(20)	Erosion. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof. 
(21)	Exempted discharges. Discharges other than stormwater as specified in section 23-151 hereof. 
(22)	Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of water bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any source. 
(23)	Floodplain. Any land area subject to periodic flooding. 
(24)	Flood protection elevation. The base flood elevation plus one (1) foot at any given location. 
(25)	Floodway. The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved to carry and discharge a base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of one (1) foot due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage. 
(26)	Grading. Any stripping, clearing, stumping, excavating, filling, leveling and stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
(27)	Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
(28)	Illicit connection. Any method or means for conveying an illicit discharge into water bodies or the city's stormwater system. 
(29)	Illicit discharge. Any discharge to water bodies that does not consist entirety of stormwater, discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit, or exempted discharges as identified in this article. 
(30)	Impervious surface. A surface, such as a paved or gravel driveway, roof parking area or road that prevents the infiltration of water into the soil. 
(31)	Livestock production facilities. An agricultural activity in which one hundred (100) or more livestock are fed, bred and/or raised within a confined area, other than an open pasture either inside or outside an enclosed building. 
(32)	MDEQ. The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(33)	Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A publicly owned conveyance system designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
(34)	NPDES. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
(35)	NPDES permit. A national pollutant discharge elimination stormwater discharge permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to Section 1342(b) of the Clean Water Act) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States; whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
(36)	Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(37)	Overland flow-way. Surface area that conveys a concentrated flow of stormwater runoff. 
(38)	Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, limited liability company, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal entity. 
(39)	Plan. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which contain information pursuant to this article. 
(40)	Pollutant. A substance discharged which includes, but is not limited to the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. 
(41)	Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
(42)	Property owner. Any person having legal or equitable title to property or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any property. 
(43)	Retention. A system which is designed to capture stormwater and contain it until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates. 
(44)	Soil erosion. The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling formation of new sedimentary deposits. 
(45)	State. The State of Michigan. 
(46)	State water quality standards. All applicable state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of Section 3106 of Part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended. 
(47)	Storm drain. A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant structures intended to convey or manage stormwater runoff ground water and drainage. 
(48)	Stormwater permit. A permit issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(49)	Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the BMP and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
(50)	Stormwater runoff. The runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting from rainfall or snowmelt or other natural event or process. 
(51)	Stormwater management facility. The method, structure, area, system, or other equipment or measures which are designed to receive, control, store, or convey stormwater. 
(52)	Stream. A river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. 
(53)	Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(54)	Water body. A river, lake, stream, creek or other watercourse or wetlands. 
(55)	Watershed. A region draining into a water body. 
(56)	Wetlands. Land characterized by the presence of hydric soils and water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or aquatic life. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-115-23-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER PERMIT 

Sec. 23-130. - Permit required. 
(1)	A developer shall not engage in any development without first receiving a stormwater permit from the city pursuant to section 23-131. 
(2)	The granting of a stormwater permit shall authorize only such development for which the permit is required, subject to the terms of the permit, and it shall not be deemed to approve other development or other land use activities. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-131. - Stormwater permit review procedures. 
    The city shall grant a stormwater permit, which may impose terms and conditions in accordance with section 23-138, and which shall be granted only upon compliance with each of the following requirements: 
(1)	The developer has submitted a drainage plan complying with section 23-132. 
(2)	The drainage plan contains a description of an adequate, temporary stormwater retention system to prevent construction site stormwater runoff, satisfying the requirements of section 23-134 and the developer has obtained a soil erosion permit, if necessary. 
(3)	The developer provides: 
(a)	A permanent on-site stormwater management system complying with the city and drain commissioner standards and specifications; and 
(b)	Written construction plan approval from both the city and the drain commissioner. 
(4)	The developer has paid or deposited the stormwater permit review fee pursuant to section 23-133. 
(5)	The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial guarantee pursuant to section 23-135. 
(6)	The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this article including, but not limited to, section 23-181. All easements shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance and shall be recorded with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds. 
(7)	The drainage plan is designed in conformity with the City Code and drain commissioner design and performance standards for drains and stormwater management systems, as set forth in division 8 hereof. 
(8)	All stormwater runoff facilities shall be designed in accordance with the then-current BMP. 
(9)	The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for routine, emergency and long-term maintenance of all stormwater management facilities. This agreement shall be in compliance with the approved drainage plan and this article including, but not limited to, section 23-182 hereof. The maintenance agreement shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance and shall be recorded with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-132. - Drainage plan. 
    The developer shall provide a drainage plan for review and approval by the city and the drain commissioner. The drainage plan shall identify and contain all of the following: 
(1)	The location of the development site and water bodies that will receive stormwater runoff. 
(2)	The existing and proposed topography of the development site, including the alignment and boundary of the natural drainage courses, with contours having a maximum interval of one (1) foot (using USGS datum). The information shall be superimposed on the pertinent Ottawa County soil map. 
(3)	The development tributary area to each point of discharge from the development. 
(4)	Calculations for the final peak discharge rates. 
(5)	Calculations for any facility or structure size and configuration. 
(6)	A drawing showing all proposed stormwater runoff facilities with existing and final grades. 
(7)	The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts serving the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development site. Any significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions other than culverts should be noted on the drainage map. 
(8)	An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all stormwater management facilities necessary to the overall drainage plan, including a schedule of the estimated dates of completing construction of the stormwater runoff facilities shown on the plan and an identification of the proposed inspection procedures to ensure that the stormwater management facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved drainage plan. 
(9)	A plan to ensure the effective control of construction site stormwater runoff and sediment tracking onto roadways. 
(10)	Drawings, profiles and specifications for the construction of the stormwater runoff facilities reasonably necessary to ensure that stormwater runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in accordance with this article. 
(11)	A maintenance agreement, in form and substance acceptable to the city and the drain commissioner, for ensuring maintenance of any privately-owned stormwater management facilities. The maintenance agreement shall include the developer's written commitment to provide routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of the facilities in perpetuity and, in the event that the facilities are not maintained in accordance with the approved drainage plan, the agreement shall authorize the city to maintain any on-site stormwater management facility as reasonably necessary, at the developer's expense. 
(12)	The name of the engineering firm and the registered professional engineer that designed the drainage plan and that will inspect final construction of the stormwater runoff facilities. 
(13)	All design information must he compatible for conversion to REGIS and Ottawa County Geographic Information System. 
(14)	Any other information necessary for the city and/or the drain commissioner to verify that the drainage plan complies with the city's and the drain commissioner's design and performance standards for drains and stormwater management systems. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-133. - Stormwater permit review fees. 
(1)	All expenses and costs incurred by the city and drain commissioner directly associated with processing, reviewing and approving or denying a stormwater permit application shall he paid (or reimbursed) to the entity from the funds in a separate escrow account established by the developer, as provided in subsection (2) below. The city may draw funds from a developer's escrow account to reimburse the city and drain commissioner for out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the city and drain commissioner relating to the application. Such reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to, expenses related to the following: 
(a)	Legal services of the city directly related to the application. 
(b)	Engineering services of the city directly related to the application. 
(c)	Services of other independent contractors working for the city which are directly related to the application. 
(d)	Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice requirements necessitated by the application. 
(2)	At the time a developer applies for a stormwater permit, the developer shall deposit with the city, as an escrow deposit, an initial amount as determined by resolution of the city commission for such matters and shall provide additional amounts as requested by the city commission such increments as are specified in said resolution. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow account after the application has been fully processed, reviewed, and the final city approval and acceptance of the development has occurred will be refunded to the developer with no interest to be paid on those funds. At no time prior to the city's final decision on an application shall the balance in the escrow account fall below one-half (1/2) the required initial amount. If the funds in the account are reduced to less than one-half (1/2) the required initial amount, the developer shall deposit into the account an additional amount as determined by resolution of the city commission before the application review process will be continued. Additional amounts may be required to be placed in the escrow account by the developer, at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-134. - Construction site runoff controls. 
    Prior to making any earth change on a development site regulated by this article, the developer shall first obtain a soil erosion permit from the drain commissioner issued in accordance with Part 91 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended, if one is required. The developer shall install stormwater management facilities and shall phase the development activities so as to prevent construction site stormwater runoff and off-site sedimentation. During all construction activities on the development site, the city's engineer may inspect the development site to ensure compliance with the approved construction site runoff controls. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-135. - Financial guarantee. 
(1)	The city's engineer shall not approve a stormwater permit until the developer submits to the city, in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, a letter of credit or other financial guarantee for the timely and satisfactory construction of all stormwater runoff facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan. Upon certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater management facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved drainage plan including, but not limited to, the provisions contained in subsection 23-132(8), the city may release the letter of credit or other financial guarantee subject to final city acceptance and approval. 
(2)	Except as provided in subsection (3) below, the amount of the financial guarantee shall be equal to the construction cost estimate provided by the developer of all stormwater runoff facilities, unless the city determines that a greater amount is appropriate, in which case the basis for such determination shall be provided to the developer in writing. In determining whether an amount greater is appropriate, the city shall consider the size and type of the development, the size and type of the on-site stormwater system, and the nature of the off-site stormwater management facilities the development will utilize. 
(3)	The city manager or his or her designee may waive the financial guarantee for a development if the Ottawa County Road Commission, as part of its review process, is requiring a letter of credit or other financial guarantee for the satisfactory construction of all stormwater management facilities. 
(4)	The city manager or his or her designee may reduce or waive the amount of the financial guarantee for a development that will not increase the percentage of impervious surface of the development site by more than ten (10) percent. 
(5)	This article shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site private stormwater runoff facilities as well as those costs arising from the need to make other drainage improvements in order to reduce a development's impact on a drain consistent with adopted design standards. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-136. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until stormwater management facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved drainage plan; provided, however, the city may issue a certificate of occupancy if an acceptable letter of credit or other financial guarantee has been submitted to the city for the timely and satisfactory construction of all stormwater management facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-137. - No change in approved facilities. 
    Stormwater management facilities, after construction and approval, shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved drainage plan, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in accordance with the approved drainage plan, or in accordance with approved amendments or revisions in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-138. - Terms and conditions of permits. 
    In granting a stormwater permit, the city may impose such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article. A developer shall comply with such terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER SYSTEM, FLOODPLAIN AND OTHER STANDARDS; SOIL EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 23-140. - Management of and responsibility for stormwater system. 
    The city is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on private property for the management of stormwater on said property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide for, and maintain, private stormwater runoff facilities serving the property and to prevent or correct the accumulation of debris that interferes with the drainage function of a water body. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-141. - Stormwater system. 
    All stormwater management facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances and rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-142. - Stormwater discharge rates and volumes. 
    The city shall utilize the drain commissioner's minimum design standards for stormwater discharge release rates. However, if the city commission makes a specific finding that the drain commissioner's standards are insufficient, the city may establish minimum design standards for stormwater discharge release rates and require dischargers to implement on-site retention, detention or other methods necessary to control the rate and volume of surface water runoff discharged into a stormwater drainage system in the following circumstances: 
(1)	A parcel of land is being developed in a manner that increases the impervious surface area of the parcel; or 
(2)	The discharge exceeds the city's approved predevelopment discharge characteristics for the subject property, and the city determines that the discharge is a violation of the drainage, flooding or soil erosion regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-143. - Floodplain standards. 
(1)	All new buildings and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be protected from flood damage up to the flood protection elevation and shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules and regulations. Floodplain/floodway alteration shall be permitted only upon review and approval by the city, in accordance with an approved drainage plan. If mandated by state law, MDEQ review and approval shall also be required. 
(2)	A drainage plan providing for the filling or alteration of a floodplain/floodway shall include provisions to minimize erosion, stabilize the stream bank and to protect water quality. A natural vegetation strip shall be maintained on each parcel or lot between the top of stream bank and a line, each point of which is twenty-five (25) feet horizontal from the top of stream bank. 
(3)	Within any required buffer zone, no earth change shall take place except in accordance with the approved drainage plan and a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit. Such plan may also include provisions for the acceptable replacement of floodplain storage volume, where such storage volume is lost or diminished as a result of approved development. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-144. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(1)	All persons who cause, in whole or in part, any earth change to occur shall provide soil erosion and sedimentation control so as to adequately prevent soils from being eroded and discharged or deposited onto adjacent properties or into a stormwater drainage system, a public street or right-of-way, wetland, creek, stream, water body, or floodplain. All development shall be in accordance with Part 91 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended, and all applicable federal, State and local ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(2)	A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit is required for any earth change that is greater than one (1) acre or less than five hundred (500) feet from any lake or stream. 
(3)	During any earth change which exposes soil to an increased risk of erosion or sediment tracking, the property owner and other persons causing or participating in the earth change shall: 
(a)	Comply with the stormwater management standards of this article; 
(b)	Obtain and comply with the terms of a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit; 
(c)	Prevent damage to any public utilities or services within the limits of grading and within any routes of travel or areas of work of construction equipment; 
(d)	Prevent damage to or impairment of any water body on or near the location of the earth change or affected thereby; 
(e)	Prevent damage to adjacent or nearby land; 
(f)	Apply for all required approvals or permits prior to the commencement of work; 
(g)	Proceed with the proposed work only in accordance with the approved plans and in compliance with this article; 
(h)	Maintain all required soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, including but not limited to, measures required for compliance with the terms of this article; 
(i)	Promptly remove all soil, sediment, debris, or other materials applied, dumped, tracked, or otherwise deposited on any lands, public streets, sidewalks, or other public ways or facilities, including catch basins, storm sewers, ditches, drainage swales, or water bodies (removal of all such soil, sediment, debris or other materials within twenty-four (24) hours shall be considered prima facie compliance with this requirement, unless such materials present an immediate hazard to public health and safety); and 
(j)	Refrain from grading lands at locations near or adjoining lands, public streets, sidewalks, alleys, or other public or private property without providing adequate support or other measures so as to protect such other lands, streets, sidewalks or other property from settling, cracking or sustaining other damage. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-145. - Building openings. 
(1)	No building opening shall be constructed below the following elevations: 
(a)	One (1) foot above the 100-year floodplain; and 
(b)	The building opening established at the time of plat or development approval and on file at the city and/or the drain commissioner. 
(2)	A waiver from elevations stated in subsection (1) above may be granted by the city's engineer following receipt of a certification from a registered professional engineer demonstrating that the proposed elevation does not pose a risk of flooding. 
(3)	If the drain commissioner has specified a minimum building opening at the time of plat or development approval or if construction occurs within the 100-year floodplain, upon completion of construction of the structure's foundation and or slab on grade, a registered land surveyor shall certify any minimum building opening elevation specified by this article. This certificate shall attest that the building opening elevation complies with the standards of this article. The permittee for the building permit shall submit the certificate to the city building inspector prior to the commencement of framing and/or structural steel placement. If the surveyor should find that the minimum building opening elevation is below the elevation specified in subsection (1) above, that opening must be raised using a method that meets with the approval of the city. After reconstruction, a registered land surveyor or engineer shall re-certify that the minimum building opening elevation complies with the standards of this article prior to the commencement of framing and or structural steel placement. 
(4)	The city building inspector may waive the required land survey under subsection (3) above if the minimum building opening appears to be at or above the elevation of adjacent buildings which have already been certified or if a grade map shows that the low opening elevation of the building is at least three (3) feet higher than the minimum building opening established pursuant to subsection (1) above. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-146. - Sump pump discharge. 
(1)	Whenever building footing drains are required or utilized, a direct connection between the footing drains through a sump pump-check valve system to a storm sewer is required. A gravity system is not permitted. 
(2)	In cases where subsection (1) above applies, a stormwater lateral shall be provided for each parcel at the time of storm sewer construction. 
(3)	Laundry facilities or other similar features shall not be connected to a footing drain or pump system discharging to footing laterals and the storm sewer system. Laundry facilities and interior sump pumps must be drained to the sewage disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-147. - Public health, safety and welfare. 
    Protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall be a primary consideration in the design of all stormwater runoff facilities. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-148, 23-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROHIBITION AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 23-150. - Prohibited discharges. 
(1)	No person shall discharge to a water body, directly or indirectly, any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge identified in section 23-151. Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively prevent pollutants from being discharged with the stormwater, except in accordance with BMP. 
(2)	The city is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, utilizing BMP necessary to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the city's stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-151. - Exempted discharges. 
    The following nonstormwater discharges shall be permissible, provided that they do not result in a violation of state water quality standards: 
(1)	Water supply line flushing; 
(2)	Landscape irrigation; 
(3)	Diverted stream flows; 
(4)	Rising groundwater; 
(5)	Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains; 
(6)	Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)	Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)	Foundation drains; 
(9)	Air conditioning condensate; 
(10)	Individual residential car washing; 
(11)	De-chlorinated swimming pool water; 
(12)	Street wash water; 
(13)	Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities; and 
(14)	Discharges for which a specific federal or state permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-152. - Interference with natural or artificial drains. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave, alter the course of, or otherwise interfere with any natural or constructed drain, or drainageway without first submitting a drainage plan to the city and receiving approval of that plan. Any deviation from the approved plan is a violation of this article. This section shall not prohibit, however, necessary emergency action so as to prevent or mitigate drainage that would be injurious to the environment, the public health, safety, or welfare. When any of the above activity involves an established county drain, a drain use permit is required from the drain commissioner. 
(2)	No filling, blocking, fencing or above-surface vegetation planting shall take place within a floodplain/floodway. 
(3)	For an overland flowway: 
(a)	A silt fence shall not be permitted below the top of the bank of a water body; 
(b)	Chain link fences shall be permitted if the city and drain commissioner determine that the fence will not obstruct or divert the flow of water; 
(c)	If a fence is removed by the city or the drain commissioner for drain access or drain maintenance, the fence shall be replaced by the owner of the fence at the owner's expense, as long as the owner complies with subsection (2) above; and 
(d)	No shrubs or trees shall be planted below the top of the bank of a water body. 
(4)	Shrubs, trees or other aboveground vegetation shall not be planted over the top of an underground storm sewer or over the top of the easement within which the storm sewer has been installed. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-153. - Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway. 
    Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store or stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials unless adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such materials from entering the drainage-way. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-154. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(1)	Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(a)	Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(b)	The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or water discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(2)	Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying wastewater to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-155-23-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING AND RECORDKEEPING 

Sec. 23-160. - Inspection and sampling. 
    To assure compliance with the standards in this pervasively regulated area, the city may inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater management facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the city's or the drain commissioner's properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. The city and drain commissioner shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice of such inspection and/or sampling. The city, drain commissioner or their properly identified representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-161. - Stormwater monitoring facilities. 
    A discharger of stormwater runoff shall provide and operate equipment or devices for the monitoring of stormwater runoff, so as to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or a stormwater runoff facility, when directed in writing to do so by the city. The city may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from or as a result of such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges shall he installed and maintained in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-162. - Accidental discharges. 
(1)	Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a water body any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge identified in section 23-151 hereof shall immediately inform the city and/or the drain commissioner concerning the discharge. If such information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the city and the drain commissioner within five (5) days. The written report shall specify: 
(a)	The composition of the accidental discharge and the cause thereof; 
(b)	The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the accidental discharge; 
(c)	All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence; and 
(d)	The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and the name of a person who may be contacted for additional information on the matter. 
(2)	A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative defense to an infraction brought under this article against a discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to obtain other relief as a result of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all the requirements of subsection (1) above. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-163. - Record keeping requirement. 
    Any person subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on magnetic or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or stormwater runoff from any property. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-164-23-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 23-170. - Sanctions for violation. 
(1)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, plus costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Act 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws, including, without limitation, equitable relief; provided, however, that the violation stated in subsection (2) below shall be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this article. For purposes of this section, "subsequent offense" means a violation of the provisions of this article committed by the same person within twelve (12) months of a previous violation of the same provision of this article for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be responsible. 
(2)	Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order issued under section 23-171 hereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and such person shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the court. 
(3)	Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this article shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section 23-170. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-171. - Stop work order. 
    Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or in part, a violation of any provision of this article, the city is authorized to issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work order shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The city may also undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures so as to prevent violations of this article or to avoid or reduce the effects of noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work, and such cost shall be a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-172. - Failure to comply; completion. 
    In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the provisions of this article, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall upon being invoiced be obligated to promptly reimburse the entity for all costs of such work. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-173. - Emergency measures. 
    When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this article, and shall promptly reimburse the city for all of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-174. - Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system. 
    A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of the provisions of this article. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the EPA or MDEQ for violation of an NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-175. - Collection of costs; lien. 
    Costs incurred by the city and the drain commissioner pursuant to sections 23-171, 23-172, 23-173, and 23-174 shall be a lien on the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with the Revenue Bond Act, Act 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, as amended, from time to time. Any such charges which are delinquent for six (6) months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city or the drain commissioner shall have all remedies authorized by the Revenue Bond Act, Act 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-176. - Appeals. 
    Any person as to whom any provision of this article has been applied may appeal in writing, not later than thirty (30) days after the action or decision being appealed from, to the city commission the action or decision whereby any such provision was so applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The city commission shall consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the city commission may consider the recommendations of the city's engineer and the comments of other persons having knowledge of the matter. In considering any such appeal, the city commission may grant a variance from the terms of this article so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)	The application of the provisions of this article being appealed will present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site; provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with this article; and 
(2)	The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent the goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by this article, nor result in less effective management of stormwater runoff 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-177. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1)	The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or the environment, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(2)	Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-178, 23-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - STORMWATER EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 23-180. - Applicability of requirements. 
    The requirements hereof concerning stormwater easements and maintenance agreements shall apply to all persons required to submit a drainage plan to the city for review and approval. 
Sec. 23-181. - Stormwater management easements. 
    The developer shall provide all stormwater management easements necessary to implement the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this article in form and substance required by the city and shall record such easements as directed by the city. The easements shall assure access for proper inspection and maintenance of stormwater runoff facilities and shall provide adequate emergency overland flowways, where necessary. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-182. - Maintenance agreements. 
    The developer shall provide all stormwater maintenance agreements necessary to implement the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this article in form and substance as required by the city, and shall record such agreements as directed by the city. The maintenance agreements shall, among other matters, assure access for proper inspection and maintenance of stormwater runoff facilities and, where necessary, adequate emergency overland flowways. 
Sec. 23-183. - Establishment of county drains. 
    Prior to final approval, all stormwater management facilities for platted subdivisions and site condominium developments shall be established as county drains, as authorized in Section 433, Chapter 18 of the Michigan Drain Code, Act 40 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956, as amended, for long-term maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-184-23-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 23-190. - Performance standards. 
    In order to achieve the goals and purposes of this article, the following three (3) stormwater management zones are hereby established. The zones are shown on the map attached as Appendix A to Ordinance No. 04-249, and made a part of this article. 
(1)	Zone A represents areas where sandy soils are present or where high quality waters may be impacted. The goal of this zone is to preserve the natural condition of water bodies included in it, in whole or in part. In this zone, when site conditions permit, infiltration of runoff via stormwater retention shall be required. or extended detention implemented, rather than standard detention or the directed flow of stormwater runoff into water bodies. This stormwater management practice provides greater protection for surface water quality, and also assists in augmenting stream base flow, reduction of flash storm flows and prevention of stream bank erosion. 
(2)	Zone B represents areas where sandy soils are not present and where high quality waters are not impacted. The goal of this zone is the control of stormwater runoff in order to prevent destabilizing of streams and other water bodies. In this zone, the use of detention ponds, the maintenance and enhancement of buffer strips and other measures to reduce directly connected impervious areas are specified. The management practices for this zone are intended to maintain existing water quality and to alleviate adverse downstream impact on water bodies. 
(3)	Zone C consists of nonmandated detention zones, i.e., areas located at the lower portions of all watersheds impacted by a given project, as determined by the drain commissioner. Among the measures required in this zone, are the use of sediment basins, the maintenance and enhancement of buffer strips along water bodies and excavation of additional floodplain storage. An important element of stormwater management practice in this zone is the control and prevention of sedimentation, in order to reduce pollution of water bodies. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-191. - Design standards. 
    The design standards for stormwater runoff facilities for zones A, B and C, as described in section 23-190 hereof, are the following: 
Zone A Zone B Zone C Criteria Areas where sandy soils are present or where high quality waters may be impacted Areas where sandy soils are not present and where high quality waters are not impacted Areas located at the lower end of all watersheds impacted (non-mandated detention zones) Stormwater Management and Water Quality Standards Use retention basins, infiltration trenches, extended detention basins, and/or constructed wetlands. Maintain and enhance buffer strips or provide equivalent treatment. Use detention ponds; maintain and enhance buffer strips, and reduce directly connected impervious area or provide equivalent treatment. Use sediment basins, maintain and enhance buffer strips. Bank Erosion Control Stormwater runoff shall not exceed the capacity of the downstream conveyance system. Stormwater runoff shall not exceed the capacity of the downstream conveyance system. Stormwater runoff shall not exceed the capacity of the downstream conveyance system. Flood Control Detention with infiltration when conditions permit. Release rate of 0.13 cfs/acre per drain commissioner rules. Release rate of 0.13 cfs/acre per drain commissioner rules. Direct conveyance of stormwater runoff within the capacity of downstream system and excavate additional floodplain in lieu of detention.  
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-192. - Resolution to implement performance and design standards. 
    The city may by resolution adopt more detailed design and performance standards for stormwater runoff facilities, consistent with the terms of this article, and in order to further implement its goals and purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-193. - Responsibility to implement BMP. 
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the city storm drain system or watercourses through the use of structural and nonstructural BMP. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMP to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. Such BMP shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan, as necessary, for compliance with requirements of a NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Secs. 23-194-23-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER MATTERS 

Sec. 23-200. - Interpretation. 
    Words and phrases in this article shall be construed according to their common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in section 23-114 shall he construed according to the respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined in this article but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-201. - Headings. 
    The headings of the sections of this article are intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the meaning or interpretation of the text of the sections to which they may refer. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-202. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable, and if any part or provision of this article should be declared invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any other part or provision of the article. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 23-203. - Other provisions of city code. 
    This article shall be in addition to other provisions of the city code, and shall not be deemed to repeal or replace other ordinances or parts thereof except to the extent that such repeal is specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-249, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Chapter 24 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation declared a nuisance, § 15-2 (1). 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq., MSA 9.631(1) et seq.; obnoxious plants and trees, MCL 124.151 et seq., MSA 12.270(1) et seq.; deposit of noxious weeds on highways, MCL 247.51, MSA 28.181. 

Sec. 24-16. - Required cutting. 
    No person shall permit any grass, weeds or any noxious growth greater than eight (8) inches above mean grade level of any lot or acreage within the city. All vacant lots or acreage within the city on which there is any such growth other than a growth for commercial use, shall have such growth cut at least three (3) times per calendar year, with the first cutting to be completed on or before June first of each year, the second cutting to be completed on or before August first of each year, and the third cutting to be completed on or before October first of each year. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 1, 10-9-62; Ord. No. 97, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 24-17. - Notification of property owners; failure to comply. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to notify in writing any person to whom property is assessed when the property shall fail to be cut in compliance with this article or on which weeds shall be growing. If the property shall not be cut in compliance with this article or such noxious weeds shall not be removed, the city manager shall arrange for such necessary work as will bring the lot or acreage into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 2, 10-9-62) 
Sec. 24-18. - Assessment and collection of costs. 
    If any violation of this article occurs the city may cut or order to be cut any lot or vacant acreage with the city or have noxious weeds removed and the cost thereof shall be added to the ad valorem taxes assessed against the property and may be collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 3, 10-9-62) 
Sec. 24-19. - Penalties for second offense. 
    All owners to whom property shall be assessed for ad valorem taxes shall be deemed the responsible parties to comply with the terms of this article. If any provisions of this article shall be violated a second time in the course of any calendar year, the person to whom the property is assessed shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor, and in addition to the other penalties prescribed herein, upon conviction of the second offense, be subject to the penalties of section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 4, 10-9-62) 
Sec. 24-20. - Action upon written complaint; cumulative remedy. 
    Action under this article may be taken on the written complaint of any citizen or by action of any official of the city designated by the city commission and this article is hereby declared to be cumulative and in addition to any existing rights or duties under ordinances of the city or any state or county law. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 5, 10-9-62) 
CHAPTER 25 - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other officer or employee of the city authorized by this Code, designation from time to time by the city manager, state law or any other ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infractions violation notices. 
    Bureau means the municipal ordinance violations bureau as currently existing or as may be established. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in 58 th District Court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited and to answer to the allegations contained in the citation. 
    Municipal civil infraction determination means a determination that a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one (1) of the following: 
(1)	An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction; 
(2)	An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation"; 
(3)	A preponderance of evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing pursuant to MCL §§ 600.8719 or 600.8721, respectively; or 
(4)	A default judgment for failing to appear as directed by a citation or other notice at a scheduled appearance pursuant to MCL §§ 600.8715(3)(b) or (4), at an informal hearing pursuant to § 600.8719, or at a formal hearing under § 600.8721. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice, prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at a municipal ordinance violations bureau now existing or hereafter established to answer to the allegations made in the municipal civil infraction violation notice and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized by state law. 
    State law means the statutory law enacted by the State of Michigan, including, but not limited to, the Home Rule City Act, Act 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909, as amended (MCL § 117.1 et seq.), the Revised Judicature Act, Act 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961, as amended (MCL § 600.1 et seq.) and the City and Village Zoning Act, Act 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921, as amended (MCL § 125.581 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-2. - Adoption and incorporation of state law by reference. 
    As provided for in state law, the city hereby adopts and incorporates the provisions of state law enabling municipalities to adopt and enforce ordinances declared to be municipal civil infractions to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-3. - Commencement of municipal infraction action. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau or a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in 58 th District Court. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-4. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)	Establishment. There is hereby established a municipal ordinance violations bureau, as authorized by state law, to accept responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials and to collect and retain civil fines. 
(b)	Location and supervision. The bureau shall be located at city hall and be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. 
(c)	Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice, and not a municipal civil infraction citation, has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle a person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from taking other action permitted by law. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed by the 58 th District Court. The unwillingness of a person to dispose of a violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protections accorded by law. 
(d)	Scope of authority. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining scheduled civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility "only with explanation," and in no event shall the bureau determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter related to an alleged violation. 
(e)	Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as are provided for citations in this chapter. In addition to any other information required by this Code, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine for the alleged violation and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)	Appearance and payment of fine and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs on or before the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation. 
(g)	Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal civil infraction violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the fine and costs prescribed by the schedule of fines set forth in this chapter are not paid for the violation at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation shall be filed with the 58 th District Court and a copy of the citation shall be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by state law but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil infraction violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. When disposing of such citation, the 58 th District Court may order the civil infraction fine to be paid directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-5. - Issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)	The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)	The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 58 th District Court. 
(3)	Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the 58 th District Court and copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided for in state law. 
(4)	A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as if it were made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the citation and if the citation contains the following statement above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief." 
(5)	An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.	Based upon investigation the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.	Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(6)	Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.	Except as provide immediately below, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.	If the municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting a copy on the land or attaching a copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-6. - Contents of municipal civil infraction citations. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction(s) alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)	Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one (1) of the following: 
(1)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction(s) by mail, in person or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction(s) "with explanation" by mail, in person or by representation by the time specified for appearance in person or by representation. 
(3)	Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.	Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a 58 th District Court judge or magistrate without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.	Appearing in 58 th District Court for a formal hearing before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)	The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)	That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the 58 th District Court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)	That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the 58 th District Court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)	That the hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)	That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a 58 th District Court judge or magistrate without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)	That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a 58 th District Court judge and will have the opportunity of being represented by an attorney retained at his or her own expense. 
(d)	The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type stating that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-7. - Schedule of municipal civil infraction fines. 
(a)	A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility served with municipal civil infraction violation notices is hereby established as follows: 
(1)	For violation of violations listed in section 25-8 with the letters [numbers] (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), (17) and (18): 
First offense-$50.00 
First repeat offense-200.00 
Second or any subsequent repeat offense-500.00 
(2)	For violation of violations listed in section 25-8 with the letter [number] (16): 
First offense-$100.00 
First repeat offense-200.00 
Second or any subsequent repeat offense-500.00 
(b)	A first repeat offense and a second or any subsequent repeat offense shall mean, for the purpose of determining the fine applicable in subsections 25-7(a)(1) and (2), an offense occurring within twelve (12) months of a first offense. An offense occurring beyond such twelve-month period shall be considered a new first offense. 
(c)	A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time by resolution of the city commission, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 25-8. - Violations constituting municipal civil infractions. 
    A municipal civil infraction shall include the following offenses set forth in this Code: 
(1)	Violations of Chapter 4, "amusements and entertainments," of this Code. 
(2)	Violations of Chapter 5, "animals," of this Code. 
(3)	Violations of Chapter 6, "buildings and building regulations," of this Code. 
(4)	Violations of Chapter 10, "fences," of this Code. 
(5)	Violations of Chapter 11, "fire prevention and protection" of this Code. 
(6)	Violations of Chapter 12, "flood damage prevention," of this Code. 
(7)	Violations of Chapter 13, "garbage and trash," of this Code. 
(8)	Violations of Chapter 14, "mobile homes and trailers" of this Code. 
(9)	Violations of Chapter 15, "nuisances," of this Code. 
(10)	Violations of Chapter 16, "offenses," of this Code, except sections 16-21, 16-31, 16-41, 16-42, 16-43, 16-44, 16-52, 16-55, 16-56, 16-57, 16-58 and 16-61. 
(11)	Violations of Chapter 17.5, "signs and billboards," of this Code. 
(12)	Violations of Chapter 20, "streets, sidewalks and other public places," of this Code except sections 20-57 and 20-58. 
(13)	Violations of Chapter 21, "subdivision control and land regulation," of this Code. 
(14)	Violations of Chapter 21.5, "telecommunications," of this Code. 
(15)	Nonmoving violations of Chapter 22, "uniform traffic code and Michigan Vehicle Code" of this Code. 
(16)	Violations of Chapter 23, "utilities," of this Code. 
(17)	Violations of Chapter 24, "vegetation," of the Code. 
(18)	Violation of Appendix A, "zoning ordinance," of this Code. 
    Upon the effective date of this chapter, the offenses noted above are municipal civil infractions only and shall no longer constitute misdemeanor criminal offenses or subject the violator to any criminal sanctions, except as provided for by state law. This, however, shall not affect the sanctions provided for by state law or this chapter for a violator's or alleged violator's failure to comply with an order or judgment of the 58 th District Court nor shall this section limit or restrict the authority of the court to enforce its orders by appropriate sanctions or actions. This section shall not restrict, limit or bar any action permitted under any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 277, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 25-9. - Miscellaneous municipal civil infraction provisions. 
(a)	If a person is cited as a minor, he or she shall be permitted to appear in court or to admit responsibility for a civil infraction without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. A court having jurisdiction over a municipal civil infraction shall have jurisdiction over the minor and may proceed in the same manner as if he or she were an adult. 
(b)	A municipal civil infraction action is a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state law and this Code. The plaintiff in a municipal civil infraction action shall be the city if the alleged civil infraction is a violation of this Code, any other city ordinance designating the violation as a municipal civil infraction or a state law designating a violation as a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)	Each act of violation and every day upon which any violation is permitted or suffered to exist or continue shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate fine upon admission or determination of responsibility. The fines provided by this chapter shall apply to any amendment or addition to this chapter or to the provisions elsewhere in this Code defining a municipal civil infraction whether or not such fines are reenacted in the amendment or addition. 
(d)	Municipal civil infractions shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)	If a defendant is determined to be responsible or responsible "with explanation" for a municipal civil infraction, the 58 th District Court judge or magistrate may order the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs as provided by law and, if applicable, damages and expenses as provided in MCL § 600.8733(2). In the order of judgment, the judge or magistrate may grant a defendant permission to pay a civil fine, costs and damages and expenses within a specified period of time or in specified installments; otherwise the civil fine, costs and damages and expenses are due immediately. 
(2)	If a defendant is ordered to pay a civil fine, the judge or magistrate shall determine the costs of the action, which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil actions and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction up to the entry of a judgment, of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Except as otherwise provided by state law, costs shall be payable to the general funds of the city. 
(3)	In addition to ordering the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs and damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate may issue a writ or order under MCL § 600.8302. 
(4)	A judge or magistrate may impose the sanctions permitted under subsections (1) and (3) above only to the extent expressly authorized by the chief judge of the 58 th District Court. 
(5)	The schedule of civil costs and fines and costs to be imposed for municipal civil infractions shall be posted at city hall and readily available for public inspection. The schedule need not include all municipal civil infractions but shall be regularly updated. 
(6)	A default in the payment or the payment of an installment of a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses may be collected by any means authorized for enforcement of a judgment under state law. 
(7)	If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to state law within the time prescribed by the judge or magistrate, the 58 th District Court may proceed under MCL §§ 600.8729, 600.8731 or 600.8733, as applicable. 
(8)	A defendant who fails to answer a notice to appear or citation for a municipal civil infraction is guilty of a criminal misdemeanor as provided for in state law. 
(e)	The following shall apply with respect to the default in the payment of fines, costs, damages and expenses: 
(1)	If a defendant defaults in the payment or the payment of an installment of a civil fine, costs or, if applicable, damages and expenses as provided in state law, upon the motion of the city or upon its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause, or a bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
(2)	If a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses, the individual authorized to make disbursement on behalf of such entity shall timely pay the fine, costs or damages and expenses and his or her failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless he or she makes the showing in subsection (3) below. 
(3)	Unless the defendant shows to the satisfaction of the court that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant imprisoned until all or a specific part, as determined by the court, of the amount due is paid. 
(4)	If it appears to the court that the default in the payment of a fine, costs or damages and expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of the payment or of any installment(s), or revoking the fine, costs or damages and expenses. 
(5)	The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses shall be specified in the order or commitment and shall not exceed one (1) day for each fifty dollars ($50.00) due. A person imprisoned for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
(6)	A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages and expenses shall not be released from custody until one (1) of the following occurs: 
a.	The defendant is credited with the amount due pursuant to subsection (5) above; 
b.	The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise; or 
c.	The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of a. and b. above. 
(7)	The civil contempt shall be purged by the court upon satisfaction of subsection (6) above. 
(Ord. No. 10-275, § 2, 9-14-10) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- App. A contains the zoning ordinance of the city adopted Sept. 8, 1992, and amendments thereto. Amendments have been included in the affected section(s) and history notes, parenthetically enclosed, have been added at the end of such section(s). Capitalization and numerical expressions have been conformed; any obvious typographical errors have been corrected without comment, and any words appearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor for clarity. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE 
    This ordinance, enacted under Act 207, Public Acts of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended, governing the City of Hudsonville, Ottawa County, Michigan, is adopted to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, and residence, and for public, semi-public or other specified uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards, courts, and open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population. To obtain said purposes and any others allowed by applicable law, this ordinance, as adopted, shall divide the municipality into districts and establish the boundaries thereof; provide for changes in the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries of such districts; define certain terms used herein; provide for enforcement; establish a board of appeals; and impose penalties for the violation of this ordinance. 
    THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE KNOWN AND MAY BE CITED AS THE CITY OF HUDSONVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE. 
ARTICLE 2. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTING CLAUSE 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in such case, this City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance, made and provided for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Hudsonville by protecting and conserving the character, social, and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial, and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; by preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; by providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access; by facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation, and other public requirements; and by other means, all in accordance with a master plan, now therefore: the City of Hudsonville, Ottawa County, Michigan, ordains: 
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Rules of construction. 
A.	The particular shall control the general. 
B.	The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any similar entity. 
C.	The phrase "used for" includes arranged for, designed for, intended for, maintained for, or occupied for. 
D.	A building or structure includes any part thereof. 
E.	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunctions "and," "or," "either...or," the conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.	"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
2.	"Or" indicates the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.	"Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
F.	Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
G.	Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
H.	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
I.	In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
J.	Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
Sec. 3-2. - General definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms shall have the meanings defined in this section. Where certain words or terms are defined in other articles or sections of this ordinance, such words or terms shall have the meanings defined in such articles or sections. 
    Abutting (lot or parcel): A lot or parcel which shares a common border with the subject lot or parcel. 
    Accessory use, building or structure: A use, building, or structure which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, devoted exclusively to, subordinate to, and located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related. An accessory building is considered attached when it is connected to a principal building by common, major structural elements such as a wall or roof; otherwise it is considered detached. 
    Adjacent (lot or parcel): A lot or parcel which abuts or is directly across a street right-of-way from any lot or parcel line of the subject lot or parcel. 
    Attached dwelling unit: (See Dwelling unit, attached). 
    Average grade: (See Grade, average). 
    Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below finished grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Berm: A mound of earth graded, shaped and improved with landscaping in such a fashion as to be used for visual and/or audible screening purposes. 
    Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns, walls, or any other supports, which is used for the purpose of housing, sheltering, storing, or enclosing persons, animals, or personal property, or carrying on business activities. This definition shall include tents, awnings, mobile homes, or vehicles used for such purposes. 
    Building height: The vertical distance measured from entry grade to the highest point of flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the average height between eaves and the ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. (See Figure 3.1) 
Figure 3.1 Measurement of Building Height 
    Building, principal: (See Principal building or structure). 
    Child care center: A facility, other than a private residence, licensed by the Michigan Department of Social Services, in which one or more children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours per day, and where a parent or legal guardian is not immediately available to the child. 
    A child care center includes a facility which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. A child care center does not include a Sunday school; a vacation Bible school; a religious class where children are in attendance for not greater than four hours per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than eight hours per day for a period not to exceed four weeks during a 12-month period; or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not greater than four hours per day, while persons responsible for the children are attending religious classes or services. 
    Communication tower: A radio, telephone, cellular telephone or television relay structure of skeleton framework or monopole, attached directly to the ground or to another structure, used for the transmission or reception of radio, telephone, cellular telephone, television, microwave or any other form of telecommunication signals. 
    Corner lot: (See Lot, corner). 
    Cul-de-sac: A dead-end public or private street, generally short in distance, which terminates in a circular or semi-circular section of street allowing for vehicle turnaround. 
    Day care center: (See Family day care home or Group day care home). 
    Density: The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed on per gross specified area of land. Density is expressed in units per acre. 
    Detached dwelling unit: (See Attached dwelling unit [and Dwelling unit, detached]). 
    Driveways: (See article 9). 
    Dwelling unit: A building, or enclosed portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having independent living, eating, sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities. A dwelling unit shall include both manufactured units (mobile homes and modular homes) and site-built units. Reference to dwelling shall mean dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling unit, attached: A dwelling unit attached to one or more dwelling units by common, major, structural elements. 
    Dwelling unit, detached: A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. 
    Dwelling unit, multiple-family A building designed exclusively for and containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit, single-family: A detached building designed exclusively for and containing one dwelling unit only. 
    Dwelling unit, two-family: A detached building designed exclusively for, and containing two dwelling units only. 
    Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by a property owner to and/or for use by the public or another person or entity. 
    Entry grade: (See Grade, entry). 
    Essential public services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities, city-authorized cable-television companies, municipal departments, commissions, boards, or other government agencies of specific underground, surface, or overhead systems or structures reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services, or for the public health, safety, or general welfare, but not including buildings other than those necessary to house or protect such essential services/utilities. Such systems shall include gas, electric, steam, water transmission/distribution, storm water, waste water collection, or cable-television. Such structures shall include dams, weirs, culverts, bridges, canals, fire alarm boxes and hydrants, traffic signals, signs and other similar equipment and accessories. 
    Family: One or more persons living together as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit, organized as a single entity in which the members share a dwelling unit based on marriage, consanguinity, adoption, or other domestic bond. This definition does not include any society, combine club, fraternity, sorority, association, federation lodge, coterie, organization, or any other group whose domestic relationship is of a transitional or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration. 
    Family day care home: A private residence in which the operator permanently resides as a member of the household, registered with the Michigan Department of Social Services, in which at least one minor child, but less than seven minor children, are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours per day. These children shall be unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care homes include homes that give care to an unrelated minor child(ren) for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    Finished grade: (See Grade, finished). 
    Floodplain: Reference to floodplain(s) in this ordinance shall refer to the 100-year floodplain as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or other governmental agency qualified to make such determination. The 100-year floodplain is that land which, on the basis of available floodplain information, is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Floor area, gross: The sum of all gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or buildings, measured from the outside dimensions of the outside face of the outside wall. Except where they are utilized for commercial purposes, unenclosed porches, court yards, or patios shall not be considered as part of the gross floor area. 
    Front lot line: (See Lot line, front). 
    Grade, average: The arithmetic average of the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five feet of the foundation line of a building or structure. 
    Grade, entry: That grade at which the primary entrance to the first story of a building is established. 
    Grade, finished: The lowest point of elevation between the exterior wall of the structure and a line five feet from the exterior wall of the structure. 
    Gross floor area: (See Floor area, gross). 
    Group day care home: A private residence in which the operator permanently resides as a member of the household, licensed by the Michigan Department of Social Services, in which more than six, but not more than 12, minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours per day. Children shall be unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care homes include homes that give care to an unrelated minor child(ren) for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    Height, building: (See Building height). 
    Home occupations: Any occupation conducted within a residential dwelling unit located within a residential district. Such occupation is incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
    Housekeeping unit: A dwelling unit organized as a single entity in which the members share common kitchen facilities and have access to all parts of the dwelling. 
    Landscaping: (See article 8). 
    Lot: A parcel of land separated from other parcels of land by description on a recorded plat or by metes and bounds description; having frontage upon a public street or city approved private road; and having sufficient size to comply with the requirements of this ordinance for minimum area, setbacks, coverage, and open space. 
    Lot area: The amount of space contained within a lot, typically expressed in square feet or acres. 
    Lot, corner: Any lot having at least two contiguous sides abutting upon one or more streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage: The percentage of a lot which is taken up by building space. 
    Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between side lot lines. (See Figure 3.2) 
    Lot frontage: The length of the front lot line. 
    Lot line: A line bounding a lot or parcel from another lot or parcel, existing street right-of-way, approved private-road easement, or ordinary high-water mark. 
    Lot line, front: The lot line which separates the lot from the street right-of-way or approved private-road easement that provides primary access to the lot. (See Figure 3.2) 
    Lot line, rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot or parcel, it means an imaginary line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot or parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. (See Figure 3.2) 
    Lot line, side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. (See Figure 3.2) 
Figure 3.2 Measurement of Lot Lines 
    Lot of record: A tract of land which is part of a subdivision shown on a plat or map which has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Ottawa County, Michigan; or a tract of land described by metes and bounds which is the subject of a deed or land contract which is likewise recorded in the office of the register of deeds. 
    Lot width: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front yard setback line. 
    Master Plan of City of Hudsonville: A document containing the future development policy and map for the City of Hudsonville, together with supporting documentation as most recently adopted or amended by the City of Hudsonville Planning Commission pursuant to Michigan Public Act 285 of 1931, as amended. 
    Mobile home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities. The plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems are contained in the structure. Mobile homes shall not include modular homes, motor homes, or travel trailers. 
    Mobile home park: A parcel or tract of land upon which three or more mobile homes are located. The park is intended to be used on a continual, residential, non-recreational-specific basis and is offered to the public for that purpose. 
    Motor home: A self-propelled, licensed vehicle prefabricated on its own chassis, intended for recreation activities and temporary occupancy. 
    Multiple-family dwelling unit: (See Dwelling unit, multiple-family). 
    Nonconforming building or structure: A building, structure, or portions thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or subsequent amendment which fails to meet the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located, as contained in this ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto. 
    Nonconforming lot: A lot of record which does not meet the dimensional requirements of this ordinance or subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Nonconforming use: A use which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    On-premises: Something being located totally within a lot, and not encroaching into any street right-of-way or access easement. 
    Parking area: Any on-premises parking lot, together with associated circulation aisles, and access drives. 
    Planning commission: The City of Hudsonville Planning Commission as created pursuant to Michigan Public Act 285 of 1931. 
    Plat: A map of a subdivision of land. 
    POA: The property owner's association. 
    PUD: A planned unit development. 
    Principal building or structure: A building or structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Principal use: The main use to which the premises are devoted and the main purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Private street: Any street or thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is privately owned and maintained, and which provides the principal means of access to two or more abutting properties. 
    Rear lot line: (See Lot line, rear). 
    Required yards: (See Yards, required). 
    Right-of-way: A street, alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles and under the legal authority of the agency having jurisdiction over said passage. 
    Satellite dish antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured; is in the shape of a shallow dish, parabola, cone or horn; and has a minimum dimension of three feet or greater. Such a device shall be used to transmit and/or receive television, radio, or other electromagnetic communication signals between terrestrially and/or extraterrestrial based sources. This definition includes, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVRO's (television reception only satellite antennas), and satellite microwave antennas. 
    [Sexually oriented business and related definitions:] 
    Sexually oriented business: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult live entertainment theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center and includes: 
(A)	The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(B)	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a sexually oriented business. 
(C)	The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; 
(D)	The relocation of any sexually oriented business; 
(E)	The substantial enlargement of an existing sexually oriented business; or 
(F)	The continuation of any sexually oriented business in existence on the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Adult arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store: A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(A)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(B)	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not be a primary or majority use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment. 
    Adult cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features one or more of the following: 
(A)	Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; 
(B)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; 
(C)	Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(D)	Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers. 
    Adult entertainment: Any exhibition, display or dance which involves exposure to view of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult live entertainment theatre: An enclosed building for presenting live entertainment involving the use of strip dancers, naked individuals, individuals who wear see-through clothing which permits the view of "specified anatomical areas," individuals who are partially clothed and partially unclothed so as to permit the view of "specified anatomical areas" or individuals conducting "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(A)	Offers accommodation to the public for any form or consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(B)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 24 hours; or 
(C)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 24 hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building used for presenting motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
    Employee: For purposes of subsection I of section 13-7 of article 13 hereof, means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, including the manager, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the manager or owner of said business. 
    Entertainer: Any person who performs any entertainment, exhibition or dance of any type within an adult cabaret, whether or not such person or anyone else charges or accepts a fee for such entertainment, exhibition, or dance. 
    Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie, to privately perform a striptease for another person, or to otherwise display specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Licensee: For purposes of subsection I of section 13-7 of article 13 hereof, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. It also means the general partners of a partnership, the partners of a limited liability partnership and the members of a limited liability company that is a licensee. 
    Manager: For purposes of subsection I of section 13-7 of article 13 hereof, an employee, other than the licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisory of employees or who is otherwise responsible for the operation of, or in charge of, a licensed sexually oriented business. 
    Nude model studio: Any place where a person who appears nude or in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity: The display of any specified anatomical areas. 
    Operator: For purposes of subsection I of section 13-7 of article 13 hereof, all persons who own, operate, direct, oversee, conduct, maintain, or effectively exert management control or authority over a sexually oriented business or its affairs, without regard to whether such person(s) owns the premises in which the sexually oriented business does business. An operator effectively exerts management control or authority when he or she actually does, or is in a position to, participate in the management, direction or oversight of a sexually oriented business or its affairs, whether or not such person's name appears on any public record filed with any government agency in connection with a sexually oriented business or any parent company or affiliate. 
    Owner: For purposes of subsection I of section 13-7 of article 13 hereof, a person owning, directly or beneficially, any interest or part interest, however identified, in a sexually oriented business. 
    Peep booth: A viewing room, other than a private room not authorized for admittance by patrons, of less than 150 square feet of floor space upon the premises of a sexually oriented business where there is exhibited photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or other video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Person: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, association or other legal entity. 
    Premises: All lands, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Private room: A room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed in the room, has a bath in the room or adjacent to the room, and is used primarily for lodging. 
    Semi-nudity: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Sexual encounter center: A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. This definition does not apply to any actions otherwise authorized by law or the examination of another person for a bona fide medical purpose consistent with reasonable medical practices. 
    Specified anatomical areas: The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal even if completely and opaquely covered, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals of any person. 
    Specified sexual activities: Includes any of the following: 
(A)	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(B)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(C)	Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(D)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (A) through (B) above. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business: The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Setback: The minimum distance that a building or structure must be from any lot line to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Side lot line: (See Lot line, side). 
    Signs: (See article 7). 
    Single-family dwelling unit: (See Dwelling unit, single-family). 
    Site condominiums: (See article 12). 
    Special land use: A use of land which is permitted within a particular zoning district only if the standards contained in the ordinance have been met. A special land use requires that a special-use permit be obtained. 
    Story: That portion of a building (excluding a basement) included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it. If there is no floor above the floor, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it shall be included as a story. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, excepting utility poles, sewage pumping stations, and utility manholes. 
    Structure, principal: (See Building or structure, principal). 
    Trip generation (rates): The number of trip ends associated with a development, based on building area, lot size, number of units, number of employees, or other parameters. The number can be estimated using actual data from comparable developments or information given in nationally accepted sources. An example of an accepted source is a trip generation manual developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). 
    Two-family dwelling unit: (See Dwelling unit, two-family). 
    Variance: A relaxation or modification of the requirements of this ordinance as authorized by the zoning board of appeals under the provisions of this ordinance, as amended. 
    Wetlands: Any land area meeting the definition of wetlands as most currently recognized by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or other governmental unit having jurisdiction over wetland regulation within the city. 
    Yards: Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and as defined herein, the open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward on the same lot with a principal building. 
1.	Front yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the foundation. 
2.	Rear yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the foundation of the main building. 
3.	Side yard: An open space between the principal building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the side yard is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the foundation of the main building. (See Figure 3.3) 
    Yards, required: Reference to a specific required yard shall mean the minimum required yard as specified by this ordinance. (See Figure 3.3) 
Figure 3.3 Yards 
    Zoning administrator: An individual appointed by the planning commission with the consent of the city manager to administer the City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance. 
    Zoning board of appeals (ZBA): The City of Hudsonville Zoning Board of Appeals created under Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, § 1, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 98-210, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 00-217, § 1, 3-14-00) 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-1. - Effect of zoning. 
    No building, structure, premises, lot, or parcel of land in the city shall hereafter be used or occupied; and no building or part thereof shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
Sec. 4-2. - Extent of regulations. 
    The general regulations contained in article 4 shall apply to all zoning districts except as otherwise noted. 
Sec. 4-3. - Accessory uses-Single-family lots. 
A.	Location requirements. 
1.	Detached accessory buildings shall only be permitted in the rear yard with the exception of a garage accessory building, intended principally for the storage of automobiles, small trucks, vans and related uses customary and incidental to a single-family residential dwelling, which may be permitted in the side yard. 
2.	No detached accessory building roofline shall extend over an adjacent property, nor shall the drainage from any accessory building roof be drained onto an adjacent property. 
3.	No detached accessory buildings shall be permitted within any required setback area as defined in the "Building Setbacks From Public/Private Right-Of-Way" map (Figure 4.1). 
4.	Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of four feet from any property line (measured from the nearest point of the building wall) with the exception of a garage accessory building in the side yard which shall meet the side yard setbacks of the principal building. 
5.	Attached accessory buildings shall comply with the corresponding principal building setback requirements. 
6.	Detached accessory buildings shall be located at least ten feet from the principal building. 
7.	Paved areas for driveways and parking shall be permitted up to one foot from the property line. 
B.	Number permitted. 
1.	A single-family home shall be permitted two detached accessory buildings and one attached accessory building. 
2.	A two-family dwelling unit shall be permitted a total of two detached accessory buildings and one attached accessory building; provided, however, two attached accessory buildings shall be permitted if each is a garage separately serving each of the family units. 
C.	Size and height restrictions. 
1.	Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the principal building, and in no case shall the accessory building height exceed 14 feet in height unless a special use permit is obtained. 
2.	The permitted size of accessory buildings shall be in accordance with Table 4.1. 
3.	Accessory buildings exceeding the provisions of Table 4.1 shall require a special use permit. When considering the issuance of a special use permit under this subsection 3, the planning commission may take into consideration screening provided by the topography and vegetation. 
4.	No roof overhang, cornice, or any other part of the accessory building may exceed 24 inches from the outside of the building's wall. 
D.	Use requirement. Accessory buildings shall not include residential or living quarters for human beings. 
E.	For accessory buildings of 200 square feet or greater, the type and kind of construction, and the general architectural character of the building shall be compatible with the principle structure. 
(Ord. No. 00-217, §§ 3, 4, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 13-296, §§ 2, 3, 12-10-13) 
Table 4.1. Permitted Single-Family Lots 
Accessory Building Space 
Type of Accessory Building Maximum Size-Lot area under 22,000 square feet Maximum Size-Lot area of 22,000 feet or greater Single detached The lesser of 576 square feet or 25% of the lot's rear yard The lesser of 864 square feet or 25% of the lot's rear yard Single attached 100% of the ground floor area of the principal building 100% of the ground floor area of the principal building All detached and attached combined* 1,024 square feet total 1,536 square feet total  
*All detached and attached accessory space combined shall not exceed the ground floor area of the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 00-217, § 5, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 4-4. - Accessory uses-Non-single-family lots. 
A.	Approvals required. Any accessory-use building which exceeds either five percent of the principal building or exceeds 960 square feet in size shall require site-plan review by the planning commission. Accessory buildings which are less than five percent shall only require the approval of the zoning administrator. 
B.	Setback requirements. 
1.	The minimum setback for accessory buildings and structures which are 200 square feet or less in area shall be equal to the required perimeter landscape screen width as specified in section 8-4 of this ordinance. 
2.	All accessory buildings which exceed 200 square feet in size shall meet all building setbacks for the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.	No accessory buildings shall be permitted within any setback areas as defined in the "Building Setbacks From Public Rights-of-Way Map" (Figure 4.1). 
(Ord. No. 00-217, § 4, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 4-5. - Basement and illegal dwellings. 
A.	Permitted use of basement as living quarters. The use of a basement as living quarters may be permitted if it meets the city's building code as amended for ingress and egress. 
B.	Use of basement as living quarters. 
1.	When not attached to any above-ground dwelling, the use of a basement for living quarters shall be prohibited. 
2.	The use of a basement of a partially completed building as a dwelling unit is prohibited. 
Sec. 4-6. - Building demolition. 
    No building shall be demolished unless a permit is obtained from the zoning administrator. The permit issued shall prescribe the method of demolition to be used and time frame in which the demolition and site restoration shall be completed. The zoning administrator may also condition the permit on other reasonable regulations related to the health and safety of the public. If utility connections are involved, the city's building inspector shall ensure that such utilities are properly disconnected and, where applicable, capped off. 
Sec. 4-7. - Building setbacks. 
    Building setbacks from any public road right-of-way shall comply with the setbacks designated on the "Building Setbacks From Public Rights-of-Way Map" in Figure 4.1. Where more stringent, these setbacks shall supersede any zoning district yard requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-242, § 1, 8-12-03) 

FIGURE 4.1. BUILDING SETBACKS 
Sec. 4-8. - City access. 
    City personnel shall be allowed access on private streets, easements and common open-space areas to provide police and fire protection to the area, to meet emergency needs, to conduct city services, to enforce city ordinances and codes, and to generally ensure the health and safety of the residents living in proximity to such roadways. 
Sec. 4-9. - Clear vision areas. 
    Clear vision areas at street intersections shall be maintained in conformance with the regulations contained in article 9. 
Sec. 4-10. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this ordinance imposes more stringent regulations than are imposed by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent regulations than are imposed by this ordinance, the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. 4-11. - Continued conformance with regulations. 
    The maintenance of yards, landscaping, open spaces, lot areas, height and bulk limitations, fences, walls, clear vision areas, parking and loading spaces, signs and all other requirements for a building or use specified within this ordinance shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or property on which such building or use is located. 
Sec. 4-12. - Driveways. 
    All developments shall comply with the driveway design and spacing regulations contained in article 9 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 4-13. - Essential public services. 
    The construction, alteration, or maintenance of essential public services shall be permitted in any zoning district. If the provision of essential public services involves the construction or alteration of above-ground buildings, plans for such buildings shall be submitted for site-plan review. Above-ground buildings required for the provision of essential public services shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinance regulations where feasible. 
Sec. 4-14. - Existing platted lots not meeting district standards. 
    Platted lots existing prior to the enactment of this zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment shall be allowed to be developed in accordance with the permitted uses in the district in which they are located, subject to the following conditions: 
A.	All requirements of the zoning district shall apply where no practical difficulties exist. 
B.	If a variance is required, the zoning board of appeals shall seek the maximum compliance possible. 
C.	If more than one lot is owned by the same owner and are contiguous, and use of more than one lot enables compliance with the zoning ordinance, then such compliance shall be required. 
Sec. 4-15. - Family day care homes. 
    Permitted family day care homes shall comply with the following standards: 
A.	The family day care home shall be licensed by the State of Michigan under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973. 
B.	A minimum of 200 square feet of general activity space must be provided within the home. General activity space shall not include hallways, bathrooms, kitchens, or bedrooms. 
C.	There shall be a minimum of 2,500 square feet of outdoor play area provided. The outdoor play area shall not be located within the required front yard setback area. 
The planning commission may waive the requirement for outdoor play area on-premises if they feel there exists suitable outdoor play area of equal or greater size within 500 feet of the home. 
D.	Family day care homes shall provide a safe environment. Such environment shall be free from nuisance conditions either on or adjacent to the premises which would place children's health or safety at risk. Nuisance conditions might include, but are not limited to, unacceptable exposure to traffic, noise, air contaminants, vibration, explosive materials, or other dangerous commercial or industrial activities. 
The planning commission may require any site improvement which they feel is necessary to ensure the health and safety of the children to be present on the premises. 
E.	The family day care home shall provide two parking spaces on-premises for pickup and drop off of children. 
Sec. 4-16. - Frontage on public or private streets. 
    No building shall be erected unless the premises upon which it is to be constructed shall abut upon a public street or private street which has received the approval of the planning commission. This regulation applies to site condominium and planned unit development projects, as well as more conventional development on platted or unplatted lots. 
Sec. 4-17. - Home occupations. 
A.	Required standards to be permitted by right. Home occupations shall be permitted by right if they meet the below-listed standards. However, if a home occupation does not meet one or more of the below standards it shall not be permitted, unless approved for a special use permit by the planning commission: 
1.	The home occupation shall not involve any person not residing at the home. 
2.	The home occupation shall not involve any outdoor activities. 
3.	The home in which the occupation is proposed must be used principally for residential purposes. 
4.	The home occupation shall not involve the storage of any significant amount of materials for which there is high risk of inflammability or explosion. 
5.	The home occupation shall not generate more than five client trips to the home in any 24-hour period. 
6.	The home occupation shall be permitted one sign of not more than two square feet in size. Such sign shall be attached to the dwelling. 
7.	The home occupation shall not result in the exterior of the home having other than a residential appearance. 
8.	The home occupation shall not involve deliveries by trucks greater than 25 feet in length. 
9.	Noise emanating from the home occupation dwelling as a result of the home occupation shall not exceed 65 DNL as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
B.	Approval of home occupation not an acceptance of commercial uses in residential zones. The allowance of any home occupation by the city, subject to the regulations contained in this section of the ordinance, shall not in any way constitute an acceptance of, or give validity to, the introduction of nonresidential uses into any residential zoning district. 
Sec. 4-18. - Landscaping. 
    All developments or uses shall comply with the landscaping regulations contained in article 8 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 4-19. - Lighting. 
A.	Places and periods of time when lighting is required. Parking areas, walkways, and building entryways associated with commercial, public, industrial, and multiple-family residential complex uses shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness for which the use is in operation. Hours of operation shall include all times during which employees or residents may normally be arriving or departing any building. 
B.	Height limitation for lighting fixtures. Lighting fixtures intended to light the grounds or parking areas shall not be mounted on any building or supporting structure at a height of greater than 30 feet. This regulation shall not apply to recreational facilities. 
C.	Lighting prohibitions No lights shall shine directly into windows or onto streets and driveways in such a manner as to interfere with or distract driver vision or the privacy of adjacent uses. 
Sec. 4-20. - Lot-to-building relationship. 
    There shall not be more than one principal structure permitted on any one lot in any R-1 Residential District. 
Sec. 4-21. - Lot coverage. 
    In determining percent of lot coverage, both principal and accessory buildings shall be included in the calculation. 
Sec. 4-22. - Lot width of cul-de-sac lots. 
    The planning commission may reduce the minimum lot width for cul-de-sac lots by up to 
20%. 
Sec. 4-23. - Parcel or lot division. 
    No parcel or lot division shall be made which results in a parcel or lot being in nonconformance with any provision of this ordinance as amended, or is in violation of the city's subdivision control ordinance as amended. 
Sec. 4-24. - Parking. 
    All developments or uses shall comply with the parking and unloading regulations contained in article 6 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 4-25. - Relocation of existing buildings on parcels or lots in the city. 
A.	Special use permit requirements. A special use permit shall be required if any building from either inside or outside of the city is to be relocated upon any parcel or lot in the city. 
B.	Design compatibility. Any building proposed to be relocated within the city shall be compatible in design and construction with buildings and other structures already existing in the immediate area of the proposed building relocation site. 
C.	Compliance with zoning ordinance requirement. Any building proposed for relocation shall conform to all other requirements of the zoning district in which the relocation site is located. 
D.	Bond requirement. The city may require a bond to insure against damage to city roads or other public property and also to provide for proper relocation of any building. 
E.	Route approval. The route to be taken within the city must be approved by the city. 
F.	Responsibility for payment of public expenses incurred. The permittee shall be responsible to pay for all costs incurred by the city which are attributable to the building relocation. 
Sec. 4-26. - Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles and equipment in residential districts. 
A.	Permitted repair and maintenance. 
1.	Normal and customary maintenance work (vehicle washing, changing oil, tune ups, etc.) shall be permitted. 
2.	Repair involving body work or major engine repair shall only be permitted if performed within an enclosed building. 
B.	Prohibited repair and maintenance. 
1.	When not performed within an enclosed building, repair involving body work or major engine repair shall be prohibited. 
2.	Commercial repair (repair being conducted for monetary compensation on vehicles or equipment owned by other than residents of home where the repair activity is taking place) shall be prohibited. 
3.	Repair and maintenance activities being performed outside of an enclosed building shall not be permitted for more than two days in any week. 
4.	Repair or maintenance being performed outside of an enclosed building shall not be conducted between the hours of 9:00 pm and 9:00 am. 
C.	Prohibited vehicle storage. Inoperable vehicles and vehicles without a valid license plate shall not be permitted to be stored in a residential district unless within an enclosed building. 
Sec. 4-27. - Rooftop accessory structures. 
A.	Allowance for exceeding maximum building height. The height of accessory structures, such as chimneys, air conditioning units, and other mechanical appurtenances, may exceed the maximum building height for the district in which it is located by a maximum amount of 15 feet. 
B.	Required screening. Where rooftop appurtenances are within 15 feet of a building edge, the planning commission may require that they be screened to a height of three feet above roof grade. The planning commission shall base their decision to require screening on the aesthetic quality of the rooftop appurtenances and degree of visibility to adjacent uses and the general public. 
Sec. 4-28. - Satellite dish antennas. 
    Installation of a satellite dish antenna in any zoning district shall require the issuance of a zoning compliance permit by the zoning administrator. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the following provisions must be met: 
A.	Site plan requirement. A site plan shall be provided to the zoning administrator. The site plan shall be to scale and show the proposed location and elevation of the antenna, other buildings, roads and natural features. 
B.	Design and location standards. 
1.	No portion of the antenna shall display any advertising message or other graphic representation other than a manufacturer's logo or nameplate, provided such logo or nameplate is of a size and character that it is not legible from adjacent properties. 
2.	Satellite dish antennas shall be designed to blend into the adjacent background through use of color, texture, or other design features. 
3.	No satellite dish antenna shall be located in any front yard. 
4.	No satellite dish antenna with support structures located on the ground shall exceed 15 feet in height. Roof-mounted dish antennas located in residential districts shall not exceed the building-height limitation for the district. And further, in any residential district no roof-mounted dish antenna shall exceed four feet of height as measured from the base of the mounting structure. 
C.	Determination of requirement for special-use permit. A special use permit shall be required prior to the installation of dish antennas having one or more of the following characteristics: 
1.	Any dish antenna exceeding 12 feet in height and ten feet in diameter; 
2.	Any dish antenna which is not permanently anchored to a foundation located on the ground; and 
3.	Any dish antenna which is to serve more than one structure. 
Sec. 4-29. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be provided in accordance with applicable city policies and ordinances. 
Sec. 4-30. - Soil removal, grading, and filling. 
A.	Intent. 
1.	It is the intent of this section to regulate the removal of soil, the grading and leveling of soil, and the filling of soil within the City of Hudsonville. These regulations are necessary because of the potential for adverse impacts and damages including: 
a.	Noise, 
b.	Dust, 
c.	Odors, 
d.	Alteration of topographical and geographical characteristics of the land, 
e.	Elimination of topsoil, 
f.	Erosion, 
g.	Filtration of soil into city storm sewers, 
h.	Shifting earth, and 
i.	Standing water. 
2.	The regulations are also intended to preserve city resources, prevent nuisances and hazards, and require reasonable control of the above-stated activities. 
B.	Definitions. The following definitions shall be used for this section of the ordinance: 
1.	Fill project: The depositing, removal, redistribution, or placement of soil on land in a manner which alters the pre-existing contour or elevation of said land. 
2.	Soil: topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, rock, stone, aggregate, earth or any other similar material. 
C.	Requirements for permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any fill project upon any land in the city without a permit issued by the zoning administrator pursuant to the terms of this section. 
    Exceptions to this regulation shall include: 
1.	Projects which are a part of uses or activities approved under site plan review or special use permit; 
2.	Projects incidental to development of land subject to the Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of 1967, as amended, when final preliminary plat approval has been obtained; and 
3.	Projects involving any normal landscaping, driveway installation and repairs, or other minor fill project conducted in the interests of good land husbandry. 
D.	Requirement for obtaining a permit. 
1.	The application for a permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may request such information from the applicant as is necessary to determine that the fill project for which approval is requested will meet the requirements of this section. The zoning administrator may consult with the city engineer to make such a determination. The zoning administrator shall issue the permit requested if he/she is satisfied that the following provisions have been met: 
a.	The fill project will not impede drainage. 
b.	The fill project will not alter the topographical features of the applicant's property, causing a change in the natural flow of surface waters with respect to adjoining properties. 
c.	The fill project will not be in violation of any condition of this ordinance or other city ordinance or state law. 
d.	The fill project uses only soil as defined in subpart B of this section. 
e.	The fill project does not endanger health, safety or welfare of any individual. 
f.	The proposed operation will not create an unreasonable hazard, annoyance, or inconvenience to the owners or occupants of nearby property; will not significantly change the character of the neighborhood or unreasonably reduce the value of nearby properties; and will not adversely affect implementation of the zoning ordinance or city master plan. 
2.	Where necessary for proper consideration of the factors listed in subpart D.1 of this section, the zoning administrator is authorized to require the applicant to furnish any or all of the following information: 
a.	A full identification of the applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly interested in the permit if granted; 
b.	The residence and business address of the applicant; 
c.	The exact nature of the proposed soil to be used in the project and an estimate of the approximate number of cubic yards involved; 
d.	The proposed route where soil is to be transported; 
e.	The location of the place and the name and address of all persons and firms from whom the soil and any materials to be used in the project are to be obtained; 
f.	The start and completion date for the project, including the hours during which the soil will be transported; 
g.	A topographic map of existing land features prepared under the supervision of a land surveyor or professional civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan, at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch, indicating 
i.	A legal survey of the property wherein filling is proposed, 
ii.	The existing ground surface elevations for involved property and adjacent contiguous areas within 300 feet of said property, bounded by accurate contours at intervals not exceeding two feet U.S.G.S. datum, 
iii.	All existing surface and subsurface improvements to include such features as buildings, roads, driveways, fences, culverts, pipe lines, electric and telephone lines, etc., 
iv.	The existing drainage courses with channel cross-section and profile information, 
v.	The permanent parcel (sidwell) number on record with the County of Ottawa of the subject site and all abutting properties with ownership, and 
vi.	The seal of the surveyor or engineer that supervised the preparation of the map on each sheet thereof; and 
h.	A map or drawing of the proposed land fill/land balancing project, prepared under the supervision of a land surveyor or professional civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan, at the same scale as the topographic map indicating: 
i.	The proposed finished surface elevations and slopes, by contours at intervals not exceeding two feet U.S.G.S. datum, with cross-sections as necessary to clearly indicate proposed slopes and drainage provisions around the periphery of proposed site; 
ii.	A clear delineation of limits of proposed grade changes, 
iii.	The location of proposed access roads, 
iv.	The stormwater-drainage provisions (both during and following completion of operations, including drainage pattern, run-off calculations, and detailed information for proposed, new or improved drainage facilities), 
v.	The type of proposed fill material and proposed placement and compaction methods, 
vi.	The details of provisions for controlling soil erosion and for controlling sedimentation onto contiguous properties and into water courses (both during and following completion of operations), and 
vii.	Seal of the surveyor or engineer that supervised the preparation of the map on each sheet thereof. 
E.	Violations and zoning administrator powers. The zoning administrator may attach such conditions to the granting of the permit which may be necessary to insure that the intent and purpose of this ordinance is in all respects observed. Any violation of a condition(s) included in the permit shall be construed as a violation of this ordinance, shall give rise to the penalties provided in this ordinance, and shall be grounds for revoking the permit. The permittee shall submit a written request to the zoning administrator for approval of changes to the original plans, specifications, reports, and methods of operation submitted with a permit application. No such change shall be initiated until the written approval of the zoning administrator has been obtained. 
F.	Payment of fees and issuance of permits. At the time of application, the applicant shall pay an application fee as established by the Hudsonville City Commission. If the application is approved and all fees paid, the zoning administrator shall issue a permit. 
G.	Expiration, termination, suspension and revocation of a permit. 
1.	When a fill project is completed, as described in the application, the permit granted shall terminate and no further materials may be deposited or moved on the site until a new application has been filed and a permit granted in the same manner as provided for the original application and permit. 
2.	In the event that any fill project for which a permit has been granted is not started within three months from the date the permit is issued, the permit will expire. The permit shall also expire on the date stated in the permit, unless the applicant formally requests an extension from the zoning administrator, and such request is approved. 
3.	Failure of a permit holder to conform the fill project to the activities described in the approved permit application and plans upon which granting of the permit was based (and any approved amendments thereto) shall result in the suspension or revocation of the permit, forfeiture of any and all bonds furnished, and prosecution under the terms of this ordinance. 
H.	Bond. The zoning administrator may require a bond or similar financial surety as a condition to issuing a permit under this section. In establishing the amount of the bond, the zoning administrator shall consider the scale of operation, the costs to rehabilitate the property upon default of the operator, court costs, and other reasonable expenses. 
Sec. 4-31. - Solid waste receptacle areas. 
A.	Location requirements. Other than for single-family home use, any outdoor, commercial solid waste receptacle shall comply with the following: 
1.	No receptacle shall be placed in a front yard. 
2.	For multiple-family residential developments, receptacles shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residential building, but not to exceed 500 feet from any building they are intended to serve. 
3.	No receptacle shall be placed closer than 20 feet to any single-family residential lot line. 
B.	Design requirements. 
1.	All receptacles shall be placed on an asphalt or concrete pad. 
2.	All receptacles shall be fully screened from view by a masonry or wood wall or fence, to include a gate. The screen shall not exceed six feet in height. The planning commission may waive this requirement if the receptacle is adequately screened by perimeter landscaping treatment. 
Sec. 4-32. - Swimming pools. 
A.	Permit requirements. Installation of any swimming pool or spa which is two feet deep or greater shall require a building permit and shall meet the following requirements: 
1.	A set of plans and specifications for the pool, including fencing, decks, and related equipment, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. 
2.	The swimming pool shall meet the specification of the BOCA Electrical Code and BOCA Building Code as most recently adopted by the city commission. 
B.	Location. Swimming pools shall not be located closer than ten feet from a dwelling unit or any lot line. 
Sec. 4-33. - Temporary buildings. 
    Temporary buildings shall only be permitted if approved under special-use permit. 
Sec. 4-34. - Utilities for residential developments. 
    All utilities shall be placed underground for new residential developments, including single-family plats, multiple-family complexes, and mobile-home parks. 
Sec. 4-35. - Single-family and two-family dwelling units outside mobile home parks. 
A.	Standards. All single-family and two-family dwelling units located outside mobile home parks shall comply with the following standards: 
1.	An enclosed storage area of not less than 384 square feet shall be provided in conjunction with the dwelling unit. The storage area may consist of a basement or an attached or detached accessory structure that is in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, the mobile home must either be (a) new and certified by the manufacturer or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Regulations entitled "Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards" at the time the mobile home is located in the city or (b) used and certified by the manufacturer or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the above-referenced standards and found, upon inspection by the building inspector or his/her designee, to be safe and fit for residential occupancy. 
3.	The dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent frost free foundation with a wall of the same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling unit and is to be constructed of such materials and type as required by the building code, as amended from time to time, enforced within the city for on-site constructed single-family dwelling units. If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, its foundation shall fully enclose the chassis and undercarriage. 
4.	The foundation shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches below grade and a minimum exposed foundation about grade of eight inches. 
5.	All dwelling units without basements shall provide a "broom finished" crawl space below the entire floor of the dwelling unit at least two feet in depth with a vapor barrier consisting of two inches of concrete on the floor of the crawl space. The crawl space shall also be provided with adequate drains to drain any accumulation of water in the crawl space. The building inspector may allow an alternative building plan to be utilized for the crawl space if it is consistent with the building code, as may be amended from time to time, enforced within the city. 
6.	If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, it shall be installed with the wheels, towing mechanism and hitch removed. 
7.	The exterior finish of the dwelling unit shall not cause reflection that is greater than than from siding coated with clean, white, gloss exterior enamel. 
8.	Chimneys for fireplaces, furnaces, wood burning stoves and similar devices may be on the outside of the dwelling unit, provided the vent pipe is enclosed with materials compatible with the exterior finish. 
9.	Dwelling units shall provide a minimum height between the floor and ceiling of 7.5 feet. 
10.	The pitch of the main roof of the dwelling unit shall not be less than four feet of rise for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and shall have not less than a 12-inch overhang. 
(Ord. No. 02-235, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 4-36. - Freestanding outdoor furnaces. 
    It shall be unlawful to install or operate a freestanding outdoor furnace, or to cause or permit the installation or operation of a freestanding outdoor furnace, within the city. A freestanding outdoor furnace is defined as a furnace, stove or boiler that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans that is designed, intended or used to provide heat and/or hot water to any residence or structure that burns wood or other solid fuel such as, but not limited to, coal, paper or agricultural products. 
(Ord. No. 07-260, § 1, 1-9-07) 
ARTICLE 5. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5-1. - General provisions. 
A.	Establishment of districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Hudsonville is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
R-1-A Single-Family Residential R-1-B Single-Family Residential R-1-C Single-Family Residential R-1-D Single-Family Residential R-1-E Single-Family Residential R-2 Single-Family and Attached Residential R-3 Single-Family Attached Residential R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District MHP Mobile-Home Park CBD-1-G Central Business District-One-General CBD-1-OS Central Business District-One-Office/Service CBD-2 Central Business District-Two LC Light Commercial HC Highway Commercial FCR Fairgrounds Commercial Recreation PF Public Facilities I-1 Industrial I-2 Industrial PUD Planned Unit Development AG Agricultural  
B.	Zoning districts map. The locations and boundaries of these districts are hereby established on a map entitled "The Zoning Map of the City of Hudsonville, Ottawa County, Michigan" (Figure 5.1) which is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
    It shall be mandatory for all development proposals within any planned unit development district be reviewed as a planned unit development, subject to the regulations contained in article II. 
    The official zoning map shall be located in the office of the zoning administrator, and, together with other official zoning records, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of property within the city. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the zoning administrator, attested to by the city clerk. 
C.	District boundaries interpreted. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	Where the boundaries are indicated as approximately following the street, alleys, or highways, the center lines of said streets, alleys, or highways, or such lines extended, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
2.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following city boundary lines shall be construed as following such city boundaries. 
4.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to be the center line of the railroad right-of-way. 
5.	Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the center lines of streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map. 
6.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the shoreline of any water body shall be construed to follow such shoreline. In the event of change in the shoreline, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of any water body shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
7.	Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, such boundary determination shall be made by the zoning board of appeals after receiving a recommendation by the zoning administrator. 
D.	Application of regulations. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered, unless in conformity with the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
E.	Zoning of annexed areas. Whenever any area is annexed to the City of Hudsonville it shall be considered to be zoned R-1-E until such time as a formal rezoning process can be completed. 
F.	Zoning of vacated areas. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way, within the City of Hudsonville shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way, or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 

Sec. 5-2. - Purpose for R-1 Single-Family Districts. 
    A series of single-family zoning districts ranging from R-1-A to R-1-E are included in this ordinance. Each of these five districts is intended for single-family, detached dwelling units. The primary purpose of having five separate single-family districts is to provide for a variety of lot and dwelling unit sizes. The R-1-A District has the lowest minimum size requirement for lot and dwelling unit size. These requirements increase sequentially through the R-1-E District. The R-1 Districts are also intended to provide greater dwelling unit compatibility and reduced occurrence of building or lot nonconformity in all single-family residential neighborhoods. 
Sec. 5-3. - R-1-A Single-Family Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-1-A District is intended for single-family, detached residential development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the R-1-A District, except as otherwise noted: 
1.	Single-family detached dwelling, including single-family detached condominiums; 
2.	Family day care homes; 
3.	Accessory buildings incidental to the above-permitted uses; and 
4.	Signs as provided in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted by special-use permit in the R-1-A District: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Group day care homes, 
3.	Child care centers, and 
4.	Home occupations as provided in section 4-17. 
D.	Dimensional requirements. Lot and building dimensional requirements for the R-1-A District shall be as follows: 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 9,100 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 65 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30%. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Minimum first-story size for one-story dwelling units shall be 950 square feet. 
b.	Minimum upper-story size for raised-ranch dwelling units shall be 900 square feet. 
c.	Minimum first-story size for partial-two-story dwelling units shall be 800 square feet. Minimum size for the finished, partial second story shall be 250 square feet. 
d.	Minimum upper-two-story size for tri-level dwellings units shall be 800 square feet. 
e.	Minimum first-story size for full-two-story dwelling units shall be 650 square feet. Minimum size for the finished second story shall be 650 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-way Map (Figure 4.1). 
Sec. 5-4. - R-1-B Single-Family Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-1-B District is intended for single-family, detached residential development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the R-1-B District, except as otherwise noted: 
1.	Single-family detached dwellings, including single-family detached condominiums; 
2.	Family day care homes; 
3.	Accessory buildings incidental to the above-permitted uses; and 
4.	Signs as provided in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit in the R-1-B District: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Group day care homes, 
3.	Child care centers, 
4.	Two-family dwelling units (duplexes), and 
5.	Home occupations as provided in section 4-17. 
D.	Dimensional requirements. Lot and building dimensional requirements for the R-1-B District shall be as follows: 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30%. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Minimum first-story size for one-story single dwelling units shall be 1,000 square feet and for duplex dwelling units 900 square feet. 
b.	Minimum upper-story size for raised-ranch dwelling units shall be 950 square feet. 
c.	Minimum first-story size for partial two-story dwelling units shall be 850 square feet. Minimum size for the finished, partial second story shall be 250 square feet. 
d.	Minimum upper two-story size for tri-level dwellings units shall be 850 square feet. 
e.	Minimum first-story size for full-two-story dwelling units shall be 700 square feet. Minimum size for the finished second story shall be 700 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Amend. of 6-96; Ord. No. 02-235, § 2, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 5-5. - R-1-C Single-Family Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-1-C District is intended for single-family, detached residential development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the R-1-C District, except as otherwise noted: 
1.	Single-family detached dwellings, including single-family detached condominiums; 
2.	Family day care homes; 
3.	Accessory buildings incidental to the above-permitted uses; and 
4.	Signs as provided in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit in the R-1-C District: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Group day care homes, 
3.	Child care centers, 
4.	Two-family dwelling units (duplexes), and 
5.	Home occupations as provided in section 4-17. 
D.	Dimensional requirements. Lot and building dimensional requirements for the R-1-C District shall be as follows: 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 10,800 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30%. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Minimum first-story size for one-story single dwelling units shall be 1,100 square feet and for duplex dwelling units 900 square feet. 
b.	Minimum upper-story size for raised-ranch dwelling units shall be 1,050 square feet. 
c.	Minimum first-story size for partial two-story dwelling units shall be 900 square feet. Minimum size for the finished, partial second story shall be 250 square feet. 
d.	Minimum upper two-story size for tri-level dwellings units shall be 900 square feet. 
e.	Minimum first-story size for full two-story dwelling units shall be 750 square feet. Minimum size for the finished second story shall be 750 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Amend. of 6-96; Ord. No. 02-235, § 3, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 5-6. - R-1-D Single-Family Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-1-D District is intended for single-family, detached residential development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the R-1-D District, except as otherwise noted: 
1.	Single-family detached dwellings, including single-family detached condominiums; 
2.	Family day care homes; 
3.	Accessory buildings incidental to the above-permitted uses; and 
4.	Signs as provided in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Uses permitted by special-use permit. The following uses shall be permitted by special-use permit in the R-1-D District: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Group day care homes, 
3.	Child care centers, 
4.	Two-family dwelling units (duplexes), and 
5.	Home occupations as provided in section 4-17. 
D.	Dimensional requirements. Lot and building dimensional requirements for the R-1-D District shall be as follows: 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 11,500 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 85 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30%. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Minimum first-story size for one-story single dwelling units shall be 1,100 square feet and for duplex dwelling units 900 square feet. 
b.	Minimum upper-story size for raised-ranch dwelling units shall be 1,050 square feet. 
c.	Minimum first-story size for partial two-story dwelling units shall be 1,050 square feet. Minimum size for the finished, partial second story shall be 250 square feet. 
d.	Minimum upper two-story size for tri-level dwellings units shall be 1,050 square feet. 
e.	Minimum first-story size for full two-story dwelling units shall be 750 square feet. Minimum size for the finished second story shall be 750 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Amend. of 6-96; Ord. No. 02-235, § 4, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 5-7. - R-1-E Single-Family Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-1-E District is intended for single-family, detached residential development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the R-1-E District, except as otherwise noted: 
1.	Single-family detached dwellings, including single-family detached condominiums; 
2.	Family day care homes; 
3.	Accessory buildings incidental to the above-permitted uses; and 
4.	Signs as provided for in article 7 of the ordinance. 
C.	Uses permitted by special-use permit. The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit in the R-1-E District: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Group day care homes, 
3.	Child care centers, and 
4.	Home occupations as provided in section 4-17. 
D.	Dimensional requirements. Lot and building dimensional requirements for the R-1-E District shall be as follows: 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot area may be reduced to 11,500 square feet if submitted as part of a plat which maintains an average lot size of 15,000 square feet or greater. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 85 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30%. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Minimum first-story size for one-story dwelling units shall be 1,350 square feet. 
b.	Minimum upper story size for raised-ranch dwelling units shall be 1,300 square feet. 
c.	Minimum first-story size for partial two-story dwelling units shall be 1,150 square feet. Minimum size for the finished, partial second story shall be 250 square feet. 
d.	Minimum upper two-story size for tri-level dwelling units shall be 1,150 square feet. 
e.	Minimum first-story size for full two-story dwelling units shall be 850 square feet. Minimum size for the finished second story shall be 850 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
Sec. 5-8. - R-2 Single-Family and Attached Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. This district is intended for single-family, detached, residential dwelling units, and low density, attached, residential dwelling units. This district has been created in recognition that a higher density than that of typical single-family residential development may be needed for development in this area to be economically feasible due to poor soil conditions. The submission of a residential planned unit development is encouraged for this district. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Single-family and Attached Residential District: 
1.	Single-family detached dwellings, including single-family, detached site condominiums; 
2.	Single-family attached dwellings, subject to conditions a. through d. 
a.	The development must consist of a minimum of five acres, 
b.	The development must involve the development of at least eight dwelling units, 
c.	The residential development must provide a common-grounds maintenance contract, and 
d.	The residential plan must be submitted for site-plan review in accordance with the process outlined in article 15; 
3.	Accessory buildings incidental to the above-permitted uses; and 
4.	Signs as provided for in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit in the R-2 District: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Group day care homes for children, and 
3.	Home occupations, as provided for in sections 4-17. 
D.	Dimensional requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to lots and residential dwelling units within the R-2 District: 
1.	Minimum lot area. 
a.	Lots for single-family detached units shall have 11,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.	Lots for attached units shall have 7,900 square feet per dwelling unit. 
2.	Minimum lot width. 
a.	Lots for single-family detached units on shall have 85 feet. 
b.	Lots or parcels for attached dwelling units of eight or more units shall be 150 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30%. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. Buildings shall also not exceed two stories. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Single-story units shall be 1,100 square feet in size. 
b.	Two-story units shall be 1,500 square feet in size. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback. 
i.	Single-family detached-unit side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
ii.	Attached-unit side yard setback shall be 35 feet. 
c.	Rear yard setback. 
i.	Single-family detached-unit rear yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
ii.	Attached-unit rear yard setback shall be 35 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
8.	Maximum density. No residential development within any R-2 District shall exceed 5.5 dwelling units for any one acre within the development. 
9.	Minimum building-to-building spacing for attached residential dwelling units. 
a.	Side-to-side spacing shall be 25 feet. 
b.	Front-to-front spacing shall be 50 feet. 
c.	Rear-to-rear spacing shall be 80 feet. 
d.	Front-to-side spacing shall be 50 feet. 
e.	Corner-to-corner spacing shall be 25 feet. 
f.	Front-to-rear spacing shall be 60 feet. 
g.	Rear-to-side spacing shall be 50 feet. 
Sec. 5-9. - R-3 Single-Family Attached Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-3 Single-Family Attached Residential District is intended for attached, single-family dwelling units. They are also referred to as townhouses, and they commonly use condominium-type ownership. This district is intended to preserve areas having environmentally sensitive qualities. It is further intended as a compatible transition use between more intense uses and single-family, detached dwelling units. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted in this district: 
1.	Attached, single-family dwelling units; 
2.	Accessory buildings and uses associated with, but subordinate to, the above-permitted uses, including 
a.	Automobile carports/garages, 
b.	Health club facilities intended exclusively for residents of the multiple-family complex, and 
c.	Recreational facilities intended exclusively for residents of the multiple-family complex (i.e. pool, tennis courts, golf course etc.); and 
3.	Signs as provided in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Conditions for permitted-by-right uses. Buildings containing attached dwelling units shall not exceed six dwelling units per building. 
D.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit in the R-3 District: 
1.	Planned unit developments (PUD's); 
2.	Group day care homes or child care centers; 
3.	Home occupations as provided for in sections 4-17 and 13-7-E; 
4.	Commercial recreational facilities limited to: 
a.	Physical fitness/health clubs, 
b.	Tennis clubs, and 
c.	Golf courses; and 
5.	Multiple-family developments offering medical support services. 
E.	Dimensional requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 7,200 square feet per dwelling unit. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. Measured at the street right-of-way line, lots must have a minimum of 150 feet of frontage along an arterial or collector street as classified in the City of Hudsonville Master Plan. A minimum lot width of greater than 150 feet may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 35% of total lot area. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Single-story dwelling-unit size shall be 1,100 square feet. 
b.	Two-story dwelling-unit size shall be 1,500 square feet 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Building setbacks from all public and private roadways shall be those setbacks indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Buildings shall be setback from any non-right-of-way property line as follows: 
1 Story 2 Story i. Side of building 30 feet 40 feet ii. Front or rear of building 40 feet 50 feet  
8.	Maximum density. No residential development within any R-3 District shall exceed six dwelling units for any one acre within the development. 
9.	Minimum building-to-building spacing. 
a.	Side-to-side spacing shall be 25 feet. 
b.	Front-to-front spacing shall be 50 feet. 
c.	Rear-to-rear spacing shall be 80 feet. 
d.	Front-to-side spacing shall be 50 feet. 
e.	Corner-to-corner spacing shall be 25 feet. 
f.	Front-to-rear spacing shall be 60 feet. 
g.	Rear-to-side spacing shall be 50 feet. 
Sec. 5-10. - R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District. 
A.	Purpose. The R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District is intended for buildings containing multiple-dwelling units, including both attached, single-family dwelling units and apartment-style residential development. 
    This district provides for a slightly-higher dwelling-unit density than the single-family residential districts, but is limited to a low-rise type of development due largely to the limited need for mid- or high-rise buildings in the city, and also the city's limitations in providing fire protection for such buildings. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in this building: 
1.	Multiple-family buildings, including attached dwelling units and apartment buildings having three or more dwelling units; 
2.	Accessory buildings and uses associated with, but subordinate to, the above-permitted uses, including 
a.	Automobile carports/garages, 
b.	Health-club facilities intended exclusively for residents of the multiple-family complex, and 
c.	Recreational facilities intended exclusively for residents of the multiple-family complex (i.e. pool, tennis courts, golf course etc.); and 
3.	Signs as provided for in article 7 of this ordinance. 
C.	Conditions for permitted-by-right uses. 
1.	Attached dwelling units shall not exceed six dwelling units per building. 
2.	Apartment buildings shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per building. 
D.	Uses permitted by special-use permit. The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit in the R-2 District: 
1.	Planned unit developments; 
2.	Group day care homes or child care centers; 
3.	Home occupations as provided for in sections 4-17 and 13-7.E; 
4.	Commercial recreational facilities, including 
a.	Physical fitness/health clubs, 
b.	Tennis clubs, and 
c.	Golf courses; 
5.	Apartment buildings containing more than 12 dwelling units per building; and 
6.	Multiple-family senior-citizen developments which offer medical support services. 
E.	Dimensional requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to lots and residential dwelling units in this district: 
1.	Minimum lot area. 
a.	Lots for attached single-family dwelling units shall have 7,200 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.	Apartment-style dwelling units (rental or owner occupied). 
i.	Lots for efficiency units shall have 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
ii.	Lots for one-bedroom units shall have 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
iii.	Lots for two-bedroom units shall have 5,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
iv.	Lots for three-bedroom units shall have 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
v.	Lots for four-bedroom units shall have 7,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
2.	Minimum lot width. All multiple-family buildings containing three or more units shall have a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a public street. 
A greater lot width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 35% of total lot area. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size. 
a.	Efficiency units shall be 500 square feet. 
b.	One-bedroom units shall be 600 square feet. 
c.	Two-bedroom units shall be 800 square feet. 
d.	Three-bedroom units shall be 1,000 square feet. 
e.	Four-bedroom units shall be 1,150 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Building setbacks from all public and private roadways shall be those setbacks indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Buildings shall be setback from any non-right-of-way property line as follows: 
1 Story 2 Story i. Side of building 30 feet 40 feet ii. Front or rear of building 40 feet 50 feet  
8.	Maximum density. No residential development within any R-4 District shall exceed 8.5 dwelling units for any one acre within the development. 
9.	Minimum building-to-building spacing. 
a.	Side-to-side spacing shall be 25 feet. 
b.	Front-to-front spacing shall be 50 feet. 
c.	Rear-to-rear spacing shall be 80 feet. 
d.	Front-to-side spacing shall be 50 feet. 
e.	Corner-to-corner spacing shall be 25 feet. 
f.	Front-to-rear spacing shall be 60 feet. 
g.	Rear-to-side shall be 50 feet. 
Sec. 5-11. - MHP Mobile Home Park District. 
A.	Purpose. The MHP District is intended to provide for single-family, detached dwelling units which are more economical and at slightly higher density than conventional, single-family, detached subdivisions. It is further intended to provide for a planned mobile home park which offers an orderly, attractive, and healthy residential environment. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted in this district: 
1.	Mobile homes; and 
2.	Accessory buildings and uses, including 
a.	Storage sheds, not to exceed 150 square feet, 
b.	An office building for conducting the business of the mobile home park, 
c.	Laundry facilities intended to serve the residents of the mobile home park only, 
d.	Auxiliary storage space, 
e.	Recreation areas, and 
f.	A community building. 
C.	Applicable standards. All mobile home parks shall comply with the applicable requirements of Act 419, of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan, 1976, as amended, provided further that said developments meet the standards and conditions and all other provisions as herein established. 
D.	Installation and occupation of mobile homes. 
1.	No mobile home shall be placed, parked, or installed in a mobile home park until such time as a building permit is obtained from the city building inspector. Such permit shall be issued upon a finding from the building inspector or designated agent that said mobile home meets construction standards as approved by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or has been certified by a manufacturer as constructed according to the requirements of HUD. 
2.	No mobile home shall be occupied by any person as a residence or for any other purpose until such time as said mobile home is placed or situated on a specific lot in the mobile home park and has been inspected by the city building inspector or designated agent and issued an occupancy permit. 
a.	Such inspection shall include the placement and interconnection to utilities, and review for compliance with all necessary state, city or other municipal ordinances and regulations. 
b.	Such permit shall be issued by the building inspector upon payment of an inspection fee as may be authorized by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
c.	In the event said mobile home is moved to another lot, or another mobile home is placed on the specific lot, a new certificate of occupancy must be obtained. 
E.	Application procedures. 
1.	No site plan shall be submitted for any mobile home park unless that area is in a MHP zoning district. 
2.	Any application for the extension, alteration, or construction of a mobile home park shall require the submittal of a site plan, subject to the process outlined in article 15 of this ordinance. 
F.	General standards. All mobile home parks shall be designed and developed in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
1.	Minimum site size for a mobile home park shall be ten acres. 
2.	Required streets and utilities shall be completed for at least 25 mobile home spaces along with related improvements, before first occupancy. 
3.	The mobile home park shall contain one or more open space areas intended primarily for the use of park residents on a minimum ratio of 250 square feet for every mobile home lot, provided that buffer zone areas shall not be included as part of such requirement. 
4.	No mobile home or other building or structure for residential purposes shall be in excess of 25 feet in height. 
5.	Each mobile home lot, exclusive of streets, shall have a minimum size of 4,800 square feet and a minimum width of 40 feet. No more than one mobile home shall be parked on any one lot, and no mobile home shall be occupied by more than one family. 
G.	Street, access, and parking standards. 
1.	Each mobile home park shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street as defined in the City of Hudsonville Master Plan, as amended. 
2.	Minimum street widths within the mobile home park shall be in accordance with the following schedule. 
a.	No parking on street; 
i.	One-way street widths shall be 13 feet. 
ii.	Two-way street widths shall be 24 feet. 
b.	Parallel parking on one side of street; 
i.	One-way street widths shall be 22 feet. 
ii.	Two-way street widths shall be 33 feet. 
c.	Parallel parking on both sides of street. 
i.	One-way street widths shall be 31 feet. 
ii.	Two-way street widths shall be 42 feet. 
3.	All streets shall be constructed to city specifications for private streets. 
4.	Each lot or mobile home unit shall provide a minimum of two off-site parking spaces. 
5.	Guest parking areas shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any mobile home. 
6.	Individual, on-premises parking shall not be located closer than 15 feet from mobile homes on adjoining lots. 
H.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with City of Hudsonville Ordinance Number 128, which regulates sidewalk installation. 
I.	Minimum building setbacks. 
1.	The setback from any public right-of-way shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
2.	The setback from any property line which is not a right-of-way line shall be ten feet. 
3.	The setback from any internal road for any part of a mobile home shall be seven feet from the inside of the sidewalk if one exists, or ten feet from the edge of the road or back of the curb if no sidewalk exists. The minimum setback for portions of any mobile home not being used for living purposes shall be ten feet from the inside of the sidewalk if one exists, or 15 feet from the edge of the road or back of the curb if no sidewalk exists. 
4.	Mobile homes shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from any attached structure, or part thereof, of another mobile home which is used for living purposes, provided, however, that for mobile homes where cluster parking for four or more motor vehicles is located immediately in front thereof, the required distance between adjacent mobile homes including any attached structure may be reduced to 15 feet provided the average distance between adjacent mobile homes including any attached structure is not less than 20 feet. 
J.	Utility standards. 
1.	All utilities shall be underground. 
2.	All lots shall be provided with a municipal public water and sanitary sewer service, and all mobile homes shall be connected thereto. 
3.	The mobile home park shall provide sufficient storm sewer facilities, independent of sanitary sewers, to prevent flooding of either streets or lots within the park in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Department of Health. All storm drainage and surface drainage facilities flowing from the park to adjacent areas shall be approved by the city engineer and the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner. 
K.	Mobile home standards. 
1.	Every mobile home shall be supported on a permanent concrete pad or foundation at least 14 feet in width, with a minimum of 840 square feet, and four inches thick. 
2.	In the event the soil or topography conditions of the proposed mobile home park are such that other foundations or supports are appropriate, and the developer provides to the city building inspector a report by a certified engineer that piers are equal to or superior to concrete pads as specified above, such foundations may be approved by the building inspector, provided such construction includes provisions for proper drainage and ground covering under each mobile home. 
3.	Every mobile home shall be at least 14 feet in width and have a minimum of 840 square feet of living area, exclusive of porches and cabanas. 
4.	All mobile homes shall be skirted and anchored in accordance with standards contained in Act 419, of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1976, as amended. 
L.	Mobile home sales. 
1.	Sales shall be carried out by the tenant, licensed dealer, or real estate broker. 
2.	Sales shall be for the exclusive sale of individual mobile homes on pads located on individual sites within the manufactured housing park. Commercial sales of mobile homes shall be prohibited. 
3.	In those instances where mobile homes are to be used as model homes within a new mobile home park, not more than four sites shall be used for such purposes at one time. 
M.	Signs. Signs shall be permitted as provided for in article 7 of this ordinance. 
N.	Landscaping. All mobile home parks shall comply with the landscaping regulations contained in article 8 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-209, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 5-12. - CBD-1-G Central Business District-One-General. 
A.	Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for a combination of compatible retail, office, entertainment, and personal service establishments which shall contribute to a viable downtown district. This district shall be intended for businesses directed toward both a local and more regional market. However, providing for the retail and service needs of the local community shall be the primary intent of this district. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the CBD-1-G District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Office buildings; 
2.	Medical offices or clinics; 
3.	Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and savings and loan associations; 
4.	Retail establishments selling products such as, but not limited to, clothing, clothing accessories, fabrics, shoes, baked goods, confections, drugs, meats, groceries, specialty foods, flowers, hardware, bicycles, hobby equipment, sporting goods, jewelry, music, notions, stationary, books and newspapers, office and art supplies, office machines and computers, and sundry, small household articles; 
5.	Personal service establishments performing services on the premises such as, but not limited to, repair shops (jewelry, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, hair salons or barber shops, photographic studios and print shops. (Automobile repair shall not be considered a permitted-by-right use); 
6.	Dry-cleaning establishments dealing directly with the consumer; 
7.	Government administration or service buildings, such as post offices, city hall offices, fire stations, and police stations; 
8.	Automobile sales (may include service if subordinate to the business as a sales outlet and is performed in an enclosed building); 
9.	Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through service; and 
10.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this section subject to all other pertinent restrictions in this ordinance. 
C.	Standards for permitted-by-right uses. All permitted-by-right uses shall meet the following standards: 
1.	All retail and service establishments shall be dealing directly with the consumer. 
2.	All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
3.	All uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building, except for automobile parking for customers or employees, off-street loading spaces, parking for automobile sales, and signs. 
4.	No outdoor storage, with the exception of automobiles actively being sold by an auto dealership or storage approved as part of site plan review, shall be permitted without a special use permit. This shall include the temporary storage of client vehicles that are retained for servicing. 
D.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted if a special use permit is granted pursuant to the regulations contained in article 13 of this ordinance: 
1.	That portion of any permitted-by-right use which is not conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for automobile parking for customers or employees, off-street loading spaces, parking for automobile sales, and signs (Outdoor storage of vehicles to be repaired shall require a special use permit.); 
2.	Gasoline service stations, automobile service (general repair, oil changes, tune-ups, etc.), and automotive parts; 
3.	Child care centers; 
4.	Accessory residential dwelling units; 
5.	Sales of agricultural support products to include fertilizers, animal feeds, insecticides, and pesticides (The sale of large farm implements, such as tractors, mulchers, and harvesting equipment shall not be permitted.); 
6.	Planned unit developments (PUD's); and 
7.	Other uses which are similar to uses permitted by right within this district. 
E.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width for a lot being developed as an independent site shall be 60 feet. Minimum lot width for a lot where a building is to be attached to a multi-unit structure shall be 24 feet. 
Greater lot widths may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be 
i.	Ten feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot, or 
ii.	15 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private street right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 1, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 5-13. - CBD-1-OS Central Business District-One-Office/Service. 
A.	Purpose The purpose of this district is to provide areas within the CBD-1 District to be used exclusively for office or personal service businesses. This district is intended to serve as a transition use between the broader range of commercial uses permitted in the CBD-1-G District and adjacent, single-family dwelling units. 
    This district is further intended to maximize architectural compatibility with adjacent, single-family dwelling units and to facilitate the conversion of existing, single-family dwelling units within the district to office/service uses. Having businesses with a relatively low vehicle-trip-generation rate along 32nd Avenue is also an intent of the district. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the CBD-1-OS District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Office buildings; 
2.	Medical or dental offices or clinics; 
3.	Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and savings and loan associations; and 
4.	Personal service establishments performing services on the premises, such as, but not limited to, repair shops (jewelry, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, hair salons or barber shops, photographic studios, flower shops, and print shops. (Automobile repair shops shall not be considered a permitted-by-right use.) 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted if a special use permit is granted pursuant to the regulations contained in article 13 of this ordinance: 
1.	Accessory residential dwelling units; and 
2.	Planned unit developments (PUD's). 
D.	Additional conditions. 
1.	All personal service establishments shall be dealing directly with the consumer. 
2.	All uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building, except for automobile parking for customers or employees, and signs. 
E.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width for a lot being developed as an independent site shall be 60 feet. Minimum lot width for a lot where a building is to be attached to a multi-unit structure shall be 24 feet. 
Greater lot width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be: 
i.	Ten feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot, or 
ii.	15 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 2, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 5-14. - CBD-2 Central Business District-Two. 
A.	Purpose. The purpose of this district is the same as that of the CBD-1-G, with the exception that it is designed to permit a greater variety of retail and service uses. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the CBD-2 District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Office buildings, including medical offices and clinics; 
2.	Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and savings and loan associations; 
3.	Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise within an enclosed building; 
4.	Personal service establishments, including repairs shops, hair salons, flower shops, photographic studios, print shops, dry cleaners, and laundromats; 
5.	Restaurants; 
6.	Dancing and music studios; 
7.	Personal fitness centers; 
8.	Bowling alleys, roller/ice skating rinks, arcades, and other indoor recreation uses; 
9.	Club or lodge meeting halls; 
10.	Nurseries for retail sales of plants, trees, and other natural vegetation; 
11.	Gasoline service stations, automobile service stations (general repair, oil change, tune-up etc.), and automotive parts stores; 
12.	Automobile and recreational vehicle sales (may include service if subordinate to the business as a sales outlet and is performed within an enclosed building); 
13.	Parking lots intended to serve any permitted-by-right use within the district; and 
14.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this section, subject to all other pertinent restrictions in this ordinance. 
C.	Standards for permitted-by-right uses. 
1.	All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
2.	No retail business which devotes more than 50% of their gross floor area to non-retail space, such as for storage, manufacturing, or service areas, shall be permitted without obtaining a special use permit. 
3.	Retail businesses manufacturing merchandise on the premises shall not employ more than ten people per shift related to the manufacturing element. 
4.	All uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building, except for automobile parking for customers or employees, off-street loading spaces, parking for automobile sales, and signs. 
5.	No outdoor storage, with the exception of automobiles actively being sold by an auto dealership, shall be permitted without a special use permit. This shall include the temporary storage of client vehicles that are retained for servicing. 
D.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted if a special use permit is granted pursuant to the regulations contained in article 13 of this ordinance: 
1.	Planned unit developments; 
2.	That portion of any permitted-by-right use which is not conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for automobile parking for customers or employees, off-street loading spaces, parking for automobile sales, and signs; 
3.	Retail establishments in which greater than 50% of the gross floor area of the principal structure is devoted to non-retail functions, such as manufacturing, storage, and service areas; 
4.	Construction, home-improvement, or heavy-service businesses; 
5.	Any commercial business which requires the on-premises storage of heavy equipment; 
6.	Child care centers; 
7.	Funeral homes; 
8.	Accessory residential dwelling units; and 
9.	Other uses similar to those permitted by right in this district. 
E.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 85 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setbacks shall be: 
i.	Ten feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot, or 
ii.	20 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot. 
c.	Rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 3, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 5-15. - LC Light Commercial District. 
A.	Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for a combination of compatible retail, office, and personal service establishments which are considered to be of a light intensity. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the LC District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Office buildings; 
2.	Medical or dental offices or clinics; 
3.	Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and savings and loan associations; 
4.	Retail establishments selling items such as, but not limited to, clothing, clothing accessories, fabrics, shoes, bakery goods, confections, drugs, meats, groceries, specialty foods, flowers, hardware, bicycles, hobby equipment, sporting goods, jewelry, music, notions, stationary, books and newspapers, office or art supplies, office machines and computers, and sundry small household articles; 
5.	Personal service establishments performing services on the premises such as, but not limited to, repair shops (jewelry, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, hair salons or barber shops, photographic studios, flower shops, and print shops (Automobile repair shall not be considered a permitted-by-right use.); 
6.	Personal fitness centers; 
7.	Dry-cleaning establishments dealing directly with the consumer; 
8.	Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through service; 
9.	Nurseries offering sales of trees, shrubs, landscape supplies, etc.; and 
10.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this section, subject to all other pertinent restrictions in this ordinance. 
C.	Conditions for permitted-by-right uses. 
1.	All retail and service establishments shall be dealing directly with the consumer. 
2.	All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
3.	All uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building except for automobile parking for customers or employees, off-street loading spaces, parking for automobile sales, and signs. 
4.	Outdoor storage shall not be permitted except for that storage which has been expressly approved by the planning commission as part of a special use approval. 
D.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted if a special use permit is granted pursuant to the regulations contained in article 13 of this ordinance: 
1.	Activities associated with the above permitted-by-right uses which are carried on outside of an enclosed building; 
2.	Child care centers; 
3.	Accessory residential dwelling units; and 
4.	Other uses similar to those permitted by right in this district. 
E.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
A greater width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side and rear yard setbacks shall be: 
i.	Ten feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot, or 
ii.	25 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot. 
c.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 4, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 5-16. - HC Highway Commercial District. 
A.	Purpose. This district is intended to provide an appropriate location for commercial and business enterprises which primarily serve the motoring public, particularly along I-196. This district is also intended for larger retail establishments or shopping centers which attract a large number of customers on a regional or subregional basis. The locations for this district (32nd Avenue/I-196 area) were selected to reduce traffic congestion on city collector and arterial roadways, to provide easy access to I-196, and to reduce traffic impacts on residential land uses. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the HC Highway Commercial District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Retail establishments selling principally new merchandise within an enclosed building; 
2.	Restaurants, including drive-through restaurants; 
3.	Office buildings; 
4.	Banks; 
5.	Automobile/light-truck dealerships; 
6.	Motels/hotels; 
7.	Gasoline service stations and automobile service establishments performing routine repair and service (Businesses performing body repair, painting, or radiator repair shall not be permitted.); 
8.	Building material sales; 
9.	Office/home furniture and appliance sales; 
10.	Carpet/floor covering businesses; 
11.	Grocery stores and convenience goods stores; and 
12.	Movie or play theaters (not to include adult theaters). 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted, if a special use permit is granted pursuant to the regulations contained in article 13 of this ordinance: 
1.	Planned unit developments, 
2.	Shopping centers/malls, and 
3.	Child care centers; 
4.	Sexually oriented businesses (as further regulated by section 13-7.I). 
5.	Accessory residential dwelling unit (one only) per hotel/motel. 
D.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
A greater lot width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Minimum building size shall be 2,000 square feet. 
This shall apply to both an independent commercial building and those that are attached within a common mall building. 
5.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side and rear yard setbacks shall be: 
i.	20 feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot, or 
ii.	40 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot and the building is 20 feet or less in height. 
iii.	An additional two feet of yard shall be required for each foot of building height above 20 feet. 
c.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
(Ord. No. 97-200, § 2, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 13-291, § 2, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 5-17. - FCR Fairground Commercial-Recreation District. 
A.	Purpose. This district is designed specifically for the Hudsonville Fairgrounds and is intended primarily to provide for community fairs and other public amusement activities. It is further intended to provide for specified commercial activities typically performed on a periodic basis and requiring outdoor exhibition areas. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. 
1.	Group A uses include: 
a.	Community fairs, including amusement rides; 
b.	Exhibitions (auto shows, art fairs, etc.); 
c.	Concession stands; 
d.	Traveling entertainment shows and circuses; 
e.	Trailer rallies; 
f.	Community or group picnics; 
g.	Auctions; 
h.	Auto swap meets; 
i.	Community garage sales; 
j.	Flea markets; 
k.	Indoor storage of vehicles and equipment; and 
l.	Horse shows. 
2.	Group B uses include: 
a.	Tractor pulls, 
b.	Demolition derbies, 
c.	Big wheel/monster truck events, 
d.	Mud runs, 
e.	Dirt bike races, and 
f.	Quad racing. 
C.	Standards for permitted-by-right uses. 
1.	All parking for permitted-by-right uses must be accommodated entirely on-premises in areas approved by the planning commission or in other parking areas not under fairgrounds ownership as approved by the planning commission. 
2.	Non-fair uses which interfere with this district to be used principally for fair purposes shall be prohibited. 
3.	Noise from any permitted-by-right use shall not result in a nuisance condition for adjacent residential neighborhoods. In consideration of the noise impacts to adjoining residential areas, the following restrictions for all loudspeaker systems shall be in effect: 
a.	Loudspeaker systems shall not be used past 9:00 p.m., with the exception that on not more than three days per week they may be used until 11:00 p.m. 
b.	Loudspeaker systems shall not be used earlier than 8:00 a.m. any day. 
4.	Group A permitted-by-right uses are permitted with no restriction as to the number of days per year they may operate. 
5.	Group B uses shall not be held on more than 12 days per year, excluding the annual fair week. 
6.	To the extent possible, all access to the fairgrounds by vehicles shall be from 40th Avenue. 
D.	Uses permitted by special use permit. Athletic events or facilities shall be permitted by special use permit. 
E.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
2.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 40%. 
3.	Parking setbacks. 
a.	All parking shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
b.	Parking shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from any residential property line. 
4.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side and rear yard setbacks shall be: 
i.	200 feet from any residentially zoned lot line, or 
ii.	100 feet from any non-residentially zoned lot line. 
5.	Outdoor use setbacks. All outdoor uses, with the exception of customer parking, shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from any residentially zoned lot line, and 100 feet from any non-residentially zoned lot line. 
Sec. 5-18. - PF Public facilities district. 
A.	Purpose. The purpose of District PF is to provide areas within the city for places of worship, public and private schools, and governmental services. It is further the intent of this district to provide sufficient public space for essential public services, preserve environmentally sensitive areas, provide adequate recreation space, and promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the PF District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	City facilities, 
2.	Police stations, 
3.	Fire stations, 
4.	Community centers, 
5.	Private and public utilities, 
6.	Public parks and public recreational facilities, 
7.	State and federal governmental offices, 
8.	Public and private schools, 
9.	Places of worship, 
10.	Public hospitals and nursing homes, 
11.	Social services, and 
12.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this section, subject to all other pertinent restrictions in this ordinance. 
C.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be two acres, excluding public utility structures and park space. 
2.	Minimum lot frontage located on a collector or arterial roadway shall be 200 feet, excluding public utility structures and park space. 
A greater lot frontage may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Minimum building setbacks: 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side and rear yard setback shall be: 
i.	20 feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot, or 
ii.	30 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot and building height is 20 feet in height or less. 
An additional 20 feet of side or rear yard building setback shall be required for all buildings above 20 feet in height. 
c.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
Sec. 5-19. - I-1 Industrial District. 
A.	Purpose. This district is intended for heavy commercial and light industrial uses which are not unreasonably offensive, hazardous, or debilitating to surrounding property or the community through the effects of noise, smoke, odor, dust, dirt, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazards, industrial wastes, or traffic. The City of Hudsonville, because of its limited geographic area and the current residential development pattern, does not have areas suitable for heavy-industrial development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the I-1 Industrial District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Commercial. 
a.	Wholesale businesses, 
b.	Heavy service businesses (examples include construction, plumbing, heating and cooling, and body shops) with associated office space, 
c.	Building supply, 
d.	Mini-storage facilities, 
e.	Heavy truck or equipment sales, and 
f.	Truck or equipment rental; and 
2.	Industrial non-basic manufacturing. (Facilities for manufacturing, processing fabrication, packaging, treating, or assembling from previously prepared materials.) 
a.	Research facilities; 
b.	Laboratories; 
c.	Tool and die shops; 
d.	Warehouses; 
e.	Businesses manufacturing automotive parts; 
f.	Businesses manufacturing apparel and similar products made from fabrics; 
g.	Businesses manufacturing wood products; 
h.	Furniture manufacturers; 
i.	Paper and paper products manufacturers; 
j.	Printing and publishing companies; 
k.	Businesses manufacturing electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies; 
l.	Fabricated metal products companies; 
m.	Glass products manufacturers; 
n.	Metal bending and welding companies; and 
o.	Dry cleaning or laundry businesses. 
C.	Standards for permitted-by-right uses. The above permitted-by-right uses for the I-1 District shall comply with the following: 
1.	Activities in this district shall be carried on in completely enclosed buildings. 
Storage may be permitted out-of-doors within the side or rear yard only, provided that when within 100 feet of any other non-industrial district or within view of any public or private street that such storage be effectively screened by a wall, fence, berm, or landscaping. In no case shall the height of the materials being stored exceed the height of the type of screening chosen. Screening, with the exception of natural vegetation, shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
2.	No use shall store, either within an enclosed building or out-of-doors, any material or liquid of a highly flammable or explosive nature in quantities or locations which would result in a hazard to adjacent properties. The storage of all materials and liquids shall also comply with the most current edition of The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the city commission. 
3.	Noise emanating from a use in this district shall not exceed 65 DNL at the boundaries of the lot. 
DNL is the abbreviation for the day/night average-sound-level system. The day/night, average sound level is the 24-hour-average sound level, expressed in decibels, obtained after the addition of a ten decibel penalty for sound levels which occur at night between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 65 DNL is comparable in loudness to typical speech levels, or nearby, freeway auto traffic. 
65 DNL has been established as the maximum allowable decibel level in recognition of the evaluation and study done in this area by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The Department of Housing and Urban Development has selected 65 DNL as the maximum acceptable decibel level for residential developments and other uses. 
4.	Uses in this district shall not create the following conditions at or beyond their lot boundary: 
a.	Emit obnoxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes or gases, except for those produced by internal combustion engines under design and operation conditions; 
b.	Emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive; 
c.	Emit noxious smoke, excluding steam; 
d.	Discharge into the air dust or other particulate matter created by any industrial operation or emanating from any products stored prior to or subsequent to processing; 
e.	Produce heat or glare which is humanly perceptible; 
f.	Produce physical vibrations which are humanly perceptible; or 
g.	Produce electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emission that could be injurious to human beings, animals, or vegetation, or of any intensity that interferes with the lawful use of any other property. 
5.	No use in this district shall produce or store any material designed for use as an explosive, nor use such material in production. 
If after review of the site-plan application, or during the process of site-plan review, the planning commission has concerns about whether the standards for permitted-by-right uses can or will be met, they may request additional information from the applicant. This information may include additional factual information, professional evaluations, or measurement of impact factors, such as noise, air emissions, and vibration. 
D.	Building standards. 
1.	It is intended that industrial buildings be both attractive and functionally appropriate for housing industrial uses. The architecture of each building should harmonize with other uses in the industrial park or area. Building color, materials, finishes, and forms should be sensitively integrated with the character of the industrial park or area. For safety and aesthetic reasons, one or more of the following materials should be used in the construction of buildings in this district: 
a.	Pre-cast concrete, 
b.	Fluted-concrete block, 
c.	Split-face concrete block, 
d.	Scored concrete block, 
e.	Metal siding (corrugated), 
f.	Glass/glass blocks, 
g.	Drivit, and/or 
h.	Face brick. 
2.	The planning commission may permit the use of building materials other than those listed above if, in their judgment, they are of comparable or better quality than the above-listed materials. 
3.	For building facades that face either a collector or arterial street as classified in the Hudsonville Master Plan, such facades shall be constructed of face brick, wood, glass, stone, or fluted concrete block. The planning commission may permit the use of other materials in such facades if, in their judgment, they find the proposed materials comparable in safety and aesthetic qualities. 
E.	Uses permitted by special use permit. Basic initial manufacturing, compounding, processing and/or fabrication of the following materials from their raw state will be permitted with a special use permit: 
1.	Agricultural products; 
2.	Food and kindred products; 
3.	Wood and wood products; 
4.	Metal and metal products; 
5.	Glass and glass products; and 
6.	Insulation manufacture. 
F.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
A greater lot width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 40%. 
5.	Minimum building setbacks. 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side and rear yard setback shall be: 
i.	20 feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot. 
ii.	50 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot and the building is 20 feet in height or less. 
An additional two feet of side and rear yard setback shall be required for each additional foot of building height above 20 feet. 
c.	Any yard which abuts a public or private right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
Sec. 5-20. - I-2 Industrial District. 
A.	Purpose. This district is intended for light industrial uses within an industrial park setting which are not unreasonably offensive, hazardous, or debilitating to surrounding property or the community through the effects of noise, smoke, odor, dust, dirt, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazards, industrial wastes, or traffic. The City of Hudsonville, because of its limited geographic area and the current residential development pattern, does not have areas suitable for heavy industrial development. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the I-2 Industrial District, no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the below-listed uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
    Industrial non-basic manufacturing facilities for manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, treating or assembling from previously prepared materials shall be permitted by right including: 
1.	Research facilities; 
2.	Laboratories; 
3.	Businesses manufacturing apparel and similar products made from fabrics; 
4.	Businesses manufacturing wood products; 
5.	Furniture manufacturers; 
6.	Paper and paper product manufacturers; 
7.	Printing and publishing companies; 
8.	Electrical machinery, equipment and supply manufacturers; 
9.	Glass product businesses; and 
10.	Central dry cleaning and laundry companies. 
C.	Standards for permitted-by-right uses. The above permitted-by-right uses for the I-2 District shall comply with the following: 
1.	Activities in this district shall be carried on in completely enclosed buildings. 
2.	No use shall store any material or liquid of a highly flammable or explosive nature in quantities or locations which could result in a hazard to adjacent properties. The storage of all materials and liquids shall also comply with the most current edition of the BOCA National Fire Protection Code as adopted by the city commission. 
3.	Noise emanating from a use in this district shall not exceed 65 DNL at the boundaries of the lot. 
DNL is the abbreviation for the day/night average-sound-level system. The day/night, average sound level is the 24-hour-average south level, expressed in decibels, obtained after the addition of a ten-decibel penalty for sound levels which occur at night between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 65 DNL is comparable in loudness to typical speech levels, or nearby freeway auto traffic. 
65 DNL has been established as the maximum allowable decibel level in recognition of the evaluation and study done in this area by the U.S. Department of housing and Urban Development. The Department of Housing and Urban Development has selected 65 DNL as the maximum acceptable decibel level for residential developments and other uses. 
4.	Uses in this district shall not create the following conditions at or beyond their lot boundary: 
a.	Emit obnoxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes or gases, except for those produced by internal combustion engines under design and operation conditions; 
b.	Emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive; 
c.	Emit noxious smoke, excluding steam; 
d.	Discharge into the air dust or other particulate matter created by any industrial operation or emanating from any products stored prior to or subsequent to processing; 
e.	Produce heat or glare which is humanly perceptible; 
f.	Produce physical vibrations which are humanly perceptible; or 
g.	Produce electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emission that could be injurious to human beings, animals, or vegetation, or of any intensity that interferes with the lawful use of any other property. 
5.	No use in this district shall produce or store any material designed for use in an explosive, nor use such material in production. 
If after review of the site plan application or during the process of site plan review the planning commission has concerns about whether the standards for permitted-by-right uses can or will be met, they may request additional information from the applicant. This information may include additional factual information, professional evaluations, or measurement of impact factors, such as noise, air emissions, and vibration. 
D.	Building standards. 
1.	It is intended that industrial buildings be both attractive and functionally appropriate for housing industrial uses. The architecture of each building should harmonize with other uses in the industrial park or area. Building color, materials, finishes, and forms should be sensitively integrated with the character of the industrial park or area. For safety and aesthetic reasons one or more of the following materials should be used in the construction of buildings in this district: 
a.	Pre-cast concrete, 
b.	Fluted-concrete block, 
c.	Split-face concrete block, 
d.	Scored concrete block, 
e.	Metal siding (corrugated), 
f.	Glass/glass blocks, 
g.	Drivit, or 
h.	Face brick. 
2.	The planning commission may permit the use of other building materials if, in their judgement, they are of comparable or better quality than the above-listed materials. 
3.	For building facades that face a public street in the I-2 District, such facades shall be constructed of face-brick, wood, glass, stone, or fluted-concrete block. The planning commission may permit the use of other materials in such facades if, in their judgment, they find the proposed materials comparable in safety and aesthetic qualities. 
E.	Uses permitted by special use permit. 
1.	Basic initial manufacturing, compounding, processing and/or fabrication of the following materials from their raw state shall be permitted with a special use permit: 
a.	Agricultural products; 
b.	Food and kindred products; 
c.	Wood and wood products; 
d.	Metal and metal products; 
e.	Glass and glass products; 
f.	Insulation manufacture; 
2.	Heavy commercial services; 
3.	Outdoor storage; 
4.	Warehousing; 
5.	Tool and die shops; 
6.	Fabricated metal products manufacturing; 
7.	Metal bending and welding; 
8.	Truck terminal; 
9.	Truck maintenance facility; 
10.	Metal and plastic stamping presses; and 
11.	Automotive parts manufacturing businesses. 
12.	Health and fitness including a gymnastics facility. 
F.	Site development requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
A greater lot width may be required where necessary to meet the driveway spacing standards contained in article 9. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 40%. 
5.	Minimum building setbacks: 
a.	Front yard setback shall be the minimum front yard building setback shall comply with the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side and rear yard setback shall be: 
i.	20 feet, where abutting a non-residentially zoned lot. 
ii.	50 feet, where abutting a residentially zoned lot and the building is 20 feet in height or less. 
An additional two feet of side and rear yard setback shall be required for each additional foot of building height above 20 feet. 
c.	In cases where the side or rear yard abuts a public or private street right-of-way, the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1) shall be required, unless the district side or rear yard requirement is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 98-204, §§ 1-3, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 07-263, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 5-21. - AG Agricultural District. 
A.	Purpose. This district is intended primarily for agricultural crop production. It is designed to support the adjoining agricultural uses in Georgetown Charter Township and the retention of "muck" soils which offer a unique agricultural resource for this area. The band of "muck" soil runs from east of the City of Zeeland to Georgetown Charter Township, east of the city, with portions of it in the city. This district is intended to protect the parcels of this unique, highly organic soil for agricultural use, and thus supporting the regional strategy to preserve this valuable agricultural resource. 
B.	Uses permitted by right. In the AG District, no building or part hereof shall be erected, altered, nor land or premises used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
1.	Crop production; 
2.	Farm-related accessory buildings (for equipment only); 
3.	Farm-related single-family detached residential dwelling; 
4.	Passive recreation such as picnic areas or walking trails; 
5.	Natural resource preservation uses; 
6.	Family day care homes; and 
7.	Signs as permitted in article 7. 
C.	Uses permitted by special use permit. The following uses may be permitted, if a special use permit is granted pursuant to the provisions contained in article 13: 
1.	Wholesale nurseries; 
2.	Roadside sales of agricultural products grown on the premises with or without a structure. 
3.	Active recreational uses such as athletic fields and golf courses; 
4.	Accessory buildings for a purpose other than equipment storage; and 
5.	Home occupations as provided in section 4-17. 
D.	Site development requirements. Lot and building dimensional requirements for the AG District shall be as follows: 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
2.	Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
3.	Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
4.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 20%. 
5.	Minimum dwelling unit width shall be 24 feet. 
6.	Minimum dwelling unit size: 
a.	Minimum first story size for one-story dwelling units shall be 1,100 square feet. 
b.	Minimum upper story size or raised-ranch dwelling units shall be 1,050 square feet. 
c.	Minimum first story size for partial two-story dwelling units shall be 1,050 square feet. Minimum size for the finished, partial second story shall be 250 square feet. 
d.	Minimum upper two-story size for tri-level dwelling units shall be 1,050 square feet. 
e.	Minimum first-story size for full-two-story dwelling units shall be 750 square feet. Minimum size for the finished second story shall be 750 square feet. 
7.	Minimum building setbacks: 
a.	Front yard setback shall be that setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
b.	Side yard setback shall be ten feet for single-family residential dwellings. Farm accessory buildings shall be set back 20 feet from any lot which is non-residentially zoned, and 50 feet from any residential zoned lot. 
c.	Rear yard setback for single-family residential dwellings shall be 40 feet. Rear yard setback from farm accessory buildings shall be same as for the side yard. 
d.	Any yard which abuts a public right-of-way shall meet the building setback indicated on the Building Setbacks from Public/Private Rights-of-Way Map (Figure 4.1). 
ARTICLE 6. - ON-PREMISES PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to permit and regulate on-premises (off-street) parking of motor vehicles and the off-street loading and unloading of vehicles in all zoning districts. 
    In all zoning districts, on-premises parking facilities for the storage and parking of motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of buildings erected, altered, or extended after the effective date of this ordinance shall be provided as prescribed herein. 
Sec. 6-2. - Location of parking. 
A.	One- and two-family dwellings. Required on-premises parking shall be provided on the same lot or parcel as the dwellings they are intended to serve. With the exception of driveways, no parking shall be allowed closer than 15 feet to a street right-of-way line. Driveways for single-family dwellings shall not exceed 24 feet in width. Total driveway width for two-family dwellings shall not exceed 48 feet. In no instance shall the total area devoted to driveways and parking areas for one or two-family dwellings exceed one-third of the front yard area. 
B.	Multiple-family dwellings. Required on-premises parking for multiple-family dwellings shall be provided on the same lot or parcel as the dwellings they are intended to serve. In no instance shall any parking space, other than that provided within an enclosed garage, be located nearer than 15 feet to a residential building. 
C.	Other land uses. Required on-premises parking for other than residential uses shall be located on the same lot, or within lots under the same ownership, within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the building to the nearest parking space of the on-premises parking lot. 
    Parking on lots under different ownership within 300 feet shall also be permitted if such arrangement does not result in a parking deficiency for the other use, and a legal agreement specifying the terms for the parking arrangement, signed by all involved parties, is provided. 
    The planning commission may permit parking up to a maximum distance of 500 feet for planned unit developments or uses within any CBD District, if the subject use requires on-premises parking of 200 spaces or more. 
Sec. 6-3. - General requirements. 
A.	Parking location standards. 
1.	The parking of any vehicle on-premises in other than a paved parking area approved for such parking by the planning commission shall be prohibited. 
2.	The parking of any vehicle on any lawn or landscaped area shall be prohibited. The planning commission may require any person or business responsible for converting lawn or landscaped areas to parking, without having received site-plan approval, to restore such areas to their original state. 
3.	During construction, parking shall be provided on-premises for all construction vehicles and employees. 
4.	For all residential uses, the parking of motor homes, boats, trailers and other large recreational equipment in the front yard for longer than three days shall be prohibited. 
B.	Storage or repair in parking areas. 
1.	The use of required parking areas for the storage or display of vehicles and/or merchandise, or for vehicle or machinery repair or maintenance, is prohibited, unless specifically approved by the planning commission as part of site-plan review or by special use permit. 
2.	The storage of semi-trailers outside of areas approved for such storage on an approved site plan shall be prohibited. 
3.	The use of parking areas for the storage or parking of vehicles unrelated to the business for which the parking is intended shall be prohibited. 
4.	The use of semi-trailers for storage purposes on a long-term basis (longer than a week) is prohibited. 
C.	Determination of parking requirements. 
1.	The minimum parking space requirements for all uses shall be those identified in section 6-6. 
2.	For uses not specifically listed in section 6-6, the requirements for on-premises parking shall be determined as follows: 
a.	The zoning administrator may establish the parking requirement by making the determination that the proposed use is similar in parking requirement to a use which is listed in section 6-6. In such case, the same parking requirement shall apply. 
b.	The zoning administrator may use the average rate of parking for the use as identified in the Parking Generation Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, as amended. 
c.	If the proposed use is not similar in parking requirement to a use listed in section 6-6 and is not included in the Parking Generation Manual, then the zoning administrator shall refer the determination of parking need to the zoning board of appeals to make such determination. 
3.	Public street rights-of-way shall not be used for meeting on-premises parking requirements. 
4.	Outdoor parking spaces required for business-related vehicles (whether car or truck) shall be provided in addition to the parking spaces required in section 6-6. 
5.	Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required on-premises parking if a signed agreement is provided by the property owners, and the number of spaces being provided meets the minimum required for all uses calculated individually. Such parking area shall be convenient to all uses for which it is intended. 
6.	Where two or more uses are present on the premises, parking requirements shall be calculated for each use, unless specifically provided otherwise herein. 
D.	Maximum amount of parking. In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which result in adverse aesthetic impacts and contribute to high rates of stormwater runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by greater than 30% shall be prohibited. 
E.	Conversion of parking areas to other uses. Unless the planning commission has reviewed and approved the change, any parking area once approved as a required parking area shall not be changed to any other use. 
Sec. 6-4. - Design and construction requirements. 
A.	Surface and drainage requirements. All parking areas shall be surfaced with a material that will provide a durable, smooth, and paved surface, and shall be graded and provided with adequate drainage facilities, all as approved by the city engineer. 
B.	Surface striping. All parking spaces, aisles, and unloading zones shall be striped or marked, using a durable exterior paint. Such striping or other required demarcation shall be maintained permanently in a condition such that easy interpretation of such markings by intended users is possible. 
C.	Lighting requirements. All parking lot or outdoor display lighting shall be designed, located, and/or shielded to prevent spillover onto adjacent properties, and shall be arranged to prohibit adverse effects on motorist visibility on adjacent public roadways. The maximum height of parking lot light fixtures shall be 20 feet for any fixture to be located within 150 feet of a residential district or use, and a maximum height of 40 feet for all other locations. 
D.	Dimensional standards for parking spaces and aisles. All on-premises parking areas shall meet the minimum parking space and maneuvering lane standards contained in Table 6.1. 
Sec. 6-5. - Parking units of measurement. 
A.	Equivalency or substitution. 
1.	Wherever parking requirements are based on gross floor area, gross leasable area may be substituted if that figure is more readily available. 
2.	In calculating bench seating for places of assembly, two feet shall be the equivalent of one seat. 
3.	In those cases where the planning commission determines that striping of spaces would not be appropriate, 300 square feet of parking area shall be provided for each required parking space. 
B.	Rounding. In calculating the required amount of parking or loading spaces, any fraction of 0.5 or greater shall be rounded up, and any fraction of less than 0.5 shall be rounded down. 
TABLE 6.1 MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND MANEUVERING LANE STANDARDS 
Parking Pattern (degrees) Maneuvering Lane Width One-way Maneuvering Lane Width Two-way Parking Space Width 1 Parking Space Length 2 Parallel 12 feet 20 feet 9 feet 25 feet 30 to 54 12 feet 20 feet 9 feet 21 feet 55 to 74 13 feet 24 feet 9 feet 21 feet 75 to 90 20 feet 24 feet 9 feet 20 feet  
       1 Parking space width measured perpendicular to the space centerline. 
       2 Parking space length measured along the space centerline. 
Sec. 6-6. - Minimum parking space requirements. 
A.	Residential. 
1.	Single- and two-family units shall have two spaces per dwelling unit. 
2.	Multiple-family units: 
a.	One-bedroom units shall have 1.5 spaces per unit. 
b.	Two or more bedroom units shall have two spaces per unit. 
3.	Mobile home units in a mobile home park shall have two spaces per mobile home unit or site. 
B.	Retirement communities. 
1.	Senior independent units shall have 1.5 spaces per unit. 
2.	Senior interim-care units shall have one space per each two beds, plus one space per employee, based on the maximum number of employees on the premises at one time. 
3.	Nursing homes or sanitariums shall have one space per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is greater. 
C.	Institutional/public assembly. 
1.	Churches shall have one space per each three seats or six feet of pews in the main place of assembly therein. 
2.	Hospitals, excluding areas for outpatient care, shall have 2.5 spaces per licensed bed. 
3.	Outpatient-care stations shall have two spaces per exam room/station or procedure/operating room, plus one space per laboratory or recovery room. 
4.	Child care centers shall have one space for every eight children of licensed capacity, plus one space for each employee. A minimum of three employee spaces shall be required. 
5.	Elementary, junior high, and middle schools shall have two spaces per classroom, plus one space for each three seats of maximum seating capacity for that indoor place of assembly having the greatest seating capacity. 
6.	High schools shall have eight spaces per classroom, or one space per each four seats of maximum seating capacity for that indoor place of assembly having the greatest capacity, whichever is greater. 
7.	Private clubs and lodges shall have one space per each 2.5 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by the appropriate fire, health, or building code. 
8.	Auditoriums (non-school), stadiums, sports arenas, and theaters shall have one space per each three seats or each six feet of bleacher seating. 
D.	Offices. 
1.	Medical/dental clinics or offices shall have four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Maximum of six spaces shall be required. 
2.	General office buildings shall have three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
3.	Banks, credit unions, or savings and loans shall have six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus two spaces per each non-drive-through automatic teller. 
4.	Government office building shall have four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.	Real estate office shall have four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
E.	Retail/service. 
1.	Appliance stores shall have four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
2.	Auto service stations shall have three spaces per each service bay, plus one space per each employee (based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time), plus fouor spaces per 1,000 square feet of any space devoted to the sales of convenience goods. A minimum of four spaces shall be required for sales of convenience goods. 
3.	Automobile washes shall have one space per each employee, based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time. A minimum of four spaces shall be required. 
4.	Barber shops/beauty salons shall have three spaces per each barber or beautician's chair or station. 
5.	Conference rooms and exhibit halls shall have one space per every two persons of capacity authorized by the appropriate fire, health, or building code. 
6.	Convenience stores shall have four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
7.	Discount stores shall have five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
8.	Dry cleaners shall have two spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of four spaces shall be required. 
9.	Service companies doing repair, electrical, and plumbing work shall have two spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of five spaces shall be required. 
10.	Funeral homes and mortuaries shall have one space per 50 square feet of parlor and chapel areas. 
11.	Furniture/carpet stores shall have 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
12.	Hardware, paint and home improvement stores shall have three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
13.	Laundromats shall have one space per each three washing machines. 
14.	Mini-storage houses/warehouses shall have six spaces. 
15.	Motels and hotels shall have 1.2 spaces per room plus ten spaces per 1,000 square feet of restaurant, banquet, or conference area. 
16.	Motor vehicle dealerships shall have one space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor sales area, plus one space per sales desk/office, plus three spaces per each service bay. 
17.	Recreational vehicle and boat dealerships shall have one space per 800 square feet of gross floor area, plus two spaces per each vehicle service bay. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
18.	Restaurants that serve non-fast food and have no drive-through window shall have 12 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or 0.4 spaces per seat, whichever is greater. 
19.	Restaurants that serve mostly take out, with six or less booths or tables shall have six spaces, plus one space per each employee, based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time. 
20.	Restaurants that serve fast food and have no drive-through window shall have seven spaces per 1,000 square feet. 
21.	Restaurants that serve fast food and have a drive-through window and indoor seating shall have 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus three designated drive-through, short-term waiting spaces, plus five spaces for truck or bus parking. 
22.	Restaurants that serve fast food and have a drive-through window, but no indoor seating shall have 15 spaces. 
23.	Shopping centers shall have four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area, plus two spaces per 1,000 square feet of indoor common area. 
24.	Video rental stores shall have 12 spaces per 1,000 square feet (up to 3,000 square feet), plus four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area above 3,000 square feet. A minimum of eight spaces is required. 
F.	Recreation/entertainment. 
1.	Arcades shall have one space for every 70 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six spaces shall be required. 
2.	Batting cage facilities shall have three spaces per cage. 
3.	Billiard room shall have one space for each two persons of capacity. *(ADDED 12/96) 
4.	Bowling centers shall have five spaces per lane. 
5.	Golf driving ranges shall have 1.5 spaces per tee. 
6.	Golf courses, miniature, shall have 1.5 spaces per each hole. 
7.	Golf courses, par-three, shall have three spaces per hole. 
8.	Golf courses shall have five spaces per hole. 
9.	Health fitness centers shall have five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
10.	Movie theaters shall have one space per each four seats, plus four spaces per screen. 
11.	Racquetball and tennis centers shall have one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or six spaces per court, whichever is greater. 
12.	Public recreation centers shall have five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
13.	Roller [or] ice skating rink shall have six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
G.	Industrial. 
1.	All industrial uses shall have 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or one space per employee, based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time, whichever is greater. 
2.	For an option for deferred parking for industrial uses, see section 6-7. 
(Amend. of 10-99) 
Sec. 6-7. - Deferred parking for industrial uses. 
A.	Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure that sufficient area exists on each industrial lot to meet the parking requirements contained in section 6-6.G, while allowing the planning commission the authority to defer the construction of a portion of this required parking where it can be demonstrated by applicants seeking deferral that a lower number of parking spaces would be adequate. This section is intended to provide equity in parking requirements, reduce runoff and parking area, and to improve potential for adaptive reuse of industrial buildings. 
B.	Planning commission authority. The planning commission shall have the authority to defer construction of the required number of parking spaces for any industrial use, subject to the regulations contained in this section. 
C.	Responsibility of applicant seeking deferral. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, or representative of the industry seeking deferral, to demonstrate to the planning commission that their business requires less parking spaces than that required in section 6-6.G. 
D.	Maximum deferral. Any deferment of required parking spaces shall not result in an amount of parking of less than 0.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area or one space per employee, based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time. 
E.	Site plan requirements. The site plan shall include the parking design for both the parking spaces proposed for construction and those spaces for which deferment is sought. 
    The design for the parking area for which deferment is sought shall be in harmony with the parking area proposed for construction, and shall not include areas required for parking setbacks, required landscape areas; or land otherwise not suitable for parking due to environmental or physical conditions. 
F.	Revocation of deferral. The planning commission shall have the right, upon observation of regular parking deficiency at any industrial business for which a parking deferral was granted, to require that a part or all of the deferred parking area be constructed. Such parking shall be constructed within six months of being served notice by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 6-8. - Stacking space requirements. 
A.	Number of spaces required. 
1.	Drive-through banks shall have four spaces per window. 
2.	Drive-through restaurants shall have ten spaces. 
3.	Drive-through dry-cleaning establishments shall have two spaces. 
4.	Fully automatic car wash establishments shall have 16 spaces per bay (non-stop drive mechanism). 
5.	Semi-automatic car wash establishments shall have 20 spaces per bay (employee controlled drive). 
6.	Self-serve car wash establishments shall have three spaces per bay. 
7.	Quick oil-change and repair companies shall have two spaces per bay. 
B.	Stacking space dimensions. Separate, outdoor stacking spaces shall each be 25 feet in length and a minimum of nine feet in width. 
C.	Stacking space restrictions. Required stacking spaces which block access to parking spaces shall not be included in calculating the required number of spaces. 
Sec. 6-9. - Barrier-free parking and design requirements. 
A.	Number required. In accordance with Table 6.2, within each parking lot signed and marked barrier-free spaces shall be provided at a convenient location. 
B.	Barrier-free design standards. The following barrier-free design standards shall be used: 
1.	Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and 20 feet in length. 
2.	Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one foot in 12 feet, and a width of not less than four feet, shall be provided for wheelchair access. 
Sec. 6-10. - On-premises requirements for loading and unloading. 
A.	Number required. 
TABLE 6.2. BARRIER-FREE SPACE REQUIREMENTS 
Total Spaces in Lot Required Handicapped Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
TABLE 6.3. LOADING/UNLOADING ON-PREMISES SPACE REQUIREMENTS 
Gross Floor Area In Square Feet Loading/Unloading Spaces Required 0 3,999 None 4,000 19,999 1 space 20,000 99,999 1 space, plus 1 space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000, or 1 space for every overhead loading door, whichever is greater. 100,000 500,000 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet, or 1 space for every overhead loading door, whichever is greater.  
    Note: Buildings having a gross floor-area square footage contained in two categories shall use the category requiring the greater number of spaces. 
    On-premises space for standing, loading, and unloading vehicles for commercial, institutional, and industrial uses shall be provided in accordance with Table 6.3. 
B.	General loading/unloading requirements. 
1.	Loading and unloading spaces shall not use any portion of any public right-of-way. 
2.	Maneuvering space for trucks using the loading spaces shall be provided on-premises, and shall not necessitate the use of public right-of-way. 
3.	Loading and unloading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, 60 feet in length, and have clearance of at least 14 feet in height. 
4.	If truck wells are to be used, a protective railing or wall shall be provided along the sides of the well. 
5.	Loading and unloading spaces or wells which are located within the front yard, or on any building side facing and directly visible to a public street shall be screened with a Type B screen as provided in article 8 of this ordinance. 
6.	Required loading and unloading spaces shall not be included in calculations for parking spaces needed to meet general parking requirements. 
ARTICLE 7. - SIGNS 

Sec. 7-1. - Purpose. 
A.	General health, safety and welfare of the public. It is the intent of this ordinance to regulate the size, number, location, and manner of display of signs in the City of Hudsonville for the purpose of maintaining and promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
B.	Traffic safety. It is determined that an excess amount of signs, and the improper placement of signs, results in a confusing backdrop for motorists to clearly see and interpret signs and signalization which are in place to regulate traffic operations. 
C.	Ease of identifying business locations. It is determined that an excessive amount of signs and improper placement of signs results in reduced ability of motorists to see, and consequently, safely and efficiently access their desired business locations. 
D.	Improve and protect city appearance. It is determined that the appearance of the city is marred by an excessive amount of signs and improper placement of signs. 
E.	Preserve property values. It is determined that an excessive amount of signs and improper placement of signs results in lower property values. 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
    Billboard: A sign directing attention to a use, activity, message, product, or service which is not conducted on or related to the lot or parcel upon which the sign is located. 
    Building sign area: The maximum allowable sign area which is allowed to be attached in any fashion to a building. 
    All signs which are in any way attached to a building will be used in calculating the building sign area. Signs which shall be counted as building sign area include, but are not limited to, wall signs, roof signs, projecting signs, awning, and canopy signs. 
    Changeable-message sign: A sign which has been designed to allow quick and easy changes to sign displays or messages, commonly by manipulation of removable letters or by reprogramming electronically generated displays or messages. 
    Freestanding sign: A sign which is structurally separated from any building. 
    Permanent sign copy area: That portion of a sign which contains lettering or other graphic representations which are intended to be permanent. 
    Portable sign: Any sign that is designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, the following signs: 
1.	With wheels removed; 
2.	With chassis or support constructed without wheels; 
3.	Designed to be transported by trailer or wheels; 
4.	Converted to A- or T-frame signs; 
5.	Attached temporarily or permanently to the ground, a structure, or other signs; 
6.	Mounted on a vehicle for advertising purposes, parked, and visible from the public right-of-way; 
7.	Menu and sandwich boards; 
8.	Searchlights and stands; and 
9.	Hot-air or gas-filled balloons or umbrellas used for advertising. 
    Sign: A structure, device, letter, word, model, figure, symbol, product, banner, balloon, flag, pennant, streamer, insignia, emblem, logo, painting, poster, or some quantity or combination of the above which is visible from a public place and is intended to direct public attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, solicitation, or otherwise convey a message to the public. 
    Temporary sign: Signs erected for a specific purpose or event and are intended to be temporary (generally up less than two months). Such signs may include for-sale, for-lease, garage sale, announcements, or election signs. 
    Wall sign: A sign painted on, incorporated in, or attached directly to a building wall, with the exposed face of the sign in a place parallel to the building wall. 
Sec. 7-3. - Administration. 
A.	Enforcement. This section shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator as provided in article 16 of this ordinance. 
B.	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter, or relocate any sign unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the zoning administrator, except as provided in section 7-5, and a permit fee paid in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
C.	Application. Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the zoning administrator for this purpose and shall contain the following information: 
1.	Name, address, and telephone number of applicant; 
2.	Zoning district in which the sign is to be located; 
3.	Location of the building, structure, or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
4.	Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, lot lines, and rights-of-way existing or proposed; 
5.	Two copies of the plans, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or ground (plans shall include sign dimensions and total square footage of sign area); and 
6.	Name, address, and telephone number of the sign erector. 
D.	Compliance inspection. All signs shall be inspected at original installation. The sign erector shall notify the zoning administrator upon completion of the sign installation. If the sign is found to comply with this article, the zoning administrator shall include in the permanent zoning file the date of approval, together with a photograph of the completed sign. 
E.	Periodic inspections. The zoning administrator shall cause existing signs to be inspected on a periodic basis as deemed necessary to determine continuation of compliance with the provisions of this article. 
F.	Removal of signs. 
1.	Should any sign be found unsafe, insecure, improperly constructed or not in accordance with the requirements of this article, the erector and/or owner shall be required to make the sign safe, secure, and otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this article within ten days of the notice. Failure to comply shall result in an order to remove the sign within 48 hours from the time of notification in writing. 
2.	Existing signs determined to be unsafe and an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be removed or repaired immediately at the owner's expense. 
a.	If the owner or sign erector of the sign cannot be reached, the city retains the right to remove or repair the sign at the owners expense. 
b.	The city shall have the right to remove improperly placed portable or temporary signs which are placed in a public right-of-way or on utility poles at any time. 
Sec. 7-4. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: 
A.	Signs in right-of-way. No sign, except those established and maintained by the city, county, state, or federal governments, shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement. This regulation includes railroad rights-of-way. 
B.	Signs in clear vision areas. No sign shall be located within, project into, or overhang any clear-vision area as defined in this ordinance. 
C.	Signs involving off-premises businesses or properties. 
1.	No signs containing off-premises advertising, with the exception of billboards which are reviewed under the special use permit process, shall be permitted. 
2.	No sign advertising sale or lease of off-premises buildings or land shall be permitted. 
D.	Signs for discontinued businesses. No sign for, or related to, a discontinued business shall be permitted once any other business or use is resumed on the same premises. 
E.	Vehicle signs. No car, van, truck, semi-trailer, or similar vehicle, with or without a valid license plate, may be parked on-premises, outside of parking spaces specifically authorized as part of the final site plan approval by the planning commission, for the purpose of creating additional freestanding sign space. 
F.	Flashing signs. The use of flashing signs shall be prohibited. 
G.	Revolving signs. The use of revolving signs shall be prohibited. 
H.	Streamers. The use of streamers shall be prohibited. 
I.	Signs on rooftops. No sign shall be painted on any rooftop, nor be attached directly against and parallel to the rooftop surface. 
J.	Freestanding changeable-message signs. Freestanding signs containing only changeable-message sign space shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 7-5. - Signs not requiring permits. 
A.	Small signs. Any sign erected on a premises which is not more than two square feet in area and is not related to commercial advertising shall not require an erection permit. 
B.	Sale or rent signs. Real estate signs advertising premises (on which the sign is located) for sale, rent or lease, shall not require an erection permit when such signs are not more than six square feet in area for a residential property, or 20 square feet in area for a non-residential property. 
C.	Street signs Signs erected by the city, county, state, or federal governments for street direction, traffic control, and guidance shall not require an erection permit. 
D.	Governmental signs. 
1.	Signs erected by any governmental entity which relate to emergency activities, civil defense, or any sign which may be required by law to display shall not require a permit to erect. 
2.	Flags and emblems of governmental entities shall not require a permit. 
E.	Holiday displays. Holiday decorations or displays erected in such a way as to have no adverse impacts to pedestrian or vehicle traffic shall not require an erection permit. 
F.	Historical plaques and memorials. Historical plaques and memorials may be placed without a permit to erect. 
Sec. 7-6. - General requirements for construction. 
A.	Material requirements. All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity to the provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of the latest adopted edition of the B.O.C.A. Code and requirements of this article. 
B.	Changeable-message signs. Whenever a changeable-message sign is added to an existing freestanding sign, such sign shall be compatible in materials, colors, and design to the freestanding sign to which it is to be attached. 
C.	Fastenings. All signs must be erected in such a manner and with such materials to remain safe and secure during the period of use. All bolts, cables, and other parts of such signs shall be kept painted and free from corrosion. 
D.	Sign and support location. 
1.	No sign or supporting mechanism shall be placed on or intrude over any publicly owned property, street right-of-way, or proposed street right-of-way. 
2.	No sign or supporting mechanism shall be located closer than ten feet to a street right-of-way line. 
3.	No sign or supporting mechanism shall extend beyond any lot lines of the property on which it is located. 
E.	Illumination of signs. No sign shall be illuminated by other than approved electrical devices. Any lighting for the illumination of signs shall be directed away and shielded from any adjacent residential zoning districts. Lighting shall not adversely affect driver visibility on adjacent public thoroughfares. 
F.	Traffic interference. No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
G.	Re-hanging. In case of re-hanging or re-erection of any sign, the erector must place his identification and the date on the sign. 
H.	Proximity to electrical conductors. No sign shall be erected so that any part, including cables, guys, etc., will be within six feet of any electrical conductor, electric light pole, street lamp, traffic light, or other public utility pole or standard. 
I.	Responsibility of compliance. The owner of any property on which a sign is placed and the person maintaining said sign are equally responsible for the condition of the sign and the area in the vicinity thereof. 
J.	Erector's imprint. Signs of every class must carry the identification of the sign erector in clearly legible letters. 
Sec. 7-7. - General provisions for permitted signs. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all signs erected or located in any zoning district: 
A.	Vacant land signs. 
1.	Vacant land which is less than one acre in size shall only be permitted one sign, not to exceed six square feet in size; 
2.	Vacant land which is between one and ten acres in size shall only be permitted one sign, not to exceed 20 square feet in size. 
3.	Signs on parcels of vacant land exceeding ten acres shall be allowed a maximum of two signs. Each sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in size. If two signs are installed, they shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from each other. 
B.	Removal of temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be removed within five days following the accomplishment of purpose or passing of the event for which they were intended. 
C.	Measurement of sign area: 
1.	Sign area shall include the entire area of the smallest rectangular or square figure enclosing all elements of the sign which form an integral part of the sign. Supporting poles, braces, or uprights shall not be included in the sign area. (See Figure 7.1) 
2.	Computing areas. 
a.	For a single-face sign, the area shall be computed as the total, exposed exterior surface in square feet. 
b.	For a sign that has two faces placed back to back, the area shall be computed as one-half the total, exposed exterior surface area in square feet. 
c.	The area of all faces shall be included in the total square footage calculation for a sign that has two or more faces so arranged that the faces are greater than two feet from one another, or such sign with any two faces that form a "V" in plan and the angle of the "V" is greater than 15 degrees, 
D.	Sign height. The maximum sign height for all districts, with the exception of the highway commercial district, shall be 25 feet. The maximum sign height in the Highway Commercial District shall be 35 feet. 
E.	Measurement of sign height. The height of the sign is measured from the ground to the highest point of the sign. 
F.	Changeable-message signs. Changeable-message signs shall only be permitted when designed as part of a sign containing permanent sign copy. If changeable-message signs are added to an existing sign, they shall be designed and constructed to be compatible in material, color, and design to the existing sign. 
G.	Driveway entry signs. One pair of driveway-entry signs, not exceeding one sign per driveway, shall only be permitted if they are necessary to direct vehicles into or out of driveways designed for one-way traffic, or are necessary to eliminate motorist confusion concerning access to an establishment. Driveway entry signs shall not exceed two square feet in size per sign. 
H.	Construction signs. One sign identifying the proposed use and/or building, and persons or firms involved, not to exceed 50 square feet, shall be permitted. Such sign shall not be erected until the start of construction and shall be removed upon substantial completion of the project at the discretion of the zoning administrator. 
I.	Sign maintenance. All signs shall be maintained on an ongoing basis in essentially the same condition as when originally installed. They shall be maintained in sound condition, rust free, and clean. Ground areas immediately surrounding the sign shall also be properly maintained on an ongoing basis, and be kept free of debris, weeds, or other vegetation overgrowth. 

Figure 7.1 Measurement of Sign Area 
Sec. 7-8. - Requirements for specific sign types. 
A.	Wall signs. Wall signs shall not: 
1.	Project more than 12 inches from a building surface; 
2.	Be placed above the sills of the first level of windows above the first story where windows are present; or 
3.	Project beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached. 
B.	Sign attached at right angle to building. 
1.	Signs shall not be more than two-faced and shall not project more than six feet from the building. If a sign has two faces, such faces shall not be more than 12 inches apart. 
2.	There shall be only one right angle sign for each entrance door to a business establishment. 
3.	Signs shall not exceed 20 square feet on one sign face. 
4.	The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of eight feet above ground level. 
5.	The top of the sign shall not extend above the top of the sills of the first level of windows above the first story, or the lowest point of the roof, whichever is lowest. 
6.	Signs shall be mounted flush to the building surface. 
C.	Roof signs. 
1.	Roof signs shall not exceed a height of two feet. 
2.	Supporting framework for roof signs shall not be visible from the ground. (See Figure 7.2) 
D.	Portable signs. 
1.	Purpose. It is the city's intent to restrict portable sign usage within the city. It is further the city's intent to balance a property owner's interest in communicating special events with legitimate areas of public concern so that portable signs do not become permanent in nature and so that the citizens' right to be free of signs which unreasonably distract drivers and pedestrians and produce confusion is protected. In addition to the purposes stated in section 7-1, the regulations restricting the use of portable signs contained in this subsection have been adopted for the following reasons: 
a.	Portable signs were being used as permanent signage. 
b.	Portable signs were becoming a blighting influence, due to their quantity and appearance (many times a variety of objects are tied to them to help anchor them). 
c.	Portable signs were conflicting with parking operations (being placed in parking spaces or parking aisles). 
d.	Electric cords running to portable signs were presenting safety concerns. 
e.	Portable signs were contributing to decreases in property value. 
2.	Communication of special events. The regulations contained in this subsection are further intended to provide a means for the communication of events which are, inherently, of a limited duration. 
3.	Use restrictions. 
a.	Portable signs shall not be used for more than 60 days out of any calendar year for a specific parcel. Further, a portable sign shall not be used for a specific parcel for more than 14 consecutive days and there shall be at least 14 consecutive days between uses for such parcel. 
b.	Portable signs may not be used within any public right-of-way or clear vision area as defined in the City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance. 
c.	Portable signs may not be used in any parking area in a manner which obstructs the vision of motorists using parking aisles, or obstructs movement through any parking aisle. 
d.	Portable signs shall not obstruct any public or private sidewalk. Electric cords for portable signs which are proposed to cross any sidewalk or parking aisle shall not be permitted without the approval of the zoning administrator. 
e.	Flashing lights on portable signs shall be prohibited. 
4.	Anchoring requirement. Portable signs shall be anchored in a safe and secure manner. The anchoring method should be one which reasonably protects against the sign being blown down or away, or by any other natural element being forced from its intended location. Anchoring shall be achieved by anchoring the portable sign to the ground or other permanent and stable structure. Anchoring of portable signs by tying weighted objects such as cinder blocks or tires shall be prohibited. 
5.	Permit required. Portable signs may be installed or erected only pursuant to permit granted by the city's zoning administrator. The permit shall identify the period during which it is valid. A fee, as established by the city commission from time to time, shall be required before a permit may be issued. 
6.	Expiration date to be affixed to sign. All portable signs shall have attached on the street side of the sign the date upon which the permit expires (example: Aug 25, 1994). The notice of date expiration shall use legible letters at least four inches in height. 
7.	Maximum size. The maximum size for a portable sign shall be 32 square feet. Support framework shall not be included in sign area calculation. The zoning administrator may allow larger sizes for inflatable portable signs only. 
8.	Noncompliance a violation. Any violation of the provisions of this section of the ordinance shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and subject to any of the penalties stated in section 16-6 of the ordinance. 
9.	Impoundment. If a portable sign is placed in a public right-of-way in violation of this ordinance, the city may impound such sign. 

Figure 7.2 Roof Signs 
Sec. 7-9. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
A.	Single-Family Residential Districts (R-1-A through R-1-E Districts). 
1.	Single-family dwelling units or lots shall not be permitted any permanent signs, with the exception of the following: 
a.	Name or address plates, not to exceed a total of six square feet; and 
b.	Home occupation signs, as regulated by this ordinance. 
2.	Single-family dwelling units may be permitted to have temporary signs, not to exceed a total of six square feet. 
3.	Single-family subdivisions having well defined entrances may have one entry sign at each primary entrance. Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in size. 
B.	Single-Family and Attached Residential District (R-2 District). 
1.	Single-family and attached residential dwelling units or lots shall not be permitted any signs, with the exception of the following: 
a.	Name or address plates, not to exceed a total of six square feet; and 
b.	Home occupation signs, as regulated by this ordinance. 
2.	Single-family and attached dwelling units may be permitted to have temporary signs, not to exceed a total of six square feet. 
3.	Single-family subdivisions having well defined entrances may have one entry sign at each primary entrance. Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in size. 
4.	Attached dwelling complexes having 16 or more units, and having well defined entrances may have one entry sign at each primary entrance. Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in size. 
C.	Single-Family Attached Residential District (R-3 District). 
1.	Attached residential dwelling units or lots shall not be permitted any signs, with the exception of the following: 
a.	Name or address plates, not to exceed a total of six square feet; and 
b.	Home occupation signs, as regulated by this ordinance. 
2.	Attached dwelling units may be permitted to have temporary signs, not to exceed a total of six square feet. 
3.	Attached dwelling complexes having eight or more units and well defined entrances may have one entry sign at each primary entrance. Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in size. 
D.	Multiple-Family Residential District (R-4 District), and Mobile Home Park District (MHP District). An apartment or mobile home park complex may have one sign per principal entrance. Each sign shall not exceed 20 square feet. 
E.	Central Business Districts (CBD-1-G, CBD-1-OS, CBD-2 Zoning Districts), Light Commercial District (LC District), Highway Commercial District (HC District), All Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Developments, Public Facility Districts (FF), and Industrial Districts (I-1 and I-2). 
1.	Each commercial, industrial, or institutional use shall be permitted an amount of building sign area up to, but not exceeding, 15% of each first-story wall area facing a public roadway, subject to the following: 
a.	Sign area shall not exceed 150 square on any one building face; and 
b.	If no specific side of the building faces a public roadway, that side of the building containing the primary entrance shall be used for calculating permissible building sign area. 
2.	Each freestanding business, shopping center, and industrial park, in addition to allowable building sign area, shall be permitted to have one freestanding sign. Maximum sign area of such sign shall be determined by referencing the amount of traffic lanes, speed limit, and linear frontage associated with the road providing access to the business. Maximum freestanding sign space standards shall be determined by the following Tables, 7.1 through 7.4. 
TABLE 7.1. MAXIMUM FREESTANDING SIGN SPACE FOR 2- AND 3-LANE ROADS 
(IN SQUARE FEET) 
Linear Frontage in Feet Speed Limit <100 100 - 299 300+ 15 25 mph   15  25  40 30 40 mph   35  45  60 45 55 mph   75  85 100  
TABLE 7.2. MAXIMUM FREESTANDING SIGN SPACE FOR EXPRESSWAYS (IN SQUARE FEET) 
Linear Frontage in Feet Speed Limit <100 100 - 299 300+ 55+ mph  140 160 200  
TABLE 7.3. MAXIMUM FREESTANDING SIGN SPACE FOR 4-LANE ROADS WITHOUT MEDIANS (IN SQUARE FEET) 
Linear Frontage in Feet Speed Limit <100 100 - 299 300+ 15 25 mph   20  30  40 30 40 mph   50  60  70 45 55 mph  110 120 130  
TABLE 7.4. MAXIMUM FREESTANDING SIGN SPACE FOR 4-LANE ROADS WITH MEDIANS AND ALL 5- AND 6-LANE ROADS (IN SQUARE FEET) 
Linear Frontage in Feet Speed Limit <100 100 - 299 300+ 15 25 mph   20  30  40 30 40 mph   50  60  70 45 55 mph  110 120 130  
a.	If primary access and public exposure to the business is provided by a road adjacent to a service drive of higher classification, service drives will not be used to determine maximum allowable freestanding sign space. 
b.	A minimum of 60% of total sign area for all freestanding signs shall be comprised of permanent sign-copy area. 
3.	Changeable-message sign space may be included as part of a freestanding sign, subject to the following: 
a.	Changeable-message sign space shall not make up more than 40% of total sign area for the freestanding sign; and 
b.	Changeable-message sign space shall be included within the maximum freestanding sign space standards, with the exception that the planning commission may permit the maximum standards to be exceeded by up to 15% if the sign space which exceeds the standards is exclusively for the purpose of providing changeable-message sign space. 
4.	If a single freestanding sign cannot be practically positioned to serve functionally as identification from both streets, businesses having frontage on two streets may be permitted to have a second freestanding sign. 
Sec. 7-10. - Billboards. 
    Billboards shall only be permitted if approved by a special use permit. The following minimum regulations shall be required before approval can be given. 
A.	Permitted zoning districts. Billboards shall only be permitted within the I-2 and PF Zoning Districts. 
B.	Spacing and location standards. 
1.	Billboards shall not be located closer than one mile (5,280 feet) from another billboard on the same side of a public right-of-way. This spacing standard shall be applicable regardless of what governmental jurisdiction other billboards may be located in. 
2.	Billboards shall only be permitted along the I-196 Freeway and shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the I-196 right-of-way, but not greater than 50 feet. 
3.	Billboards shall not be located closer than 400 feet from any residential zoning district. The planning commission may reduce this requirement to not less than 100 feet upon finding that properties within a 400-foot radius of a proposed billboard will not be adversely impacted by such a reduction. 
4.	Billboards shall not be located closer than 30 feet from any building. 
5.	Billboards shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any other freestanding sign. 
6.	Billboards shall not be erected above any building. 
C.	Construction standards. 
1.	Billboards shall use only one pole for support. 
2.	Billboards located along the I-196 Freeway shall be limited in size to 300 square feet and shall not exceed a height of 35 feet. 
3.	All billboards shall be finished on both sides, but sign content shall only be permitted on the side of the billboard which faces oncoming traffic in the closest lane of traffic. 
4.	Billboards shall not be illuminated. 
5.	Billboard displays using movable parts shall be prohibited. 
D.	Maintenance. The billboard sign shall be maintained by the owner of the sign. The maintenance of the grounds surrounding the billboard may be maintained by either the owner of the sign or the property owner, however, the city retains the right to hold both parties jointly or severally responsible for such maintenance. 
Sec. 7-11. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.	Intent. It is the intent of this article to encourage eventual elimination of signs that, as a result of the adoption of this article, become nonconforming. Elimination of nonconforming signs are being pursued for the purposes identified in section 7-1. 
B.	Continuance. A nonconforming sign may be continued, and shall be maintained in good condition, but shall not be 
1.	Replaced by another nonconforming sign; 
2.	Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or change its configuration; 
3.	Expanded; or 
4.	Improved or re-established under any circumstances if the estimated expense of the improvement or reconstruction exceeds 50% of the estimated replacement cost. 
ARTICLE 8. - LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-1. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to specify landscape requirements for all land uses requiring site-plan review, and to provide for landscape techniques to achieve compatibility between abutting and adjacent uses, including public and private streets. The landscape regulations in this article are further intended to: 
A.	Promote the public health, safety and general welfare by reducing noise, air, and visual pollutions, air temperature, and light glare; 
B.	Improve air quality; 
C.	Prevent soil erosion and increase water retention; 
D.	Improve the appearance of on-premises parking, vehicular use areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way; 
E.	Improve the aesthetics and safety of pedestrian sidewalks, both within paved areas and along public rights-of-way; 
F.	Require buffering between non-compatible land uses; 
G.	Protect residential privacy; and 
H.	Maintain a regional native landscape character. 
Sec. 8-2. - Landscape definitions. 
    Canopy tree: A deciduous tree which typically reaches a height of 40 feet or more at maturity, and is characterized by offering optimal shading potential. Example species include: oaks, sycamores, and sugar maples. 
    Evergreen tree: A tree typically having a mature height of greater than 13 feet, and exhibiting green leaves throughout the year. 
    Landscape area: Any outdoor land area which is planned and designed for the growth of vegetation. Landscape areas would include both formal landscape beds and lawn areas. 
    Landscape bed: A defined area intended for the intensive planting of trees, bushes, shrubs, and other plants. Landscape beds would exclude large areas planted in grass or other common ground cover; however, they might contain small amounts of these types of vegetation. 
    Understory tree: A deciduous tree which typically reaches a height of between 13 and 40 feet at maturity. Understory trees would include smaller shade trees and ornamental trees. 
Sec. 8-3. - Screening types. 
    The following four-tier screening classification system is intended to provide for graduated levels of screening to be used in a variety of land-use transition situations. The screening types have been designed to correlate with the degree of incompatibility between uses. The screening types are defined in order of magnitude of screening effect. Type A screen requiring the greatest amount of screening, and Type D requires the least. 
    Each screening type is based on achieving a specific effect within two zones of influence. Zone 1 relates to lower level screening, and Zone 2 relates to upper level screening. 
    The four types of screens are defined as follows: 
A.	Type A screen. 
1.	Screen dimensions: 
a.	Height 
i.	Zone 1 shall be the area from ground level to eight feet. 
ii.	Zone 2 shall be the area from eight feet to a height of 20 feet. Screening above 20 feet is permissible. 
b.	Minimum width shall be 50 feet. 
c.	Where the land-use transition requiring such screening type occurs, minimum length shall be 100% of linear distance. 
2.	Required screen effects. 
a.	The general, required screen effect shall be to exclude all visual contact between uses, mitigate noise impacts, and to create a strong impression of spacial separation. 
b.	Zone 1's required screen effect shall be to create a screen which achieves total visual obstruction on a year-round basis. 
c.	Zone 2's required screen effect shall be to create an intermittent screen which visually obscures a minimum of 40% of the Zone 2 area on either a seasonal or year-round basis. 
3.	Screen materials. 
a.	Zone 1 screens shall be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or some combination thereof. 
b.	Zone 2's intermittent screens shall be achieved by some combination of evergreen and deciduous trees. (See Figure 8.1) 
B.	Type B screen. 
1.	Required screen dimensions: 
a.	Height. 
i.	Zone 1 shall be the area from ground level to six feet. 
ii.	Zone 2 shall be the area from six feet to a height of 20 feet. Screening above 20 feet is permissible. 
b.	Minimum width. 
i.	Screening in all districts, except CBD Districts, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
ii.	Screening in CBD Districts shall have a minimum width of eight feet. 
c.	Where the land-use transition requiring such screening type occurs, minimum length shall be 100% of linear distance, 
2.	Required screen effects: 
a.	The general, required screen effect shall be to minimize noise and provide visual privacy where activity centers are located next to residential uses. 
b.	Zone 1's required screen effect shall be to create a screen which achieves total visual obstruction on a year-round basis. 
c.	Zone 2's required screen effect shall be to create an intermittent screen which visually obscures a minimum of 40% of the Zone 2 area on either a seasonal or year-round basis. 
3.	Required screen materials: 
a.	Zone 1 screens shall be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or some combination thereof. 
b.	Zone 2 intermittent screens shall be achieved by some combination of evergreen and deciduous trees. (See Figure 8.2) 
C.	Type C screen. 
1.	Required screen dimensions: 
a.	Height. 
i.	Zone 1 shall be the area from ground level to a height of three feet. 
ii.	Zone 2 shall be the area from three feet to a minimum height of 20 feet. Screening above 20 feet is permissible. 
b.	Minimum width. 
i.	Screening in all districts, except CBD Districts, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
ii.	Screening in CBD Districts shall have a minimum width of eight feet. 
c.	Where the land-use transition requiring such screening type occurs, minimum length shall be 100% of linear distance. 
2.	Required screen effects: 
a.	The general, required screen effect shall be to reduce the impacts of more intensive (higher density) residential developments on single-family developments, and to soften the visual impacts of parking lots to adjacent roadways. 
b.	Zone 1's required screen effects shall be to create a screen along 60% of the required screen length, which obscures visibility by 80% to 100% on a year-round basis. 
c.	Zone 2's required screen effects shall be to create an intermittent screen which visually obscures a minimum of 40% of the Zone 2 area on either a seasonal or year-round basis. 
3.	Required screen materials: 
a.	Zone 1 screens shall be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or some combination thereof. If some portion of the screen is to consist of vegetation, no more than 50% of such vegetation shall be of a deciduous type. 
b.	Zone 2 intermittent screens shall be achieved by some combination of evergreen and deciduous trees. (See Figure 8.3) 
D.	Type D screen. 
1.	Required screen dimensions: 
a.	Minimum height. 
i.	Zone 1 shall be the area from ground level to a height of three feet. 
ii.	Zone 2 shall be the area from three feet to 20 feet. Screening above 20 feet is permissible. 
b.	Minimum width. 
i.	Screening in all districts, except CBD Districts, shall have a minimum width of ten feet. 
ii.	Screening in CBD Districts shall have a minimum width of eight feet. 
c.	Where the land-use transition requiring such screening type occurs, minimum length shall be 100% of linear distance. 
2.	Required screen effects. 
a.	The general, required screen effects shall be to accomplish physical separation without substantial visual separation. 
b.	Zone 1's required screen effects shall be to create a screen along 30% of the required screen length which obscures visibility by 80% to 100% on a year-round basis. 
c.	Zone 2's required screen length shall be to create an intermittent screen which visually obscures a minimum of 25% of the Zone 2 area on either a seasonal or year-round basis. 
3.	Required screen materials. 
a.	Zone 1 screens shall be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or some combination thereof. If some portion of the screen is to consist of vegetation, no more than 50% of such vegetation shall be of a deciduous type. 
b.	Zone 2 intermittent screens shall be achieved by some combination of evergreen and deciduous trees. (See Figure 8.4) 

Figure 8.1 Type A Screen Examples 

Figure 8.2 Type B Screen Examples 

Figure 8.3 Type C Screen Samples 

Figure 8.4 Type D Screen Samples 
Sec. 8-4. - Required peripheral screening. 
A.	Between abutting land uses. The type of landscape screen (A, B, C, or D) required between abutting land uses shall be that screen type indicated in Table 8.1. To determine the required screen, identify the row containing the zoning district of the proposed project (subject zone), and read across that row to the column labeled with the zoning district in which the abutting land uses are located within. The cell at the intersection of the subject-zone row and the appropriate abutting-zone column will contain a letter indicating the screen type required for that combination of land uses. 
B.	Between a proposed use and a public or private street. Landscape screening between land uses and a public or private street in all zoning districts except the R-1 District, shall be provided as follows: 
1.	If no parking, loading, or paved areas are visible from the roadway, the equivalent of one canopy or evergreen tree for every 35 linear feet of frontage abutting a public street shall be provided within the front yard. All fractional numbers should be rounded upward. 
TABLE 8.1. LANDSCAPE SCREENING MATRIX 
Abutting Zone Subject Zone R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MHP PF CBD I-G CBD I-OS LC HC I-1 I-2 R-2 D D D D D D D D D D D D R-3 C C C D D D D D D D D D R-4 C C C C D D D D D D D D MHP C C C C C C D D D D D D PF D D D D D D D D D D D D CBD-1-G B B B B B B D D D D D D CBD-1-OS B B B B B B D D D D D D CBD-2 B B B B B B D D D D D D LC B B B B B B D D D D D D HC B B B B B B D D D D D D I-1 A A A A A A A A C C D D I-2 A A A A A A A A C C D D  
    Understory trees may be substituted for required canopy trees at a ratio of two understory trees for each canopy tree. However, understory trees may not be substituted for more than 50% of the canopy trees required. 
2.	If a parking or paved area is visible from the roadway, but there are no loading areas, vehicle storage areas, or significant trucking activities in view from the roadway, a Type-C screen shall be required. 
3.	If there are loading areas, vehicle storage, or significant trucking activities visible from the roadway, a Type-B screen shall be required to screen these activities, with a Type-C screen being required for any remaining areas. 
Sec. 8-5. - Landscaping requirements for on-premises parking areas. 
A.	Parking lots with 20 or fewer spaces. Parking lots having 20 or fewer parking spaces shall require no landscaping internal to the parking area. 
B.	Parking lots with 21 to 100 spaces. Parking lots having 21 to 100 parking spaces shall allocate five percent of the parking area to landscaping. 
C.	Parking lots with more than 100 spaces. Parking lots having more than 100 parking spaces shall allocate eight percent of the parking area to landscaping. 
D.	Required number of trees. One canopy tree for every ten parking spaces over 20 shall be required. In cases where it is not possible to allocate sufficient landscape space to support a canopy tree, or where other site limitations make canopy trees impractical (i.e. proximity to overhead lines, or underground utilities.), the planning commission may approve the substitution of trees of lower height. 
E.	Design standards. Landscaping required for on-premises parking lots shall be provided in accordance with the following design principles: 
1.	All required landscaping shall be located within the perimeter of the parking area. 
2.	Landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot, and shall not be located in any other, required landscape screen area. 
3.	All landscaped beds which abut a parking lot, or any landscaped area which is internal to a parking lot shall be protected with continuous concrete curbing. 
4.	Trees shall be installed in such a manner that shading of parked vehicles is maximized. 
5.	Landscaping shall be so arranged so as not to jeopardize security and surveillance. 
Sec. 8-6. - General landscaping standards. 
A.	Areas required to be landscaped for one- or two-family properties. For single- or two-family residential properties, all land area not covered by buildings or paved surfaces shall be landscaped with lawn or landscape beds. Gardens shall be an exception to this provision. 
B.	Areas required to be landscaped for all uses other than one- or two-family properties. Other than one- or two-family properties, all land area not covered by buildings or parking surface shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape site plan submitted to the planning commission. The landscape plan shall indicate what type of ground cover is proposed outside of planting beds. The planning commission may permit areas to be left in a natural state, but only in cases where such areas meet the intent of this article for screening, and when such areas have significant aesthetic or natural value. 
C.	Design standards. 
1.	If plants or shrubs are required as part of a screen involving a fence or wall, such plants and shrubs shall be placed on the less intense side of the wall, or where abutting a roadway they shall be placed on the road side of the fence or wall. 
2.	All landscaped areas shall be installed in such a manner so as not to alter drainage patterns either on-premises or on adjacent properties, except in conformance with an approved drainage plan. 
3.	All landscaping shall be kept free of all clear-vision areas as defined in this ordinance. 
D.	Landscape area requirements for canopy trees. A landscaped area of 200 square feet shall be required for an individual canopy tree. This requirement may be reduced to 100 square feet in cases where an irrigation system is to be installed. An additional 50 square feet of landscaped area shall be required for each additional canopy tree where grouped. 
E.	Landscape area requirements for understory trees. A landscaped area of 100 square feet shall be required for an individual understory tree. This requirement may be reduced to 25 square feet in cases where an irrigation system is to be installed. An additional ten square feet of landscaped area shall be required for each additional understory tree in a group. 
F.	Required tree qualities. Required trees and other landscape materials to be used near roadways, rights-of-way, or in parking areas shall have the following qualities: 
1.	Longevity, 
2.	No sap, 
3.	Hearty and resistant to motor exhaust fumes and road salt, and 
4.	Limited root system. 
G.	Evaluation of screening effects. Compliance with attainment of required screening effects or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field observation of existing vegetation. 
H.	Permitted time period to achieve required screen effects. Where specific screening effects are required, all plant materials shall achieve the horizontal and vertical effects required of this ordinance within four years of initial installation. 
I.	Protection of existing vegetation during construction. Where existing vegetation on a site is proposed for retention, a highly visible fence shall be erected along the drip-line of canopy trees. In the case of grouped vegetation, five feet from the boundary of the vegetation to be retained. 
Sec. 8-7. - Tree and plant species. 
A.	Recommended tree and plant species. As identified in section 8-1, one of the intentions of this article is the maintenance of a regional-native-landscape character. This is important because of the unique natural landscape quality that is found in the Hudsonville area. A landscape composition that occurs no where else in the region or even the midwest. 
    The importance stems from preserving a declining supply of native plants, which so many animals, birds, and insects depend upon for their survival. These species have adapted with a symbiotic relationship that goes back several thousand years. In many cases exotic (non-native) species, do not provide the proper opportunities for food, shelter, and nesting. If native vegetation is lost, the preservation of Hudsonville's fauna is put at risk. 
    For the above reasons, the following list of plant species is recommended for use in required landscape plantings: 
1.	Canopy trees. 
Common Name Horticultural Name: Sugar Maple Acer Saccharum Beech Fagus Grandifolia Yellow Birch Betula Alleghaniensis Paper Birch Betula Papyrifera White Ash* Fraxinus Americana Black Walnut Juglans Nigra Ironwood Ostrya Virginiana Black Cherry Prunus Serotina Choke Cherry Prunus Virginiana Swamp White Oak Quercus Bicolor Red Oak* Quercus Rubra Black Oak* Quercus Velutina Basswood* Tilia Americana Slippery Elm Ulmus Rubra Rock Elm Ulmus Thomasii Eastern White Pine Pinus Strobus  
    * Do well as street trees. 
2.	Understory trees. 
Common Name Horticultural Name Alleghany Serviceberry Amelanchier Laevis Eastern Redbud Cercis Canadensis Alternate-Leaf Dogwood Cornus Alternifolia Hazelnut Corylus Americana Downy Hawthorne Crataegus Mollis Leatherwood Dirca Palustris Creeping Strawberry-Bush Euonymus Obovata Blue Ash Fraxinus Quadrangulata Sand Cherry Prunus Pumila Nannyberry Viburnum Lentago  
3.	Shrubs. 
Common Name Horticultural Name Chokeberry Aronia Prunifolia Silky Dogwood Cornus Ammomum Red-Twigged Dogwood Cornus Stolonifera Witch-Hazel Hamemelis Virginiana Winterberry Ilex Verticilata Spicebush Lindera Bezoin Ninebark Physocarpus Opulifolius Swamp Rose Rosa Palustris Blackberry Rubus Alleghensis Dwarf Rasberry Rubus Pubescens Sandbar Willow Salix Interior Pussy Willow Salix Discolor Common Elder Sambucus Canadensis Sassafras Sassafrass Albidum American Bladdernut Staphylea Trifolia Mapleleaf Viburnum Viburnum Acerifolium High-Bush Cranberry Viburnum Trilobum Common Juniper Juniperus Communis Canada Yew Taxus Canadensis  
    Cultivars of the plants listed above may also be used as an acceptable substitute. 
B.	Required amount of recommended tree and plant species. To achieve the maintenance of a regional native landscape a minimum of 60% of all plants included in the landscape portion of a site plan shall be selected from the recommended plant list as identified in subsection A above. 
C.	Maximum amount of any one tree. No one tree or plant species may make up more than 25% of the total amount of landscape plantings being proposed on the site plan. 
D.	Prohibited trees. The following trees shall not be permitted in curb lawns, parking areas, or in close proximity to utility lines as they split easily; their wood is brittle and breaks easily; their roots clog drains and sewers; and/or they are unusually susceptible to disease or insect pests: 
Common Name Horticultural Name Boxelder Acer Negundo Ginkgo Ginkgo Biloba (female only) Honey Locust Gleditsia Triacanthos (with thorns) Mulberry Morus Species Poplars Populus Species Black Locust Robinia Species Willows Salix Species American Elm Ulmus Americana Siberian Elm U. Pumila Slippery Elm; Red Elm U. Rubra Chinese Elm U. Parvifola  
Sec. 8-8. - Required tree and plant sizes at installation. 
A.	Minimum sizes at time of installation. 
1.	Canopy trees shall have at least a two-and-a-half-inch caliper. 
2.	Understory trees, except ornamental trees, shall have at least a two-inch caliper. 
3.	Ornamental trees shall have at least a one-and-a-half-inch caliper. 
4.	Evergreen trees shall have at least a five-foot height. 
5.	Deciduous shrubs shall have at least a two-foot height. 
6.	Upright evergreen shrubs shall have at least a two-foot height. 
7.	Spreading evergreen shrubs shall have at least a 24-inch spread. 
B.	Measurement. The above required heights shall be measured from the ground level to the top of the tree or shrub after installation. 
Sec. 8-9. - Berms. 
A.	Slope ratio. Berms shall be constructed so as to maintain a side slope not to exceed a one-foot rise to a three-foot run ratio. 
B.	Berm covering. Berm areas not containing planting beds shall be covered with grass and be maintained in a healthy growing condition. 
C.	Plantings on berms. When landscaping is to be planted on a berm, emphasis shall be on placing such materials on the side of the berm facing the less intense use, or on the road side of a berm. 
D.	Retaining wall or terrace. If a berm is constructed with a retaining wall or by terracing, the earthen slope shall face the exterior of the site. 
Sec. 8-10. - Screen walls or fences. 
A.	Materials. All screen walls and fences shall be constructed with durable, weather-resistant, and easily maintainable materials. 
B.	Compatibility with surroundings. The color, materials, finishes and forms of all walls shall be compatible with surrounding land uses or structures, as determined by the planning commission. 
C.	Permitted openings in surface. Except in cases where total opaqueness is required, walls may be constructed with openings that do not exceed 20% of the surface. 
Sec. 8-11. - Installation and maintenance. 
A.	Installation of all required landscaping or performance guarantee of same required before occupancy. 
1.	If construction is completed during a planting season, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping complies with the requirement of this article of the zoning ordinance. 
2.	If construction is completed in an off-planting season, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued only after the owner provides a performance guarantee as provided in section 15-16 of this ordinance. 
B.	Standard for maintenance. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly state, free from weeds and debris. All grass shall be maintained at a height not to exceed eight inches, unless specifically approved by the planning commission. 
C.	Responsibility for maintenance. The owner, tenant, or their agent shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintenance. 
D.	Continuing maintenance required. All required landscaping shall be maintained on a continuing basis. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary to meet the desired effect of the original, landscape plan approval. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to make a determination of ordinance violation with regard to landscaping. If the zoning administrator issues a notice of violation, the owner shall have six months to correct the landscaping violation. 
Sec. 8-12. - Phasing. 
    If a project is constructed in phases, the landscape screen may also be constructed in phases. The planning commission shall determine the extent of landscaping required of each phase, based on: 
A.	Adjacent land uses; 
B.	Distance between land uses; 
C.	Operational characteristics, both on- and off-site; 
D.	Building heights; 
E.	Physical characteristics of the site; and 
F.	Percentage of total development which each phase represents. 
Sec. 8-13. - Landscape screening waiver. 
A.	Factors in considering waiver. If inspection of the site reveals that adequate landscaping screens already exist on-premises, or site-specific qualities minimize the need for landscaping in specific areas, the planning commission may waive in whole or in part any landscape requirement contained in this article. The following factors shall be evaluated by the planning commission in making any waiver of landscaping requirements: 
1.	Topography variations, 
2.	Existence of natural vegetation, 
3.	Existing and proposed building placement, 
4.	Adjacent land uses, 
5.	Existence of floodplain or other non-developable areas, 
6.	Recommendation of zoning administrator, and 
7.	Meeting the intent of this article of the ordinance. 
B.	Planning commission obligation. The planning commission shall not be obligated to make any waiver of landscaping requirements. 
ARTICLE 9. - DRIVEWAY STANDARDS 

Sec. 9-1. - Purpose. 
A.	Driveways, much like intersecting streets, create points of conflict with through traffic. Thus, driveways can interfere with the intended function of the roadway to move traffic safely and efficiently. The potential impacts generated by driveway traffic are dependent on a number of factors, including the number of vehicles using the driveway, driveway placement and design, the number of lanes in the roadway, and the traffic volumes on the roadway. A driveway serving a large commercial center can be viewed much like a major intersecting street, while a single-family residential driveway has a much less detrimental effect. To reduce the negative impacts created by driveway operations, the standards outlined in this ordinance are intended to: 
1.	Identify driveway design criteria that promote safe and efficient ingress and egress at driveways; 
2.	Reduce the number of driveways, increase the spacing between driveways and between driveways and intersections, and reduce the number of poorly aligned driveways; 
3.	Reduce the frequency of conflicts or the area of conflict at some or all driveways by limiting or preventing certain maneuvers; 
4.	Reduce both the frequency and severity of conflicts by providing separate paths and storage areas for turning vehicles and queues; 
5.	Acknowledge that substantial public funds have been invested to develop a network to move traffic safely and efficiently; and 
6.	Recognize that property owners have an inherent right to access public roadways, although reasonable access may be indirect in some instances; 
B.	The following standards provide basic principles for access design and control on arterial and major collector roadways. The standards will address most design concerns. Engineering judgment, however, will be required on a case-by-case basis when special circumstances arise. 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
A.	General definitions. Words used in this article and contained in this section shall have the meanings as defined in this section. 
    Applicant: The property owner or the property owner's authorized legal agent who is applying for a permit to connect a driveway as defined by Section 1 of Act 200 of the Public Acts of 1969, as amended. 
    Arterial and major collector roadways: Those roadways that are defined as such in the City of Hudsonville's Master Plan, as amended. (See Figure 9.1) 
    Buffer area (curb lawn): An area of the public right-of-way that is adjacent to a roadway and serves as a physical barrier to vehicular travel between road traffic and activity on the private property. 
    Circle driveway: A private drive, one-way driveway which enters and leaves private property at two points within the same frontage. 
    Clear vision area: Land acquired or used by and in accordance with standard practices of the agency having jurisdiction over the road for the purpose of maintaining unobstructed vision. 
    Commercial driveway: A driveway serving a commercial establishment, industry, government or educational institution, hospital, church, multifamily residential building, mobile home park, and all other facilities not included in the definitions for residential, field or utility structure driveways. 
    Controlled access: A road right-of-way in which owners or occupants of abutting lands, and other persons, have no legal right to access those abutting lands except at such point only, and in such manner as determined by the city. 
    Directional driveway: A driveway system designed so that traffic leaving the road is separated from and does not conflict with traffic entering the road. (Turning movements into and from the property is restricted.) 
    Divided driveway: A driveway so designed that traffic entering the driveway is separated by a traffic island from the traffic leaving the driveway. 
    Driveway offset: The minimum distance between two commercial driveways on the opposite sides of the roadway. 
    Field driveway: Any driveway serving a farm yard, cultivated or uncultivated field, timberland or undeveloped land not used for industrial, commercial or residential purposes or any temporary driveway serving such properties which may be used for industrial, commercial or residential purposes provided such temporary driveway has been approved by the planning commission. In determining whether to approve a temporary driveway, the planning commission shall consider whether such temporary driveway will be used in connection with a permitted use of the property it will serve and whether such temporary driveway and the related use will have a negative adverse effect on adjoining property owners. Temporary as used in this definition shall be a period no longer than five consecutive one-year periods as approved by the planning commission followed by a minimum period of non-use equal to the preceding period of use. 
    Frontage: The private lot line that abuts the road right(s)-of-way. 
    Intersection sight distance: The distance that an oncoming vehicle is visible to a driver stopped at a crossroad or driveway. 
    Owner's engineer: The professional engineer registered in the State of Michigan who is employed by the property owner to prepare plans and supervise construction. 
    Property owner: A person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of these, or any other party having an interest in the land involved. 
    Residential driveway: A driveway serving a private single-family or two-family dwelling. 
    Right-of-way frontage: That portion of the road right-of-way that abuts the frontage of a parcel. 
    Right-of-way line: The boundary between private property and the public lands under the legal control of the agency having jurisdiction over a road. 
    Temporary approach: A point of access that will be used for a particular purpose for a specified short period of time, not to exceed one year. After said period of time, either a permanent approach permit must be acquired and the approach built, or the approach must be removed and the right-of-way restored to its original condition. 
    Utility structure driveway: Any driveway serving a structure or utility installation, such as a pump house or substation, which operates automatically and requires only occasional access. 
B.	Design definitions. The letter designations (in parentheses) in the following definitions are also used in the design dimension figures illustrated in section 9-4. 
    Intersection angle (A): The clockwise angle from the road edge of pavement or road center line, if unpaved, to the driveway reference line, which is the edge or center line of the driveway. 
    Driveway width (B): The distance between driveway edges of pavement (or edges of the gravel surface, if applicable), measured at the point where the edges of the driveway become parallel. 
    Entering radius (C): The radius of the driveway-edge curve on the right side of a vehicle entering the applicant's property. 
    Exiting radius (D): The radius of the driveway-edge curve on the right side of a vehicle exiting the applicant's property. 
    Curb ending (E): The length of the height transition of the driveway curb from ground level to full curb height along an uncurbed road. 
    Right-turn lane length (F): The length of auxiliary lane (deceleration lane) preceding the driveway to accommodate traffic entering the applicant's property, not including taper. 
    Right-turn lane width (G): The width of the auxiliary lane measured from the edge of the adjacent through lane to the outside edge of the pavement. 
    Entering taper (H): The length of the diagonal pavement widening preceding the driveway or right-turn lane. 
    Exiting taper (J): The length of the diagonal pavement widening following the driveway. 
    Entrance drive width (K): The width of the portion of a divided or a directional driveway which has been designated or intended for the use of a vehicle entering the applicant's property. 
    Island width (M): The edge-to-edge distance between the entrance drive and exit drive. 
    Island length (N): The distance between the most extreme end points of the island, measured parallel to the entrance drive. 
    Nose offset (P): The distance between the edge of the through lane pavement and the median island of a divided or a directional driveway. 
    Curb cut (R): The length of the opening along the road curb for a straight-sided (90°) driveway. 
    Passing-lane approach length (S): The length of the auxiliary lane constructed on the opposite side of the road preceding the driveway to accommodate through traffic passing the left-turn traffic entering the applicant's property. 
    Passing-lane departing length (T): The length of the auxiliary lane constructed on the opposite side of the road following the driveway to accommodate through traffic passing the left-turn traffic entering the applicant's property. 
    Passing lane width (U): The width of the auxiliary passing lane, measured from the outside edge of the normal through lane to the outside edge of the passing lane. 
    Passing lane approaching taper (V): The length of the diagonal pavement widening preceding the passing lane. 
    Passing lane departing taper (W): The length of the diagonal pavement widening following the passing lane. 
(Amend. of 8-97) 
Sec. 9-3. - Driveway/curb-cut permit required. 
    The construction of any new driveway or the creation of any new curb-cut shall require that a permit be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
    When a curb cut permit is issued, existing curb cuts that are no longer in use shall be filled in with curb and gutter pursuant to city standards. Curb and gutter shall be installed together as one unit. 
    The zoning administrator may waive or vary this curbing requirement where unique circumstances exist. 
(Ord. No. 98-208, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 9-4. - Driveway location standards. 
A.	Purpose. Driveway spacing simplifies driving by reducing the amount of information a driver must process and react to. Locating a driveway away from the operational area of a signalized intersection decreases the potential for congestion and accidents for both through traffic and vehicles using the driveway. Adequate spacing between driveways and unsignalized roadways or other driveways can reduce confusion. Inadequate spacing requires drivers to watch for ingress and egress traffic at several points, while simultaneously trying to control their vehicle and monitor other traffic ahead of and behind them. 
B.	Commercial driveways. 
1.	Driveways shall be located so as to limit undue interference with the free movement of road traffic, to provide the required sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway grade. 
2.	Driveways, including the radii, but not including right-turn lanes, passing lanes, and tapers, shall be located entirely within the applicant's right-of-way frontage. This right-of-way frontage is determined by projecting the lot lines to the edge of pavement of the road. Encroachment of curb and radii on adjacent right-of-way frontage shall be permitted only upon written certifications from the adjacent property owner(s) (agreeing to such encroachment) and/or when the city has determined that such encroachment is necessary to preserve safe roadway conditions. 
3.	Driveways shall not be constructed along the acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers connecting to interchange ramp terminals. 
4.	Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed driveway and an adjacent intersection shall be those listed in Tables 9.1 and 9.2. Spacing requirements will vary depending upon the roadway classification (see Figure 9.1) and intersection control. The spacing measurements in Table 9.1 and Table 9.2 are from the center line of the proposed driveway to the near right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
5.	In those cases where an intersection setback for a driveway cannot be met, the planning commission may require that the drive be constructed on an alternative street, or be provided through a shared driveway which meets the applicable intersection setback. Where no other alternatives exist, the planning commission may allow construction of the drive along the lot line farthest from the intersection. 
6.	Driveway spacing requirements (distance between two driveways) shall be determined based upon posted speed limits. The driveway spacing indicated in Table 9.3 are measured from center line to center line. The planning commission may reduce the spacing distance requirements in Table 9.3, but in no case will the spacing be less than 80% of those figures. 
7.	For lots or parcels existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance, one driveway may be permitted for each separately owned parcel with less than 100 feet of frontage, provided that the parcel is wide enough for the minimum driveway width, plus the required radii. Where parcel size is insufficient, a shared driveway or other means of access may be required. 

Figure 9.1 Roadway Classification Map 
TABLE 9.1. MINIMUM DRIVEWAY SPACING BETWEEN COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAYS AND ADJACENT STREET INTERSECTIONS ALONG REGIONAL ARTERIALS 
Intersecting Street Classification Minimum Distance To Full-Movement Driveway Minimum Distance to Channelized Driveway (Right In, Right Out) Arterial 250 feet 100 feet Signalized Non-Arterial 125 Feet  75 feet Other Street 100 feet  75 feet  
TABLE 9.2. MINIMUM DRIVEWAY SPACING BETWEEN COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAYS AND ADJACENT STREET INTERSECTIONS ALONG OTHER THAN REGIONAL ARTERIALS 
Roadway Classification Minimum Distance To Full-Movement Driveway Minimum Distance to Channelized Driveway (Right In, Right Out) Arterial 200 feet 100 feet Signalized Non-Arterial 100 feet  75 feet Other Street  75 feet  75 feet  
8.	Additional driveways may be permitted for commercial property as follows: 
a.	One additional driveway may be allowed for a site with continuous frontage of 300 feet or more if no other access opportunities are available; or 
b.	Two additional driveways may be allowed for a site with continuous frontage of 600 feet or more if no other access opportunities are available. 
9.	Additional access such as that outlined above may be allowed if the applicant provides justification based upon standard traffic engineering criteria that encompass analyses of trip generation, distribution, and level of service. The city has the final decision regardless of conclusions drawn from these analyses. 
10.	Two commercial driveways may be permitted, in lieu of the above, to serve as a one-way circle drive if the frontage is 125 feet or more. 
TABLE 9.3. DRIVEWAY SPACING REQUIREMENTS 
Posted Speed (MPH) Driveway Spacing (In Feet) 25 145 30 185 35 245 40 300 45 350  
11.	To reduce left-turn conflicts, new driveways shall be aligned with those across the roadway where possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of 150 feet from those on the opposite side of the roadway. Longer offsets may be required depending on the expected, inbound left-turn volumes of the driveways. 
12.	In the case of expansion, alteration or redesign of an existing development, where it can be demonstrated that pre-existing conditions prohibit adherence to the minimum driveway spacing standards, the city may modify the driveway spacing requirements. Such modifications shall be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall spacing of a full-access driveway be less than 70 feet (center line to center line). 
13.	Adjacent property owners may, and are encouraged to, consolidate their driveways by using either a joint driveway system or a frontage road. All frontage roads are to be placed on private property outside of the right-of-way. Easements from participating property owners must be submitted to the city. 
14.	Requirements for minimum, corner or intersection sight distance for all road approaches shall be in accordance with American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines defined in Chapter 9 of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1984, as amended. Where special circumstances are present (frontage limitations, etc.), the minimum sight distances may be reduced to those shown in Table 9.4. 
Intersection sight distance will be measured 15 feet from the edge of pavement on paved roads. The eye height will be assumed to be 3.5 feet and the object height will be 3.5 feet if the above-reduced values are used. 
TABLE 9.4. MINIMUM INTERSECT OR CORNER SIGHT DISTANCES UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
Posted Speed (MPH) Driveway Spacing (In Feet) 25 145 30 185 35 245 40 300 45 350  
15.	All traffic signage and pavement markings at the proposed commercial driveway shall conform to the current Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
C.	Residential, utility, and field driveways. 
1.	One residential driveway shall be permitted for each platted lot or for unplatted residential property with less than 100 feet of frontage. 
2.	One additional residential driveway may be permitted along a local street for residential property with more than 120 feet of frontage. 
3.	In lieu of the above, two residential driveways may be permitted on the same property to serve as a one-way circle driveway if the frontage of the property is 100 feet or more along a local street. 
4.	Field entrance and utility structure driveways will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The city review will take into the proximity of the adjacent driveways and intersecting streets, as well as traffic volumes along the roadway. 
5.	Residential driveways shall be setback a minimum distance of 25 feet from any street intersection, measured from the closest point of the driveway approach to the closest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
(Ord. No. 3-242, § 2, 8-12-03) 
Sec. 9-5. - Design standards. 
    The design features described herein and the tables with their appropriate illustration of various driveway features, as shown in Figures 9.2 through 9.12, shall be used by the applicant in designing proposed driveways or driveway systems. These standard dimensions shall be used, unless the city determines that conditions require a deviation or the applicant can demonstrate cause for deviation. The city reserves the right to determine whether this deviation shall be granted. In addition, based upon anticipated traffic volumes on the driveway(s) and the roadway, type of traffic to use the driveway, type of development, and other safety and operational considerations, the city may request changes or specify particular dimensions to ensure safe operations. Design dimensions for widths in the following figures are from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. They do not include curb or gutter. 
A.	Commercial driveways. 
1.	All commercial driveways shall be paved in their entirety, using either concrete or asphalt. 
2.	All commercial driveways shall be constructed with concrete curb and gutter along the entire required-entry and exit radii for the driveway. 
3.	Two-way, undivided commercial driveways shall be designed to accommodate at least one lane of traffic in each direction. The dimensions of a two-way commercial driveway shall conform to those given in Figure 9.2. 
4.	A divided commercial driveway shall have a curbed island (with concrete curb and gutter), separating the entrance drive and exit drive. The radii forming the edges on this island shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle that will normally use the driveway. The minimum area of the island shall be 180 square feet. Figure 9.3 illustrates the required dimensions for a divided commercial driveway. 
5.	The applicant is strongly encouraged to consider the benefits of auxiliary right-turn deceleration lanes and left-turn passing lanes. These additional lanes, located at the driveway, will enhance the accessibility, safety and image of the proposed development. Traffic volumes may warrant the prohibition of left-turns at driveways on two-way two-lane roads without passing lanes. 
a.	Figure 9.4 shows when the left-turn prohibition is warranted. The dimensions of left-turn passing lanes is illustrated in Figure 9.5. 
b.	Figure 9.7 shows when a right-turn deceleration lane and/or taper is warranted. Figure 9.6 illustrates the dimensions of right-turn deceleration lanes and tapers. 
6.	Under certain special conditions, a proposed driveway may fall within or be adjacent to a roadway width transition area (i.e. 2 lanes to 3 lanes). The city, in this case, may require the commercial right-turn lane and tapers and passing lane specified under subsection 5 above to be built in accordance with Figure 9.8. This configuration shall not be used unless specifically approved by the city, and will normally be specified under the following conditions: 
a.	The centerline of the proposed driveway is located within 250 feet of the end of the taper to the widening at a main road (mile type) intersection. 
b.	The main road intersection is painted for (or expected to be painted for) three-lane operation. 
c.	The main road is 40 feet or less in width. 
d.	Based upon warrants discussed in section 9-5.A.5, a standard right-turn lane and a passing lane would be required to serve the driveway turning movements. 
7.	The dimensions of one-way commercial driveway systems shall conform to those given in Figure 9.9. 
8.	Directional commercial driveways are considered to be special cases, and each such driveway shall be designed individually. Directional driveways shall be designed to facilitate the desired turning movements and to discourage prohibited movement. Radii shall be, as approved by the city, based on the intersecting angle and the turning path of the largest vehicle that will normally use the driveway. Standard dimensions for a right-turn-in/right-turn-out-only driveway are shown in Figure 9.10. 
9.	Clear vision areas (triangular in shape) shall be maintained on both sides of all commercial drives. A clear vision area shall be determined using the following three points: 
a.	The point of intersection of the side line of a driveway projected to the roadway edge of pavement, and 
b.	Two points, 25 feet in distance from that point of intersection. One shall be measured outward from the driveway along the edge of pavement. The other shall be measured along the side driveway line leading onto the subject property. 
B.	Residential, utility, and field driveways. 
1.	All residential and utility driveways shall be paved in their entirety, using either concrete or asphalt. 
2.	Field driveways shall only be required to be paved from the roadway edge of pavement to the roadway right-of-way line. 
3.	All residential, utility, and field driveways shall be constructed with concrete curb and gutter along the entire required entry and exit radii for the driveway if this portion of the driveway is to be paved with asphalt. Concrete curb and gutter shall not be required if this portion of the driveway is to be paved with concrete. 
4.	The dimensions of a residential driveway shall conform to those given in Figure 9.11. 
5.	Field entrances may be permitted for cultivated land, timber land, or undeveloped land. The dimensions of a field entrance and of a utility structure driveway shall conform to those given in Figure 9.12. 
6.	Clear vision areas (triangular in shape) shall be maintained on both sides of all residential, utility, and field drives. A clear vision area shall be determined using the following three points: 
a.	The point of intersection of the side line of a driveway projected to the roadway edge of pavement, and 
b.	Two points, 15 feet in distance from that point of intersection. One shall be measured outward from the driveway along the edge of pavement. The other shall be measured along the side driveway line leading onto the subject property. 

Figure 9-2 Two-Way Commercial Dimensions 

Figure 9-3 Divided Commercial Driveways 

Figure 9-4 Warrant for Permitting Inbound Left Turns 

Figure 9-5 Passing Lane 

Figure 9-6 Commercial Right-Turn Lane and Taper 

Figure 9-7 Warrants for Right-Turn Deceleration Lane or Taper 

Figure 9-8 Approaching and Departing Driveway Standards 

Figure 9-9 One-Way Commercial Driveways 

Figure 9-10 Directional Driveways 

Figure 9-11 Residential Driveways 

Figure 9-12 Field entrance and Utility Structure Driveways 
ARTICLE 10. - PRIVATE STREET STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide an opportunity for the construction of private streets under specific circumstances in residential developments. Private streets shall not be permitted within non-residential developments. 
Sec. 10-2. - Eligibility for private street construction. 
A.	Residential developments. Private streets may be permitted in residential developments (including residential portions of planned unit developments and site condominium subdivisions) in conformity with the regulations of this article. The private street standards contained in this article shall be applicable to all residential planned unit developments. 
B.	Traffic volume restrictions. The approval or construction of proposed private streets shall not be permitted if such streets are projected to reach an average, daily traffic volume of 1,000 vehicles per day or more for any portion of the road, at any point in the future. All proposed roads which are projected to reach an average, daily traffic volume of 1,000 or more vehicles shall be dedicated to the city and built to public road standards. 
Sec. 10-3. - Approval required. 
    No private street may be constructed, extended, or otherwise improved without the approval of the planning commission. 
    A permit shall be required from the zoning administrator prior to the start of any construction related to private streets. 
Sec. 10-4. - Application submittal. 
    Application for a private street construction permit shall be made by submission of the following to the zoning administrator: 
A.	Application form. A completed application form, supplied by the city, containing the names and addresses of the owners and any other parties having any legal interest in the private street which is to be constructed, or the properties across such street. 
B.	Identification of involved properties. Identification by parcel number of all properties having any legal interest in the private street shall be included in the application. 
C.	Planned map. A map, drawn to scale, prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor, showing the precise location, route, dimension and design of the private street shall be included in the application. The map shall identify existing and proposed elevation contours within all areas to be disturbed or altered by the construction of the private street. 
D.	Location of utilities. The location of all public or private utilities to be located within the private street right-of-way or easement, or within 20 feet thereof, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, storm, telephone, gas, electricity, and cable television shall be included in the application. 
E.	Location of streams, drainageways and wetlands. The location of any streams, drainageways, or wetlands, as determined by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, within the proposed private street right-of-way or easement or within 100 feet thereof shall be included in the application. 
F.	Maintenance agreement or covenant. A copy of a recorded maintenance agreement or restrictive covenant which provides for the continued maintenance and repair, and the financing thereof, of the private street by the parties in interest shall be included in the application. Such agreement or covenant shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
G.	Application fee. An application fee, established by the Hudsonville City Commission shall be included in the application. 
Sec. 10-5. - Construction standards. 
    All private-street construction shall comply with the following standards and requirements: 
A.	Maximum grade. The grade of a private street shall not exceed eight percent, with the exception that the private street shall have a maximum grade of three percent for a minimum distance of 30 feet from its intersection with a public right-of-way or another private street. 
B.	Minimum grade. The minimum grade for a private street shall be 0.6 percent. 
C.	Minimum setback from adjoining lots. The improved surface of a private street shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any adjoining lot or parcel which does not derive access from the easement or private street. 
D.	Surface and base requirements. Private streets shall have an improved surface of two inches of bituminous aggregate which is at least 24 feet in width, with a minimum of six inches of aggregate base meeting Michigan Department of Transportation Specification 22A. 
E.	Cul-de-sac length restrictions. A private cul-de-sac shall not exceed 800 feet in length. However, the planning commission may permit a cul-de-sac up to 1,320 feet (1/4 mile) in cases where such a cul-de-sac would serve four or fewer dwelling units. The length of a private cul-de-sac shall be measured along its center line, from its intersection with either the centerline of a public street, or the centerline of a private street that has more than one outlet to a public street, to the terminal end of the private cul-de-sac. 
F.	Turn-around provision A private street shall be provided with a means for turn-around of vehicles, either by use of a cul-de-sac having an improved surface as required for the associated street surface and having a minimum outside radius of 40 feet, or by use of a continuous-loop street layout. 
G.	Repair of damaged areas. All areas disturbed by the construction of the private street shall be provided with topsoil, seeded with perennial grass, and protected against erosion. 
Sec. 10-6. - Easements required for private-street construction. 
    Whenever a private street shall be approved, the city may require easements as necessary for the provision of essential services. 
Sec. 10-7. - Maintenance. 
    Provision shall be made to ensure the continued repair and maintenance of the private street, and financing of the costs thereof by those property owners benefiting from the private street. Ongoing maintenance issues to be addressed shall include the physical condition of the roadway and associated utilities, proper functioning of all associated drainage systems, and timely snow removal. 
    The above shall be accomplished through use of a recorded agreement between the parties of interest to the private street, or through a restrictive covenant which shall run with the land. A copy of said agreement or restrictive covenant shall be provided to the zoning administrator prior to issuance of a permit for construction of the private street. 
Sec. 10-8. - Lot subdivision on private streets. 
    Lots may be created with frontage on private streets, provided that the lots conform to all requirements of the zoning district where the land is located, and further, that the lots shall not be created until an easement agreement for the private street is executed in full compliance with this article. 
Sec. 10-9. - Issuance of building permits for buildings on lots having access to a private street. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a dwelling unit, or other principal building to which access is provided by a private street, unless all of the following conditions are met: 
A.	Approval and permit. The private street has been approved by the planning commission and a permit for its construction has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
B.	Compliance to regulations. The design and construction of the private street complies with all regulations contained in this article. 
C.	Completion or assurance thereof. The private street has either been completed to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, or a financial guarantee in an amount equal to 11/2 times the cost of the construction and in a form acceptable to the zoning administrator has been provided. The financial guarantee shall insure the completion of the private street in accordance with the approved permit and plans within one year from the date of issuance of the building permit for the private street. 
ARTICLE 11. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 11-1. - Description and purpose. 
A.	Rationale. The use, area, height, bulk, and placement of district regulations of this ordinance are primarily applicable to the usual situation of one principal use or building on a lot. This traditional zoning approach with its rigid controls have now been recognized as being inappropriate to many medium- and large-scale developments. This traditional approach in many instances actually serves the interest of public health, safety, and welfare less than an approach which allows more flexibility and innovation in design. 
B.	Purpose. 
1.	It is the purpose of this section to provide developers and the city with a zoning process intended for the following purposes: 
a.	To promote flexibility and creativity in land use planning and design; 
b.	To encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; 
c.	To promote the conservation of natural features and resources; 
d.	To promote development substantially consistent with that of the underlying zoning district and the master plan; 
e.	To promote and ensure greater compatibility of design and use between neighboring properties; 
f.	To allow phased construction with the knowledge that subsequent phases will be approved as originally planned and approved by the city; and 
g.	To promote the efficient use of land to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land use, and utilities. 
2.	It is expressly not the intent of this section to use planned unit development principally as means of circumventing the ordinance with respect to underlying zoning district regulations. 
Sec. 11-2. - Establishment of a Planned Unit Development District. 
A.	Establishment by special use permit. A planned unit development shall be established by special use permit as provided in article 13 of this ordinance. Rezoning is not required. 
B.	Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall have the responsibility to review and approve all planned unit development applications. 
C.	Eligibility in all zoning districts. A landowner may seek approval for a PUD in any zoning district subject to meeting the regulations contained in this section. 
D.	Continuing applicability of approved planned-unit-development regulations. The location of all uses, buildings, and all mixtures thereof, all setbacks, and all other information or regulations regarding uses of properties as shown on the PUD site plan, or submitted in textual form therewith, once approved, shall represent the zoning regulations for the PUD site and shall have the full force of the zoning ordinance. Such information shall be the continuing obligation of any subsequent interests in a PUD District or parts thereof, and shall not be changed or altered except as approved through amendment or revision procedures as set forth in this section. A parcel of land that has been approved as a PUD shall not thereafter be developed or used except in accordance with the approved site plan, plat, or other regulations approved as part of the PUD approval. 
Sec. 11-3. - Permitted uses. 
A.	Uses permitted within a planned unit development include the following: 
1.	All uses permitted by right in the zoning district for which the PUD is proposed; 
2.	All uses permitted by special use permit in the zoning district for which the PUD is proposed, subject to approval by the planning commission in accordance with the regulations contained in article 13 of this ordinance; 
3.	Other uses subject to approval by the planning commission. 
B.	The planning commission shall make a determination of what other uses may be permitted based on the following criteria: 
1.	Degree to which proposed uses are consistent with the master plan designation and underlying zoning district (Those uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning district should be predominate among the proposed PUD uses.); 
2.	Compatibility of uses proposed for the PUD; 
3.	Compatibility of the PUD with surrounding development; and 
4.	Assessment of need for the proposed uses. 
Sec. 11-4. - General regulations. 
A.	Applicable regulations. All buildings and uses proposed for a planned unit development shall meet the zoning regulations for the zoning district in which it is located, unless alternative uses or standards are specifically included in the planned unit development plan and are approved, subject to the regulations in this section of the ordinance. 
B.	Construction. Until the requirements of this section are met, no construction, grading, tree removal, soil stripping, or other site improvements or changes shall commence, and no permit shall be issued therefor, on a lot or parcel for which a PUD classification is being sought. 
C.	Performance guarantee. The planning commission at their option may require a performance bond, letter of credit, or similar security measure to ensure completion of the public improvement portions of the proposed PUD plan. 
D.	Consistency with master plan. All proposed PUD's shall be consistent with the intent of the City of Hudsonville Master Plan, as amended, for the site proposed. 
E.	Compliance with other statutes and ordinances. All planned unit developments which involve the subdivision and platting of land shall, if applicable, comply with all state and local statutes and ordinances governing the subdivision of land, to include Michigan Acts 288 of 1967, as amended, Act 59 of 1978, as amended, and Chapter 21 "Subdivisions" of the City of Hudsonville Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 11-5. - Development regulations. 
A.	Minimum size. 
1.	Residential and commercial PUD's in all districts, except CBD Districts, shall be at least five acres. 
2.	Commercial PUD's in CBD Districts shall have no minimum size. 
3.	Industrial PUD's in all industrial districts shall have at least 20 acres. 
B.	Public access. Each dwelling unit or other permitted use shall have access to a public street, either directly or indirectly via a private-approach street, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated by common easement guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not necessarily required to front on a dedicated road. 
C.	Streets. The planned unit development shall contain sufficient road improvements to provide vehicular access to all areas of the site. All roads shall be constructed to city standard for either public or private streets. Where a site involves land needed for a planned or platted future public road, such road shall be proposed as a public road. 
D.	Definite benefit. The planned unit development must result in a definite benefit to residents of the City of Hudsonville, and the PUD's users, which would not be present without a PUD and which would not be available under the existing, underlying zoning classification. 
E.	Open space. 
1.	Planned unit developments shall provide a minimum of 25% of the gross area of the PUD as permanent open space. Building setback areas may be counted as open space. Roads, circulation aisles, and parking lot areas may not be counted as open space. Areas to be maintained as permanent open space and their percentage of the total PUD site shall be designated on the site plan or PUD agreement. 
2.	In relation to the location of dwelling units and natural features, open space areas shall be conveniently and equitably located throughout the PUD. 
3.	Open space areas shall have minimum dimensions which, in the planning commission's opinion, are usable for the functions intended and will be maintainable. 
4.	The planning commission may require that natural amenities, including ravines, wooded areas, unique wildlife habitats, ponds, streams and similar features, be retained as part of the permanent open-space system. 
F.	Maintenance. All privately owned, common open spaces shall conform to their intended purpose and remain as shown in the planned unit development plan. Deed restrictions and/or covenants shall govern the maintenance of privately owned common space. Required maintenance standards and/or maintenance activities shall be included in the deed restrictions and/or covenants. The deed restrictions and/or covenants shall provide for the City of Hudsonville to assess private property owners with an interest in common open space for the cost of maintenance in the event that inadequate private maintenance results in a public nuisance. Deed restrictions and covenants shall run with the land and be for the benefit of present, as well as future, property owners. 
G.	Unified control. All land included for the purpose of development within a planned unit development shall be under the unified control of the applicant (an individual, partnership, corporation, or group of individuals, partnerships, or corporations). Additionally, the applicant must provide legal documentation evidencing the same to the City of Hudsonville. 
H.	Residential density. The planning commission shall not be obligated to approve residential densities higher than those permitted for the zoning district in which the PUD is proposed. However, they may approve higher densities if it can be demonstrated that the proposed development can be achieved in a compatible manner with the surrounding development, and the following density maximums are not exceeded for any one acre within the PUD site: 
1.	4.5 units per acre in any R-1 District; 
2.	Six units per acre in the R-2 District; 
3.	Seven units per acre in the R-3 District; and 
4.	Ten units per acre in the R-4 District. 
I.	Uniformity of architecture and design. The planned unit development proposal, as a whole, shall have a consistent and compatible appearance with regard to facades, general appearance, theme, landscaping, lighting, and signage. 
J.	Project phasing. 
1.	If the proposed development is to be constructed in phases, a narrative description of that phase process that describes all work to be done in each phase shall be submitted, together with the PUD site plan. A map showing the area to be included in each phase shall also be provided. 
2.	A phase shall not be dependent upon subsequent phases for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access, adequate utility services, or open spaces and recreation facilities. 
3.	So that serious overloading of utility services, community facilities, or roads will not result, the planning commission may require that development be phased so that such development will generally balance the expenditures required by the public agencies to properly service the PUD development. 
4.	The planning commission may require that the required percentage of open space for the entire PUD be initially maintained through each phase of the PUD. The planning commission may allow redistribution of that open space upon completion of subsequent phases, as long as the required percentage of open space is maintained upon completion of all phases of the PUD. 
5.	Development shall occur in accordance with the phasing schedule submitted as a part of the approved preliminary development plan. Individual elements of the plan may be executed earlier than dates provided, however, the sequence of development may not be modified without prior written agreement of both parties. In the event the project applicant fails to complete any element of the plan consistent with the schedule, the city may rescind approval of any or all of the undeveloped planned elements included in the phasing schedule. 
K.	Compliance with general regulations. The planned unit development shall meet all applicable general regulations of this ordinance contained in article 4. 
(Ord. No. 01-228, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 11-6. - Pre-application conference. 
A.	Pre-application conference required. Prior to submitting a planned unit development application, the applicant shall be required to attend a pre-application conference with the zoning administrator. This conference may also be attended by the planning director and any consultants representing either the city or the applicant. 
    The purpose of this conference is for the applicant to inform the city of the concept of the proposed development and for the city to inform the applicant regarding land development policies, procedures, standards, and requirements of the city and other agencies in terms of the proposed development. 
B.	Statements made at conference not legally binding. Statements made at the pre-application conference shall not be legally binding commitments. 
C.	Information required for conference. The applicant shall present the following information at the pre-application conference: 
1.	Legal documentation evidencing unified control of the land upon which the planned unit development is proposed; 
2.	A legal description of the subject property; 
3.	The total number of acres to be included in the project; 
4.	The estimated number of acres to be occupied and/or devoted to or by each type of use; 
5.	The relative locations of the different uses in the proposed planned unit development; 
6.	A statement of the approximate number of residential units and/or the approximate number, type, and square footage of non-residential units; 
7.	Estimated density for residential developments; 
8.	The estimated amount of acres or percent of land to be preserved as open space or recreation space; 
9.	The location and estimated number of acres of natural resources and natural features proposed to be preserved, lost and/or replaced; 
10.	The location and estimated number of acres of wetlands and land within the 100-year floodplain; 
11.	The known deviations from the ordinance regulations being sought; and 
12.	A statement of why approval for a planned unit development is being sought, and the definite benefit to the City of Hudsonville and the eventual PUD occupants, which would not occur under the current zoning districts and regulations. 
Sec. 11-7. - Preliminary development plan and submission requirements. 
    Following the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit 16 copies of a preliminary development plan, along with fee, to the zoning administrator. The preliminary development plan shall contain the following information: 
A.	The name, address, and phone number of firm or individual who prepared the plan, owner of the property and applicant (if other than the owner); 
B.	The name of the proposed development; 
C.	The common description of property and complete legal description; 
D.	The dimensions of all property boundaries and total acreage of the property; 
E.	The existing zoning and land use of the proposed site and all adjacent properties; 
F.	A map showing proposed land use and a statement indicating the definite benefit of the proposed PUD to the City of Hudsonville and the eventual PUD occupants, which would not occur under the current zoning districts and regulations; 
G.	The location of existing and proposed right-of-way widths of all adjoining and internal roads, and layout of all internal roads; 
H.	The proposed acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes and proposed accesses; 
I.	An estimate of trip generation for each phase of the project; 
J.	The location of all parking areas and, if known, the number of spaces; 
K.	A description of intentions with respect to the provision of water and sewer; 
L.	The location of areas, and percent of site to be preserved as open or recreational space; 
M.	A map and written analysis of natural features and manmade features (The map and analysis shall show the location and nature of significant natural and manmade features on and near the site. Such features may include drainage courses, floodplains, drains, wood lots, and wetlands); 
N.	A gross and net density calculation, number and types of units, and minimum floor area per dwelling unit for residential developments; 
O.	The general plan concept indicating each proposed use, square footage or acreage allocated to each use, approximate locations of each principal structure and use, and set backs (If available, typical floor plan and elevation for each building shall be shown.); 
P.	A description of applicant's intentions regarding selling or leasing of land, or portions thereof; 
Q.	The specifications of each deviation from the applicable ordinance regulations which will be sought to be approved, and the safeguards, features, and/or planning mechanisms proposed to achieve the objectives intended to be accomplished by the regulation from which a deviation is being sought; 
R.	A topographical map, unless waived by the zoning administrator; and 
S.	If the PUD is to be phased, a development schedule for each phase of the PUD, which must include estimated dates for site plan approval and completion of construction for each phase of the PUD plan. 
Sec. 11-8. - Planning commission review of preliminary development plan. 
    The preliminary development plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission at both an informal and formal session of the planning commission. 
A.	Placement on informal session agenda. The zoning administrator, upon receipt of all required materials for the preliminary development plan, shall place the plan on the informal agenda for the next available meeting. 
B.	Informal session review and preparation of statement of findings and recommendations. The planning commission shall review the preliminary development plan at an informal session and subsequently have prepared a statement of findings and recommendations. This statement shall address the following: 
1.	Whether the preliminary development plan meets the regulations as set forth in this article of the ordinance, and a determination by the planning commission as to whether definite benefit and consistency with the City of Hudsonville Master Plan has been adequately demonstrated; 
2.	Identification of additional studies which the planning commission, based upon their review of the plan, feel are warranted (Such studies may include, but are not limited to, 
a.	A traffic impact assessment, 
b.	An environmental impact assessment, 
c.	A community impact statement, 
d.	A fiscal impact assessment, 
e.	A market needs assessment, and 
f.	A utility impact assessment; 
3.	Planning commission recommendations, pursuant to having the preliminary development plan brought into compliance with the regulations contained in this section of the ordinance; and 
4.	If no additional studies are being requested, identification of the date for public hearing and review of the plan in formal session, unless additional time is needed by the applicant to make plan modifications, the public hearing date should be set for the next available meeting for which the public hearing can be properly noticed. If additional studies are requested, the applicant shall present such information at a second informal session, at which time the public hearing date would be set. 
C.	Statement of findings and recommendations made part of informal session minutes. The statement of findings and recommendations shall be made a part of the official meeting minutes, and a copy shall be provided to the applicant. Copies shall also be provided to the city commission a minimum of 14 days prior to the public hearing date. 
D.	Formal session/public hearing. A public hearing on the preliminary development plan shall be held at a formal session, in accordance with the public hearing requirements for special uses contained in article 13 of this ordinance. 
E.	Planning commission options for action The planning commission, within 30 days following the public hearing, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plan. The planning commission's decision with regard to the preliminary development plan shall be incorporated into a statement of conclusions. This statement shall specify the decision, basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed relating to an affirmative decision. In reviewing the preliminary development plan, the planning commission shall evaluate compliance with the regulations contained in this article of the ordinance, with particular emphasis on adequate demonstration of definite benefit and consistency with the City of Hudsonville Master Plan. 
Sec. 11-9. - Effect of preliminary plan approval. 
    Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall have the following effects: 
A.	Applicant rights. Approval shall confer a right to the applicant, for a period of two years, that the uses and regulations that were approved as part of the preliminary plan shall not be changed, provided that subsequent planning and/or construction are diligently being pursued. 
B.	Authorization to file final site plan. Approval shall authorize the applicant to file for final site plan approval for all or any phase of the development shown on the approved preliminary plan. 
C.	Authorization for construction of approved site improvements. Approval shall authorize construction of on-premises improvements for which final design and location have been determined and planning commission approval has been granted. Grading, tree removal, and other changes in the existing topography and natural features shall be limited to the minimum required to construct approved buildings or facilities. 
D.	Preliminary plat application authorization. Approval shall authorize the applicant to file a preliminary plat. 
Sec. 11-10. - Submission requirements for final development plan. 
A.	Final plan submission. Within two years following receipt of preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator 16 copies of a final PUD plan. If the final plan has not been submitted within such period, the preliminary plan approval shall lapse, and the applicant shall have to recommence the review process. The planning commission may extend the time frame for submission of the final plan upon a showing by the applicant that no significant change of circumstance has occurred. 
B.	Final development plan contents. The final development plan shall contain the following: 
1.	A final site plan meeting all the requirements for site plan review under article 15 of this ordinance; 
2.	The name, address, and telephone number of the firm or individual who prepared the plan, owner of the property, and the applicant (if other than the owner); 
3.	The dimensions of all property boundaries and total acreage of the property; 
4.	The identification of specific uses for all proposed buildings; 
5.	The proposed acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes and proposed accesses; 
6.	The specifications of each deviation from the applicable ordinance regulations which will be sought to be approved, and the safeguards, features, and/or planning mechanisms proposed to achieve the objectives intended to be accomplished by the regulation from which a deviation is being sought; 
7.	A description of applicant's intentions regarding selling or leasing of land, or portions thereof land; 
8.	The location of, proposed uses of, and percent of site to be preserved as open or recreational space; 
9.	A description of all known natural resources and natural features, and a detail of those to be preserved; 
10.	A gross density calculation, number and types of units, and minimum floor area per dwelling unit for residential developments; 
11.	At least a sketch of the exterior facades of all buildings and structures which are to be erected; 
12.	The legal instruments setting forth a plan or manner of permanent care and maintenance of common areas and facilities (These instruments shall become a part of the approved plat or final site plan, whichever is applicable.); and 
13.	A declaration of covenants and restrictions filed by the developer where property owners associations (POA's) are to be used to maintain and preserve common areas and facilities. 
The declaration of covenants and restrictions shall include the following provisions, but shall not be limited to them: 
a.	A POA shall be established before any dwelling units or businesses in the PUD are sold or leased. 
b.	Membership in the POA shall be mandatory for each buyer and for any successive owner, and shall be so specified in the covenants. 
c.	Restrictions shall be permanent. 
d.	The POA shall be made responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and maintenance of common areas and facilities. 
e.	Property owners shall pay their pro rated share of the costs, and it shall be so specified in the covenants. (Assessments levied by the POA can become a lien on the property.) 
f.	A POA shall have authority to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. 
g.	Prior to approval of the final PUD plan, the planning commission and city attorney shall review the proposed by-laws and articles of incorporation of any POA. 
Sec. 11-11. - Planning commission review of final development plan. 
    The final PUD development plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission at both an informal and formal session of the planning commission. 
A.	Placement on informal session agenda. The zoning administrator, upon receipt of all required materials for the final development plan, shall place the final plan on the agenda for the next available meeting, under the informal portion of the meeting. 
B.	Requirement for planning commission to prepare statement of findings and recommendations. Following review at the informal session, the planning commission shall have prepared a statement of findings and recommendations. This statement shall address the following: 
1.	Whether the final development plan meets the regulations as set forth in this section of the ordinance; 
2.	Planning commission recommendations, pursuant to having the final development plan brought into compliance with this ordinance section; and 
3.	Identification of date for public hearing and formal session review by the planning commission. (Unless the applicant requires additional time for plan modifications, the public hearing shall be set for the next available planning commission meeting for which the hearing can be properly noticed.) 
C.	Statement of findings and recommendations made part of informal session minutes. The statement of findings and recommendations shall be made a part of the official meeting minutes. A copy of the statement shall be forwarded to the applicant within two weeks of the informal meeting. 
D.	Requirement for public hearing. A public hearing on the final PUD development plan shall be held in accordance with the public hearing requirement for special uses contained in article 13. 
E.	Planning commission options for action. The planning commission, within 30 days following the public hearing, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final development plan. The planning commission's decision shall be incorporated into a statement of conclusions. This statement shall specify the decision, basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed relating to an affirmative decision. 
Sec. 11-12. - Effect of final approval. 
    An approved, final PUD development plan, including any conditions imposed, shall constitute the official zoning regulations for the property. All future improvements and uses shall be in conformity with the approved, final development plan. An approved, final development plan entitles the applicant to apply for building permits. 
Sec. 11-13. - Amendment to planned unit development plans. 
A.	Amendment requests. A developer may request an amendment to an approved, preliminary or final PUD plan. Any amendment which results in a major change, as defined in this section, shall be submitted to the planning commission. Submittal shall follow the procedures required for original submittal and review, in full. 
    A request for amendment, including the reasons for such amendment, shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator. Such reasons may be based upon such considerations as changing social or economic conditions, potential improvements in design, unforeseen difficulties, or reasons mutually affecting the interests of the city and developer. 
B.	Major changes. Modifications to be considered major changes, for which amendment is required, shall include one or more of the following: 
1.	Change in concept of development; 
2.	Change in use or character of the development; 
3.	Change in type of dwelling unit; 
4.	Change in the number of dwelling units; 
5.	Change in nonresidential floor area of more than five percent; 
6.	Change in lot coverage of more than one percent; 
7.	Rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts; 
8.	Change in the character or function of any street; 
9.	Reduction in land area set aside for common open space or the relocation of such area(s); or 
10.	Increase in building height. 
C.	Request for minor modifications. A developer may request approval of modifications which constitute minor changes to an approved, preliminary or final PUD plan, as defined in this section. 
1.	The applicant shall submit the proposed modifications to the zoning administrator, who shall have the authority to approve or deny the modification request. If the zoning administrator is unsure if the modifications constitute a minor change, such determination shall be made by the planning commission. 
2.	If modifications are approved by the zoning administrator, revised drawings shall be signed by the applicant and the owner(s) of record, or the legal representative(s) of the owner(s), and maintained as part of the permanent zoning file for the PUD development. 
D.	Minor changes. Modifications to be considered minor changes shall include, among other similar modifications, the following: 
1.	A change in residential floor area; 
2.	A change in nonresidential floor area of five percent or less; 
3.	Minor variations in layout which do not constitute major changes; and/or 
4.	A change in lot coverage of one percent or less. 
Sec. 11-14. - Expiration of plan approvals. 
    A preliminary PUD plan shall expire two years after approval by the planning commission, unless a final PUD plan for the PUD, or first phase of the PUD, is submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. Subsequent phases of the preliminary plan shall expire if final plans for that phase are not submitted within one year of the proposed site plan submittal date. The applicant/developer may apply to the planning commission for an extension to the submittal deadline. However, this must be done prior to the plan expiration. 
A.	Expiration by failure to initiate project. A final PUD plan shall expire if a building permit has not been issued and construction started within 180 days from the date of approval. 
B.	Period of completion of final planned unit development plans. Final PUD plans shall be completed within two years of the date of preliminary plan approval. For phased PUD's, all phases shall be completed within five years from the date of approval of the first phase. 
C.	Phase sequencing. Unless the developer has requested and the planning commission has approved an extension of time, if the applicant/developer fails to meet any completion deadlines, the planning commission shall not review or approve final site plans for any subsequent phases of the PUD. 
D.	Removal of planned unit development zoning designation for failure to construct. If any preliminary or final plan approval has expired and there has been no start of construction, the planning commission shall have no obligation to continue the approved PUD zoning and may redesignate the zoning regulations of the underlying district or any other district. 
Sec. 11-15. - Extension of time limits. 
    Time limits set forth in this article may be extended upon showing by the developer that changed physical or economic factors, or consumer demand require a time extension. Such time extension shall be by planning commission approval only. The developer shall submit to the zoning administrator a statement of the proposed time extension and the reasons for the extension. The zoning administrator shall then have the proposed time extension placed on the planning commission's agenda. 
Sec. 11-16. - Subdivision plats. 
A.	Following approval of the preliminary PUD plan by the planning commission, a preliminary plat for all or part of a PUD may be submitted for review and approval. 
B.	Plats in a PUD shall conform to Michigan Acts 288 of 1967, as amended, and chapter 21, Subdivisions, of the City of Hudsonville Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
Sec. 11-17. - Site condominiums. 
    All site condominiums shall conform to Michigan Act 59 of 1978, as amended, and article 12 of this ordinance, as amended. 
ARTICLE 12. - SITE CONDOMINIUMS 

Sec. 12-1. - Applicable regulations. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 141 of the Condominium Act, (MCLA 559.241), Public Act 59, of 1978, as amended, all site condominium subdivisions shall be required to comply with all articles of this ordinance. Site condominium subdivisions shall only be permitted upon approval by the planning commission under the site plan review process as stated in article 15 of this ordinance. 
    The intent of this article is to allow comparable review of site condominium subdivisions with development under conventional platting, with regard to meeting ordinance regulations. This article is required because of the different design terms which are used for site condominium subdivisions. 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be used in consideration of all site condominium projects. 
    Building envelope: The ground area occupied, or to be occupied, by the principal structure which is, or is intended to be, placed on a building site, together with any attached accessory structures, e.g., house and attached garage. 
    Building site (condominium unit): Regardless of use, that portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. The building site shall include the building envelope and limited common area. 
    Condominium structure: Any building or structure constructed upon a building site (condominium unit). 
    Site condominium subdivision: A division of land, on the basis of condominium ownership, which is not subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended. An example of a site condominium subdivision, illustrating some of the above terms, is provided in Figure 12.1. 
Figure 12-1 Example of Site Condominium Subdivision 
Sec. 12-3. - Equation of conventional development terminology with site-condominium subdivision terminology. 
    The following equation of terms shall be used in applying ordinance standards to a site condominium subdivision: 
A.	All regulations pertaining to a lot shall apply to the building site in a condominium subdivision. 
B.	All regulations pertaining to dwelling or building height, width, or size shall apply to condominium structure. 
C.	Required setbacks shall apply to all site condominium subdivisions and shall be measured as follows: 
1.	The front yard setback shall be measured from nearest road right-of-way line to the building envelope; 
2.	The side yard setback shall be measured from the side of the building envelope to the side building site line; and 
3.	The rear yard shall be measured from the rear line of the building envelope to the rear line of the building site. 
D.	Regulations for building-to-building spacing shall be measured from building envelope to building envelope. 
Sec. 12-4. - Application of zoning ordinance standards. 
    The city, in reviewing a site condominium subdivision plan, may require any change which is based on meeting the intent of the applicable district regulations. 
Sec. 12-5. - Required plan content for site condominium subdivisions. 
    All site condominium subdivision and construction plans shall include the required information for site plan review as identified in article 15 of this ordinance. In addition, a copy of the proposed master deed and any other restrictive covenants shall be submitted. 
Sec. 12-6. - Master deed and restrictive covenants. 
    The condominium project developer or proprietor shall furnish the zoning administrator with one copy of the recorded master deed, and one copy of all restrictive covenants for the condominium project. 
Sec. 12-7. - Option for site condominium planned unit development. 
    Site condominium subdivision or construction plans shall have the option of being reviewed as a planned unit development, subject to the regulations contained in article 11 of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 13. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 13-1. - Purpose. 
    The intent of this article is to provide an opportunity for uses to be considered for approval which would generally be compatible with uses permitted by right within a given district, but due to specific activities or qualities, may not be compatible at all locations. This article identifies the discretionary and nondiscretionary standards which the planning commission shall use in reviewing special use applications. 
    This article is also intended to provide an opportunity for the planning commission to review and take action on those uses which have not been specifically identified within the ordinance. 
Sec. 13-2. - Designated review authority. 
    The planning commission shall have final review authority for all special land uses. 
Sec. 13-3. - Application and approval procedure. 
A.	Applicant qualification. Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application for a special use permit. 
B.	Processing done through zoning administrator. All applications for special use permits shall be processed through the zoning administrator. 
C.	Payment of fee. The required fee for special use permit review shall be paid at the time the application is submitted to the zoning administrator. 
D.	Application review Applications involving development plans shall be reviewed pursuant to the site plan review process outlined in article 15 of this ordinance. Applications which do not involve development plans may be acted on by the planning commission, following the required public hearing. 
    Information to be submitted with the application shall be identified on the application form. In addition, special uses involving development plans shall provide the information required in article 15 for site plan review. 
E.	Requirement of public hearing. Following the submission of the required application materials, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Michigan Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended. If the special use permit application does not involve a development plan requiring site plan review, and does not require that the planning commission make a decision based on discretionary standards, a public hearing shall not be required. 
F.	Planning commission options for action. The planning commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions applications for special use permits. The decision of the planning commission regarding any special use permit application shall be recorded in the official meeting minutes. Such record shall specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. 
Sec. 13-4. - Temporary special use permits. 
A.	Permissible issuance In cases where it is anticipated that a use will only be needed for a specified period of time (i.e. portable classrooms), or in cases where compatibility cannot be easily determined and a trial period is desired, the planning commission shall have the authority to issue temporary special use permit approval. 
B.	Expiration date. If the planning commission approves a temporary special use permit, it shall establish the expiration date of such approval in its motion of approval. The planning commission shall not initially approve a special use permit for more than a two-year period. 
C.	Extensions. The planning commission may allow one extension for a temporary special use permit. Such extension shall not exceed a period of one year. 
D.	Planning commission options upon expiration. Upon final expiration of a temporary special use permit approval, the planning commission may terminate the use or grant it a permanent special use approval. 
Sec. 13-5. - Time frame of validity for permanent special use approval. 
A.	Expiration for failure to initiate. In cases where the special use which is approved has not been initiated or substantial construction started within one year of the date of approval, and an application for extension has not been filed as provided in this section, the approval shall be terminated. 
B.	Extension of approved period. Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the one-year approval period, the planning commission may authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than one year. Such extension shall only be granted based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a reasonable likelihood of commencing construction within the one year extension. 
Sec. 13-6. - General standards for approval. 
    To receive approval from the planning commission all special uses shall meet all of the following general standards: 
A.	Compatible with master plan. The special use shall be compatible and in accordance with the goals and policies contained in the City of Hudsonville Master Plan, as amended, and not violate the intent of the zoning district in which the use is proposed. 
B.	Compatible with existing and planned future uses. The special use shall be constructed, operated and maintained to be compatible with the existing or planned future uses in the zoning district in which it is located. Where the proposed special use abuts such districts, compatibility with uses in adjacent zoning districts shall be required. 
C.	Served with public facilities and services. The special use shall be served adequately by public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage systems, and water and sewage facilities. 
D.	Free of adverse impact conditions. The special use shall not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, and equipment or conditions of operation that will endanger or be detrimental to the natural environment, public health, safety, or welfare, by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odors, explosive materials, blight, or other such nuisance. 
E.	Economic viability. The special use shall not create excessive additional requirements, at public cost, for public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
Sec. 13-7. - Standards for specific special land uses. 
    This section identifies specific standards for individual special land uses which shall be met in addition to those listed in section 13-6. 
A.	Planned unit developments. Planned unit developments shall meet all the requirements included in article 11 of this ordinance. 
B.	Group day care homes. Group day care homes shall be permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts if they meet all of the following standards: 
1.	Group day care homes shall be licensed by the State of Michigan under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended. 
2.	A minimum of 400 square feet of general activity space must be provided within the dwelling unit. General activity space shall not include hallways, bathrooms, kitchens, or bedrooms. 
3.	A minimum outdoor play area of 5,000 square feet shall be provided. The outdoor play area shall not be located within the required front yard setback area. 
The planning commission may waive the requirement for outdoor play area on-premises if they feel there exists suitable outdoor play area of equal size within 500 feet of the dwelling unit. 
4.	Group day care homes shall only be permitted in a safe environment. Such environment, both on premises and adjacent to such property, shall be free from nuisance conditions which would place children's health or safety at risk. Nuisance conditions might include, but are not limited to, unacceptable exposure to traffic, noise, air contaminants, vibration, explosive materials, or other dangerous commercial or industrial activities. 
As a condition of approval, the planning commission may require any site improvement which they feel is necessary to ensure the health and safety of the children to be present on the premises. 
5.	Group day care homes shall not cause a basic change in the residential character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located, nor shall it result in any nuisance condition to residents of the neighborhood in which it is to be located. 
In determining whether potential for a nuisance situation exists, the planning commission shall evaluate the following factors: 
a.	Traffic volumes to be generated into the neighborhood once the group day care home is in operation; 
b.	Adequacy of parking or drop-off sites; and 
c.	Presence of other group day care homes or similar uses in the immediate area, and any complaints on record regarding the same uses. 
(If there are existing group day care homes or similar uses already located in the neighborhood where the group day care home is proposed, the planning commission shall evaluate both the individual and collective impacts of these facilities in making a determination of a nuisance situation.) 
C.	Child care centers. Child care centers shall be permitted in any zoning district if they meet all of the following standards: 
1.	Child care centers shall be licensed by the State of Michigan under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973. 
2.	Child care centers shall have a minimum of 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child. Play area shall be computed exclusive of hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and closets, and areas used specifically for rest or sleep. 
3.	Child care centers shall have a minimum outdoor play area of 250 square feet per child. The outdoor play area shall not be located within the required front yard building setback area if proposed in a R-1 or R-2 District. 
4.	Child care centers shall only be permitted in a safe environment. Such environment shall be free from nuisance conditions, either on or adjacent to the premises, which would place children's health or safety at risk. Nuisance conditions might include, but are not limited to, unacceptable exposure to traffic, noise, air contaminants, vibration, explosive materials, or other dangerous commercial or industrial activities. 
As a condition of approval, the planning commission may require any site improvement which they feel is necessary to ensure the health and safety of the children to be present on the premises. 
5.	Child care centers shall not cause a basic change in the character of the district in which it is to be located. 
6.	Child care centers shall not result in any nuisance condition to residents of any residential district. 
In determining whether potential for a nuisance situation exists, the planning commission shall evaluate the following factors: 
a.	Traffic volumes to be generated once the child care center is in operation; 
b.	Adequacy of parking or drop off sites; 
c.	Presence of other child care centers or similar uses in the immediate area, and any complaints on record regarding the same uses. 
(If there are existing child care centers or similar uses already located in a residential district where the child care center is proposed, the planning commission shall evaluate both the individual and collective impacts of these facilities in making a determination of a nuisance situation.) 
D.	Commercial recreation facilities. Commercial recreation facilities may be permitted in the R-3 and R-4 Districts if the following standards are met: 
1.	The facility must relate to and be integrated into the design of the residential development. 
2.	The facility must be subordinate to the residential development on the site. 
3.	The facility must be complimentary to the development, and shall not adversely impact on the residential development. 
E.	Home occupations. 
1.	The need for a special use permit regarding home occupations shall be determined by the criteria identified in section 4-17. 
2.	If a special use permit is required for a home occupation, the planning commission may permit such occupations in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts if the following standards are met: 
a.	The home occupation shall not significantly change the existing residential character of the area. 
b.	The applicant shall provide for required parking on the home occupation site. 
c.	The home occupation shall not adversely impact adjoining properties. 
d.	The home occupation shall not result in potentially hazardous conditions which would threaten persons or property either on or adjoining the subject site. 
e.	The home occupation shall not generate traffic which results in congestion, neighborhood disruption, unsafe conditions, or other unacceptable traffic patterns for a residential environment. 
3.	Home occupations shall be limited to one sign not to exceed two square feet. Signs for special uses shall only be permitted if mounted directly to the residential building. 
F.	Multiple-family residential developments having medical-support services. 
1.	Multiple-family residential developments having medical or dietetic support services may only be permitted in the R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts. In making a decision whether to permit such developments, the planning commission shall review the types of multiple-family developments already existing in the R-3 and R-4 Districts, and also the remaining available acreage of property in these districts. 
2.	The intent of the R-3 and R-4 Districts is to provide for a variety of multiple-family dwelling unit alternatives, including senior-oriented dwelling units, multiple-family dwelling units with support services, and general rental dwelling units. 
3.	The planning commission's decision to permit a multiple-family development with medical or dietetic support shall be based on an assessment of local need within the various types of multiple dwelling unit categories, and the continued ability to adequately provide for need in each of these categories. 
4.	Multiple-family dwelling unit developments offering medical or dietetic support shall not be approved if such approval would preclude a reasonable opportunity to meet the local need for general rental dwelling units. 
G.	Outdoor uses. 
1.	Any business which in whole or in part is to be conducted outside of an enclosed building in the CBD-1-G, CBD-1-OS, CBD-2, HC, LC, I-1 or I-2 Zoning Districts shall require approval by special use permit for that portion of the business to be conducted outside. Excluded from this regulation shall be automobile parking for customers or employees, off-street loading spaces, parking for automobile sales, and signs. 
2.	The planning commission may require complete or partial screening of any materials or products to be stored outside. In making the determination regarding required screening of outdoor storage, the planning commission shall consider the impact of such storage on adjacent uses, and also the potential of such storage to become a blighting influence. 
3.	The planning commission may require that outdoor storage areas be paved, depending on the type of material or product proposed for storage. 
4.	Outdoor storage shall not be permitted within any required landscape buffer areas, required parking areas, or in any location resulting in conflict with vehicle circulation or parking. 
H.	Gasoline service stations, automobile service stations, and automotive parts stores. Gasoline service stations, automobile service stations (general repair, oil change, tune-up etc.), and automotive parts stores may be permitted in the CBD-1-G District if they meet the following standards: 
1.	Above uses shall be compatible with all, approved downtown development authority and city development plans and policies. 
2.	Any gasoline service station to be approved shall have frontage on an arterial or collector roadway, and shall provide safe and efficient access. 
3.	Gasoline and other automotive businesses shall not adversely impact the light commercial character which is the intent of the CBD-1-G District. 
I.	Sexually oriented businesses. 
1.	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this subsection is to regulate sexually oriented businesses, to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects on the community from such sexually oriented businesses. 
The provisions of this subsection are not intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials, it is not the intent of this subsection to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or Michigan constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment in their intended market. 
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this subsection to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
2.	Location restrictions. 
a.	A sexually oriented business shall only be permitted within acres zoned as HC-Highway Commercial District. 
b.	A sexually oriented business may not be located within 660 feet of the lot lines of residential uses or zoned districts; childcare centers, family day care homes or group day care homes; public or private schools or academies; churches, synagogues, or other regular place of religious worship; public libraries; public parks; or fairgrounds. 
c.	A sexually oriented business may not be operated within 1,000 feet of the lot line of another sexually oriented business. 
d.	A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business. 
e.	For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the outer most boundary of the lot or parcel upon which the proposed sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, public or private school or academy, public park or library, childcare center, family day care home, group day care home, fairgrounds, residential district, residential use, or another sexually oriented business. 
3.	Site development requirements. 
a.	Type B landscaping screen as provided in section 8-3 hereof shall be required. 
b.	Off-street parking shall be provided equal to a minimum of one space per occupant permitted by the maximum occupancy load of the premises established by applicable fire, health and building codes. 
c.	All other site requirements shall comply with HC-Highway Commercial District standards. 
d.	If a special use requirement is violated, the use to which it relates shall be terminated. 
4.	License required. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. 
5.	License application. 
a.	All applicants for a sexually oriented business license shall file an application for such license with the zoning administrator. Each individual applicant, partner of a partnership, member of a limited liability company, partner of a limited liability partnership, officer and director of a corporation and all managers shall be named in each application form and each of them shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the city police department. 
b.	An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. 
c.	The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this subsection and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the building inspector and zoning administrator. 
d.	If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a license as applicant, along with each officer and director of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must sign the application. If the applicant is a limited liability company each member must sign the application. If the applicant is a limited liability partnership each partner must sign the application. 
e.	The fact that a person possesses other types of permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
f.	Applications for a license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the zoning administrator by the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. Applications must be submitted by hand delivery to the office of the zoning administrator during regular working hours. The zoning administrator shall supply application forms. The intended operator shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
i.	If the applicant is: 
(a)	An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and address and any aliases. 
(b)	A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names and addresses of all partners and whether the partnership is general or limited; 
(c)	A limited liability company, the limited liability company shall state its complete name and the names and addresses of all of its members; 
(d)	A limited liability partnership, the limited liability partnership shall state its complete name and the names and addresses of all of its partners; or 
(e)	A legal entity other than a partnership, limited liability company or limited liability partnership, the application shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, the names, addresses and capacity of all officers and directors of a corporation and of the chief executive officer and manager for any other legal entity, and the name of the resident agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
ii.	The name under which the sexually oriented business is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. 
iii.	The telephone number of the sexually oriented business. 
iv.	The address and legal description of the real property on which the sexually oriented business is to be located. 
v.	If the sexually oriented business is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the sexually oriented business for which the license is sought, and the date on which the sexually oriented business began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the license is sought. 
vi.	If the sexually oriented business is not in operation, the expected start-up date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of the application). If the expected start-up date is to be more than ten days following the date of the application, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same is also required. 
g.	Whether the applicant or any other individual identified in the application had a previous sexually oriented business license under this subsection or other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, village, township or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
h.	Whether the applicant or any other individuals identified in the application has been partner in a partnership, a member of a limited liability company or partnership or an officer, director, chief executive officer or manager of any legal entity that is permitted under this subsection whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
i.	Whether the applicant or any other individual identified in the application holds any other licenses under the subsection or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, village, township or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
j.	The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any. 
k.	The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
l.	The applicant's driver license number, social security number and/or federally issued tax identification number. 
m.	The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
i.	Payment of the application, investigation and license fees; 
ii.	If the applicant is an individual, satisfactory proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age; 
iii.	If the applicant is a Michigan corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, and a current good standing certificate; 
iv.	If the applicant is a corporation incorporated in another state, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in Michigan; 
v.	If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, together with all amendments thereto; 
vi.	If the applicant is a Michigan limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
vii.	If the applicant is a limited partnership formed under the laws of another state, a certified copy of the Michigan certificate of registration; 
viii.	If the applicant is a Michigan limited liability company, a certified copy of the articles of organization, together with all amendments thereto; 
ix.	If the applicant is a limited liability company formed under the laws of another state, a certified copy of the Michigan certificate of authority; 
x.	If the applicant is a Michigan limited liability partnership, a certified copy of the registration of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
xi.	If the applicant is a limited partnership formed under the laws of another state, a certified copy of the Michigan registration; 
xii.	Documentation identifying the owner(s) of the real property on which the sexually oriented business is to be situated; 
xiii.	If the person(s) identified as the owner(s) of the real property identified above is not also the owner(s) of the sexually oriented business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owner(s) or proposed owner(s) of the sexually oriented business to have or obtain the use and possession of the real property thereof that is to be used for the purpose of the operation of the sexually oriented businesses; 
xiv.	A floor plan of the licensed premises with the following requirements: 
(a)	Location and dimensions of any manager's station, demonstrating that there is an unobstructed view from at least one of the manager's stations of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms; 
(b)	Location of all overhead lighting fixtures. 
(c)	Identification of any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted; 
(d)	Location of the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted; 
(e)	The location of any stage; 
(f)	Identification of the use of each room or other area of the premises; or 
(g)	A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot; and 
xv.	A current certificate and straight-line drawing, prepared within 30 days prior to the application, by a land surveyor depicting the property lot lines and the structures containing any sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of the closest lot line on which the applicant's business will be located and depicting the property lot line of any church, synagogue, regular place of worship, public or private school or academy, child care center, family day care home, group day care home; public park or library; fairgrounds, or residential use or zoned district within 660 feet from the closest lot line on which the applicant's business will be located. 
Any of the items ii through xv above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the zoning administrator with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
n.	The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
i.	The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and 
ii.	The applicant has read the provisions of this subsection. 
o.	A separate application and license shall be required for each sexually oriented business. 
p.	The zoning administrator shall not accept any application that is not complete in every detail. In the event that the zoning administrator determines that the applicant has improperly completed the application, the applicant shall be promptly notified of such fact and permitted ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
q.	Applicants for a license under this subsection shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this subsection in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days from the date of such change by supplementing the application on file with the zoning administrator shall be grounds for suspension of the license. 
6.	Approval of license application. 
a.	The zoning administrator shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he or she finds one or more of the following to be true: 
i.	An applicant is under 18 years of age; 
ii.	An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business; 
iii.	An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has knowingly answered falsely a question or request for information on the application form; 
iv.	The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the building inspector and the zoning administrator as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
v.	The applicant or a director, officer, partner, member, principal manager or chief executive officer of the applicant has had a sexually oriented business license revoked or suspended within one year prior to the date of application. 
vi.	The applicant or a director, officer, partner, member, principal manager or chief executive officer of the applicant has operated a sexually oriented business which was determined to be a public nuisance under laws of any state, county, city, village or township within one year prior to the date of application; 
vii.	The applicant is not in good standing or authorized to do business in Michigan; 
viii.	The application, investigation and license fees have not been paid; 
ix.	An application of the proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this subsection; 
x.	Applicant has been convicted of any of the following criminal offenses in any jurisdiction within the last ten years; 
(a)	Prostitution, procuring a prostitute, or solicitation of a prostitute; 
(b)	Sale, distribution or display of obscene material; 
(c)	Sale, distribution or display of material which is harmful to minors; 
(d)	Soliciting, procuring or aiding and abetting an unlawful sexual performance by a minor; 
(e)	Possession, sale or distribution of child pornography; 
(f)	Public lewdness; 
(g)	Indecent exposure; 
(h)	Indecent conduct with a child; 
(i)	Sexual assault or rape; 
(j)	Incest; 
(k)	Sexual solicitation of a child; 
(l)	Contributing to the delinquency of a minor; or 
(m)	Harboring a runaway child. 
b.	The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
c.	The building inspector and zoning administrator shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application. 
d.	In the event that the zoning administrator determines that an applicant is not eligible for a license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45 days of the receipt of the application by the zoning administrator, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this subsection. 
e.	An applicant may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator regarding a denial to the zoning board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days after the applicant is given notice of the zoning administrator's decision. A memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof shall accompany the notice of appeal. The zoning administrator may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal. After reviewing the relevant information the zoning board of appeals shall vote to either uphold or overrule the zoning administrator's decision. Such vote shall be taken within 45 calendar days after the date on which the zoning board of appeals receives the notice of appeal. However, applicant shall be required to comply with the zoning administrator's decision during the pendency of the appeal. 
7.	Investigation. Upon receipt of a properly completed application, together with all information required in connection therewith, fingerprints and photographs, and the payment of the application, investigation and license fee, the zoning administrator shall transmit the application to the city police department for investigation of the background of each individual applicant, the partners of a partnership, the members of a limited liability company, the partners of a limited liability partnership, or the officers and directors of a corporation and manager of the proposed sexually oriented business. Each applicant shall pay a non-refundable investigation fee at the time the application is filed in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city commission to cover the cost of such investigation. The investigation conducted by the city police department shall be sufficient to verify the accuracy of all the information required by this subsection and shall be non-refundable. 
8.	Inspection. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the city police department, or other city, Ottawa County, or State of Michigan departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with applicable law. 
9.	Application fee. Each applicant shall pay an application fee at the time of filing an application in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. Such application fee shall be non-refundable. 
10.	License fee. 
a.	Each licensee issued a license pursuant to this subsection shall pay an annual license fee at the time of application for the license as herein provided. The annual license fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. The license fee shall be refunded if the license is not approved. 
b.	In the event of suspension or revocation of a license, or termination of business for any reason whatsoever, no portion of the license fee shall be refunded. 
11.	License renewal. Any application for renewal of a license shall be filed with the zoning administrator not less than 45 days prior to the date of expiration. The zoning administrator may, for a good cause shown, waive the requirement for timely filing of a renewal application. 
12.	Term of license. 
a.	All licenses issued pursuant to this subsection shall be for a term of one year. Said term shall commence on January 1 of each year and terminate upon December 31 of the same year. Applications for a license filed at any other time during the year shall be treated the same as if they were filed January 1 of that year and shall terminate on December 31 of that same year, and no proration fees shall be permitted. 
b.	When the zoning administrator denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the zoning administrator finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
13.	Suspension. The zoning administrator shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that the licensee or an employee of a licensee has: (a) violated or is not in compliance with this subsection; (b) become impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs while on the sexually oriented business premises; (c) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this subsection; or (d) knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
14.	Revocation of license. 
a.	The zoning administrator shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
b.	The zoning administrator shall also revoke a license if he or she determines that any of the following has occurred: 
i.	Any condition exists that would warrant disapproval of a license as set forth in this subsection; 
ii.	The licensee, manager or employee has engaged or has allowed patrons or employees to engage in acts of misconduct on the licensed premises in violation of City Code, the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States when the licensee, manager or employee knew or should have known such acts were taking place; or 
iii.	Repeated disturbances of public peace have occurred within the licensed sexually oriented business or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, access ways or grounds of the licensed sexually oriented business involving patrons, employees, or the licensee. 
c.	When the zoning administrator revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the zoning administrator finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, a license may be reinstated if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
15.	Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated on the license. 
16.	Registration of managers, entertainers and employees. 
a.	No person shall work as a manager at a sexually oriented business without a current manager's registration under this subsection. No person shall work as an entertainer at a sexually oriented business in the city without a current entertainer's registration under this subsection. The registration form for each shall require the applicant to provide his/her legal name and any aliases, home address, telephone number date of birth and satisfactory proof that he/she is 18 years of age or older. 
b.	The registration year for a manager's registration shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Each such registration shall expire at close of business or midnight, whichever is earlier, on December 31 of each year. 
c.	The registration fee for a manager's registration or entertainer's registration shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. The registration fee for each such registration is payable for a full year only and is not refundable. 
d.	A manager's registration or entertainer's registration under this subsection shall not be assigned or transferred. 
e.	No person under 18 years of age may obtain a manager's registration or entertainer's registration. 
f.	In order to obtain renewal of a current manager's registration or entertainer's registration, a registration holder must file an application for renewal with the zoning administrator. The renewal fee for each year shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
g.	In the event of a licensee changes the manager of a sexually oriented business, the licensee shall immediately report such change to the zoning administrator and register the new manager within five days of such change. 
h.	Each licensee will provide to the zoning administrator the full name, address, telephone number and date of birth of any employee of the sexually oriented business within five days of employment. 
17.	Exterior structural requirements. 
a.	It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from a point outside the sexually oriented business. 
b.	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this subsection. 
c.	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the sexually oriented business to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
i.	The sexually oriented business is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
ii.	The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
d.	Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
18.	Interior structural requirements. 
a.	The facility shall meet Americans with Disabilities Act standards so there is direct access to any stage areas and restrooms. 
b.	No public access may be permitted to any dressing area. 
c.	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
d.	A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. 
e.	No alteration to the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the approval of the zoning administrator. 
f.	Viewing rooms or peep booths must be separated from other viewing rooms or peep booths by a solid, opaque, uninterrupted physical divider that is a minimum one-inch thick and serves to prevent physical contact between patrons. 
g.	No private viewing room or booths shall be constructed unless one side is always open to a central public area. No door shall be placed on any viewing room or peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two adjacent viewing rooms or peep booths. 
19.	Sign regulations. 
a.	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided herein. 
b.	Primary and secondary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of a manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
c.	Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary or secondary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
d.	Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display surface shall be a flat plane, rectangular in shape. 
e.	Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall: 
i.	Be a flat plan, rectangular in shape; 
ii.	Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
iii.	Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; and 
iv.	Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the enterprise. 
f.	The requirements of this subsection are intended to supplement the requirements and limitations of article 7 hereof. In the event of contradictions or inconsistencies, the stricter requirement shall govern. 
20.	Lighting regulations. 
a.	All off-street parking areas and premises entries of sexually oriented businesses shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business to help ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other criminal conduct. 
b.	The premises of all sexually oriented businesses, except for adult motion picture theaters, shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to provide an illumination of not less than two footcandles of light as measured at the floor level. 
c.	Adult motion picture theaters shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to provide an illumination of not less than one footcandle of light as measured at the floor level. 
21.	Age requirement regulations. 
a.	It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
b.	It shall be the duty of the manager of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business' business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished a valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or a valid personal identification certificate issued by the State of Michigan verifying that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
22.	Hours of operation. The hours of sexually oriented businesses, except for an adult motel, are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
23.	Standards of conduct. 
a.	The following standards of conduct must be adhered to on the licensed premises by the licensee and all employees, managers, officers and agents of any sexually oriented business: 
i.	No employee or entertainer mingling with the patrons or serving food or drinks shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any specified anatomical areas. 
ii.	No employee or entertainer shall engage in, encourage or knowingly permit any specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
iii.	No employee or entertainer while in view of the patrons on the licensed premises shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any specified anatomical areas, except upon a stage which shall be fixed and immovable at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest patron or behind a solid, uninterrupted physical barrier that completely separates the entertainer from any patrons. This barrier must be a minimum of one-fourth inch thick and have no openings between the entertainer and any patrons. 
iv.	There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common areas of each place offering adult entertainment a list of food and drink prices. 
v.	Any tips for entertainers shall be placed by a patron into a tip box that is permanently affixed in the sexually oriented business and no tip may be handed directly to an entertainer. A licensee that desires to provide for such tips from its patrons shall establish one or more containers to receive tips. Any physical contact between patrons and an entertainer is strictly prohibited. 
vi.	A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes shall conspicuously display in the common area of the premises one or more signs in letters at least one inch high to read as follows: 
ADULT ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF HUDSONVILLE. ALL TIPS SHALL BE PLACED IN TIP BOX AND NOT HANDED DIRECTLY TO THE ENTERTAINER. ANY PHYSICAL CONTACT BETWEEN THE PATRON AND THE ENTERTAINER IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. 
vii.	No sexually oriented entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at any time from the outside of the premises. 
viii.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly allow the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises. 
ix.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly allow prostitution on the premises. 
x.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly operate the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
xi.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly allow any live specified sexual act to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
xii.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not illegally offer for sale or illegally allow to be consumed or possessed upon the licensed premises, or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds of the licensed premises, narcotics or dangerous drugs or fermented malt, malt, vinous or spirituous beverages. 
xiii.	At least one registered manager or licensee must be on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that the business is open to the public. 
xiv.	All doors to public areas on the premises must remain unlocked during business hours. 
xv.	It shall be the duty of the licensee, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that any view area or peep booth remain unobstructed by any doors, curtain, drapes, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the license application filed pursuant to this subsection. 
xvi.	No viewing room or peep booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
24.	Adult motels. 
a.	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in section 3-2 hereof. 
b.	It is unlawful if a person, or the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a special use permit to do so, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
c.	For the purposes of b above, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
25.	Massage business. It shall be unlawful for any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, to operate as a massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex unless persons massaging any client or customer is certified as a massage therapist by the American Massage Therapy Association or is a graduate of a school of massage therapy that is certified by the State of Michigan or have other similar qualifications that must be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator. 
26.	Nonconforming uses. 
a.	Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of the location or structural configuration requirements of this subsection shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If a sexually oriented business is within 1,000 feet of the lot line of another sexually oriented business and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming. 
b.	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a lot line of a church, synagogue, regular place of religious worship, public or private school or academy, child care center, family day care home, group day care home, public park or library, fairgrounds, residential zoned district or residential use, within 660 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
27.	Exemptions from enforcement. 
a.	It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
i.	By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Michigan or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
ii.	By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
28.	Reporting of violations. Any licensee, manager or employee shall immediately report to the city police department any violation of this subsection or any breach of the peace or unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on the licensed premises, including any parking area or adjoining area under the control or management of the licensee, provided that the licensee, manager or employee knew or should have known of such violation of law. 
29.	Notices. 
a.	Any notice required or permitted to be given by the zoning administrator or any other office, department or other agency pursuant to this subsection to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license which has been received by the zoning administrator, or any notice of address change which has been received by the zoning administrator. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the zoning administrator or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the sexually oriented business. 
b.	Any notice required or permitted to be given to the zoning administrator officer by any person pursuant to this subsection shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the zoning administrator. 
c.	It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the Zoning administrator in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. 
30.	Penalties and civil remedies. 
a.	Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a license issued pursuant to the provisions of the subsection, shall be subject to a suit for injunction and any other applicable civil remedy, as well as criminal prosecution for violation of this subsection. 
b.	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse or fail to comply with or resist enforcement of any provision of this subsection, and any such violation of any provision of this subsection shall be punishable as a criminal misdemeanor. 
c.	Each day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of this subsection shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
d.	In case of any violation, failure or omission under this subsection, the city or any person affected by any such violation, failure or omission, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, initiate a civil action for injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate relief to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such violation, failure or omission and in addition, initiate an action for a money demand to recover any damages or any lawful costs or charges incurred in abating the violation. 
J.	Communication towers. 
1.	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this subsection is to regulate communication towers. Changing technology in the field of communications has resulted in reliance upon more versatile and convenient forms of communication. Businesses, individuals and governmental entities have all developed a strong dependence upon the ability to quickly contact others. This dependence is exemplified by the increasing use of radios and cellular phones for emergency situations. Due to the increasing number of communication towers, it is the city's desire to promote the joint use of new and existing tower sites to minimize the adverse impact of such towers on the community. The following standards will aid in minimizing such adverse impact while enhancing the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
2.	Location and qualifying standards. 
a.	Site and development requirements: 
1.	Communication towers shall only be permitted within I-1, I-2, FCR, CBD-2, HC and PF Zoning Districts as either a principal or accessory use. 
2.	Communication towers shall be located on a site having a minimum of three-quarters of an acre with 125 feet of road frontage provided. No frontage shall be required if the communication tower is the principal use of the site. 
3.	The base of the communication tower and the wire cable supports shall be fenced within a minimum six-foot high, standard chain link fence. 
4.	Joint use of communication towers including publicly owned elevated storage tanks or other adequate existing facilities is encouraged whenever possible to minimize the number of separate towers. Such joint use will eliminate the need for a subsequent applicant to obtain a special use permit and only require such joint user to meet the other applicable requirements of this subsection J. 
b.	Special performance standards: 
1.	A communication tower and related antennas and guy wires shall not be located within 30 feet of a side yard or rear yard property line and the front yard setback must meet the applicable zoning ordinance requirements. A dimensional variance from this requirement shall not be permitted. 
2.	Accessory structures, including accessory buildings and paving shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which the communication tower is to be located. 
3.	No communication tower shall be located within 500 feet of any residential zoning district unless it is attached to an existing principal structure such as a publicly owned elevated storage tank. 
4.	The applicant shall provide the city with a copy of the construction plans for a communication tower certified by a registered structural engineer. 
5.	An accessory structure to a communication tower shall not exceed 600 square feet of gross building area, provided, however, an accessory structure to a communication tower with joint use shall not exceed 960 square feet of gross building area. A dimensional variance shall not be granted to permit an accessory building larger than 1,200 square feet of gross building area. 
6.	Communication towers shall be designed to withstand uniform structural loading as required by the city's building code. 
7.	A communication tower shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access. 
8.	A communication tower shall meet all applicable rules, regulations, requirements and standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission or their respective successors. 
9.	Communication towers exceeding a height of 100 feet above grade level shall be prohibited within a two-mile radius of an airport and within one-half mile of a helipad. 
10.	Metal communication towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive-resistant material being trust-free at all times. 
11.	Communication towers and their antennas shall be grounded for protection from a direct lightening strike and shall, with respect to electrical wiring and connections, be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and standards. 
12.	All signals and remote control conductors of low energy extending horizontally above the ground between a communication tower and its antennae and a structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight feet above grade at all points unless buried underground. 
13.	A communication tower shall be located so as not to interfere with frequency reception of nearby areas. 
14.	There shall be adequate room for vehicles doing maintenance on a communication tower and its antennas to maneuver on the property either owned or leased by the applicant. 
15.	The base of a communication tower shall not occupy more than 500 square feet. 
16.	The minimum spacing between lattice or guyed communication towers shall be one mile. Monopole communication towers over 75 feet in height shall be one-half mile apart and monopole communication towers under 75 feet in height shall be at least one-quarter mile apart. 
17.	The height of a communication tower shall not exceed 300 feet above grade. 
18.	Existing vegetation at the site of a communication tower shall be preserved to the maximum extent practical. 
19.	A communication tower shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or its successor. 
20.	There shall be no advertising or other identification of any kind on a communication tower intended to be visible from the ground or other buildings and structures, except as required for emergency purposes. 
21.	A communication tower that does not require painting in accordance with applicable Federal Aviation Administration standards shall, if painted, have a paint scheme designed to minimize off-site visibility. 
22.	Communication towers and their antennas shall be subject to applicable State of Michigan and federal regulations and standards concerning non-ionizing electro-magnetic radiation. If more restrictive regulations are adopted in the future, the tower and antennas shall conform to such regulations and standards. Failure to conform will result in the revocation of the special use permit by the planning commission. All cost for testing and verification of such compliance shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the tower and antennas. 
23.	No personnel shall be permanently located on the site of a communication tower, provided, however, occasional and temporary repair and service activities are permitted. 
24.	All parking and drive areas of a site where a communication tower is located shall be paved in compliance with applicable city ordinances. 
25.	Where the site of a communication tower adjoins a residential zoning district or land use, the applicant shall plant two alternating rows of evergreen trees that meet on 20-foot centers along the entire perimeter of the communication tower and related accessory structures. In no case shall the evergreens be closer than ten feet to the tower or any structure. 
26.	A communication tower and its antennas shall be removed by its owner or the owner of the site on which it is located within six months after it's no longer in use. 
c.	Exemption: 
1.	A non-commercial tower erected as an accessory use in any zoning district which does not exceed a height of 70 feet and is either (a) owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or (b) used exclusively for receive-only antennas is exempt from the provisions of this subsection J., provided, the owner of such tower shall have received prior to its installation a zoning compliance permit from the zoning administrator. 
K.	Accessory uses-Single-family dwellings. 
1.	The need for a special use permit regarding single-family residential accessory buildings shall be determined by the criteria identified in section 4-3. 
2.	If a special use permit is required for a single-family residential accessory building, the planning commission may permit such accessory buildings if the following standards are met: 
a.	The proposed location, type and kind of construction, and general architectural character of the building shall be compatible with the principal structure. 
b.	The size of the building in relation to the house, lot, and adjacent buildings, shall maintain the appearance of being a residential lot. 
c.	The building shall be in scale with the type and kind of principal and accessory buildings and structures located on properties which are adjoining and in the general area. 
d.	The building shall not have an adverse effect the light and air circulation of any adjoining building or properties. 
e.	The building shall not adversely affect the view of any adjoining property owner or occupant. 
f.	Reasonable access shall be provided between the building and adjoining public rights-of-way, including the relationship to adjoining properties and the view from adjacent streets. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, § 3, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 98-210, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 00-217, § 6, 3-14-00) 
ARTICLE 14. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 14-1. - Nonconforming buildings and related structures. 
A.	Continuance. Although such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance or amendment, the use of any building, structure, land, or premises, as existing and lawful at the time of enactment of this zoning ordinance (or in the case of an amendment of this ordinance, then at the time of such amendment) may be continued. 
B.	Structural changes to nonconforming buildings. A nonconforming building shall not be structurally changed in any way which will serve to lengthen the longevity of the nonconforming portion of the building, unless such structural changes are in conformance with this article and are approved by the planning commission. 
C.	Expansion of nonconforming buildings. 
1.	For the purposes of considering legal nonconforming buildings, they shall be placed into one of two classifications. 
a.	Class 1 includes nonconforming buildings which have a minimum setback of ten feet from any lot line and do not encroach into a clear vision area. The clear vision area shall be defined as a triangular area formed by connecting two points from intersecting right-of-way lines, each measured 15 feet back from the point of intersection. 
b.	Class 2 includes nonconforming buildings which do not meet a minimum setback of ten feet from one or more lot line or encroaches into a clear vision area as defined above. 
2.	A class 1 nonconforming building shall not be limited in its expansion as long as the expansion is in conformance with this ordinance, with the exception that any building line which is nonconforming may be extended as long as it does not violate any other setback lines or encroach closer than ten feet to any lot line. 
3.	A class 2 nonconforming building shall not be allowed to expand, except by planning commission approval. The planning commission shall consider the following factors in making any decision regarding the expansion of a class 2 nonconforming building: 
a.	Safety (pedestrian and auto), 
b.	Aesthetics, 
c.	Adequate light and air, 
d.	Parking, and 
e.	The seriousness of the existing nonconformity and the degree to which the expansion might contribute to the longevity of an undesirable or unsafe situation. 
D.	Repairs. 
1.	Any lawful nonconforming buildings may be repaired or reinforced during their life to correct deterioration, depreciation, and wear, provided that such repair does not exceed the state equalized valuation of the building, unless the subject building is changed by such repair to a conforming building. 
2.	If a nonconforming building, structure, or portion thereof, containing a nonconforming use, becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to a lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the building inspector to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not hereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with all regulations of the district in which it is located. 
E.	Alterations and improvements. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the alteration, improvement, or modernizing of a lawful nonconforming building, provided that such alteration does not increase the height, area, bulk or use of the building except as provided in this article. 
F.	Prior construction approval. In cases where the city has approved a site plan for a building(s) which subsequently becomes nonconforming because of changes in the zoning ordinance, the city shall retain the right to prohibit construction of such building(s) in cases where on-premises construction of the building(s) has not been initiated. Construction shall consist of construction of the building foundation or erection of other building materials. Grading of the site shall not be considered construction of the building(s). 
G.	Elimination of nonconforming buildings by city. The city commission may acquire properties on which nonconforming buildings are located by condemnation or other legal means, and may remove such buildings. 
Sec. 14-2. - Nonconforming uses and related structures. 
A.	Continuance. The use of any building or structure and of any land or premises, as existing and lawful at the time of enactment of this zoning ordinance (or in the case of an amendment of this ordinance, at the time of such amendment) may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance or amendment. 
B.	Expansion, repair and replacement. 
1.	Classification of related buildings. Buildings housing nonconforming uses shall be classified into one of two categories for purposes of regulating their expansion, repair or replacement. 
a.	"Class 3" shall refer to single-family detached homes and two-family homes in any of the following zoning districts: R-4, CBD-1-G, CBD-1-OS, CBD-2, LC, HC, and PF; and also single-family detached homes in the R-3 Zoning District. 
b.	"Class 4" shall refer to all such buildings not identified in Class 3. 
These classifications are created in recognition of varying degrees of incompatibility between land uses and the degree of hardship imposed when addressing the accidental destruction of a home. 
2.	Expansion. Class 3 and 4 buildings shall not be allowed to expand. 
3.	Repair. Class 3 and 4 buildings may be repaired or reinforced to correct deterioration, depreciation and wear, provided that such repair does not exceed the state equalized valuation of the building. 
4.	Replacement. 
a.	Class 3: Class 3 buildings may be rebuilt or replaced subject to the following: 
1.	The need for rebuilding is the result of accidental destruction such as a fire or tornado. 
2.	The building shall not increase in footprint size unless authorized by the planning commission. 
3.	The building shall be reconstructed on the same foundation unless the planning commission requires an alternate location due to setback and compatibility considerations. 
4.	The building shall not exceed its previous height unless authorized by the planning commission. 
5.	The planning commission shall not approve any changes to a single-family building relative to height or location unless they determine that to do so would improve land use compatibility with surrounding development. 
6.	All pertinent building codes are complied with. 
b.	Class 4: Class 4 buildings shall not be rebuilt or replaced. 
C.	Reversion to a nonconforming use. If a building containing a nonconforming use has a change in occupancy to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, occupancy shall not revert to a nonconforming use. 
D.	Discontinuance or abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year or more, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to legally abandon the nonconforming use. If the owner is taking reasonable action to sell the property or find a tenant for the business or property, and can provide evidence of such action, such time will not be counted toward the one-year abandonment period. At the end of the one-year period of abandonment, the nonconforming use shall not be re-established, and any further use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
E.	Illegal nonconforming uses. Those alleged nonconforming uses, which cannot be proved conclusively to have been existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be declared illegal nonconforming uses and shall be discontinued following the effective date of this or the previous ordinances. 
F.	Nonconforming to nonconforming use. The zoning board of appeals may authorize a change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, provided the proposed use would be as compatible or more compatible to the zoning district in which it is located than the nonconforming use which is being replaced. The zoning board of appeals shall consider such factors as traffic (car and truck), noise, odors, and noxious emissions in making their determination. 
G.	Elimination of nonconforming uses by city. The city commission may acquire properties on which nonconforming uses are located by condemnation or other legal means, and may remove such uses or buildings. 
ARTICLE 15. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 15-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to require and review those documents or drawings as specified in the ordinance, to ensure that a proposed land use or development activity is in compliance with this ordinance, other local ordinances, state statutes, and federal statutes. And furthermore, its purpose is to ensure that development taking place within the City of Hudsonville is properly designed, safe, efficient, environmentally sound, and designed in such manner as to protect adjacent properties from substantial adverse impacts. 
Sec. 15-2. - Uses requiring site-plan review. 
A.	New construction and new uses. All new construction and new uses, including the expansion of existing buildings, structures, and uses, (other than single-family or two-family dwelling units which are permitted by right in the zoning district in which they are located) shall require site plan review. 
B.	Private streets. Private streets shall require site plan review. 
C.	Public utility buildings and structures. Public utility buildings and structures shall require site plan review. 
D.	Planned unit developments. Planned unit developments shall require site plan review. 
E.	Special uses. Special uses shall require site plan review. 
F.	Mobile home parks Mobile home parks shall require site plan review. 
G.	Site condominium and condominium subdivisions. All site condominiums and condominium subdivisions developed pursuant to the Condominium Act (MCLA 559.101 et seq.) shall require site plan review. 
H.	Facade changes. In the CBD-1-G, CBD-1-OS, CBD-2, LC, HC, I-1 and I-2 Districts all new construction and improvements including, but not limited to, signage, lighting, doors, windows and wall treatment made to or upon 50 percent or more of the surface area of the front facade of an existing building shall require site plan review. Such construction and improvements shall meet the Standards of the Architectural Design Elements Portfolio as most recently adopted by the city commission. If less than 50 percent of the surface area of the front facade is improved, a zoning compliance permit pursuant to section 16-3 hereof is required and the incorporation of the Design Elements Portfolio standards is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 5, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 15-3. - Responsibility for site plan review. 
    The planning commission shall have the authority and responsibility to review and make decisions regarding all plans submitted under the site plan review process. 
Sec. 15-4. - Public hearing required. 
    A public hearing shall be required for all special use and planned unit development site plan applications. Such public hearing shall be held before the planning commission. 
Sec. 15-5. - Notification to abutting property owners. 
    In those cases where a public hearing is not required, the city shall notify the owners of the properties within 300 feet of the subject property of the nature of the site plan and the dates upon which such site plan will be considered. 
Sec. 15-6. - Prohibitions prior to site plan approval. 
    Until a site plan is approved and is in effect, no grading, removal of vegetation, filling of land or construction shall commence for any development or use for which site plan approval is required. Any violation of this prohibition shall be subject to the legal enforcement procedures contained in article 16. 
Sec. 15-7. - Pre-application conference. 
    The zoning administrator and/or planning director shall have the authority to conduct a preapplication meeting with the applicant/developer, to assist them in understanding the site plan review process, and ordinance requirements; and to provide insight as to what portions of their proposed development may be of special concern to the planning commission or require special impact studies. 
    This conference shall not be mandatory, but is recommended for small and large projects alike. It is recommended for large projects that a preapplication conference be held several months in advance of the desired start of construction. Such an advance conference will allow the applicant/developer time to prepare the needed information for the planning commission to make a proper review. 
Sec. 15-8. - Submittal and review of site plan. 
    This section describes the process required for site plan review. A flow chart illustrating the process is provided in Figure 15.1. 
A.	Applicant qualifications. Anyone having a legal ownership interest in a lot or parcel may apply for site plan approval. If an owner chooses to have their consultant or other designee submit their application, fees, and required plans to the city, they may do so; however, someone having an ownership interest in the subject property shall have to sign the application form. 
B.	Consultation with zoning administrator prior to submission. To apply for site plan review, the applicant should contact the zoning administrator to obtain the proper application form, to determine required fees, and to obtain a review schedule. To ensure that there are no conflicts with ordinance requirements and that all required information has been included in the site plan, it is recommended that the applicant meet with the zoning administrator to review the completed site plan prior to formal submission. The decision to forego this pre-submission meeting may result in unnecessary delay in the review process. 
C.	Submittal to zoning administrator. The applicant shall submit the completed application, the appropriate fee, and 16 copies of the site plan to the zoning administrator. 
D.	Review schedule established. The applicant has the option at this point to have the planning commission review the site plan in informal (workshop) session, prior to their review in formal session. This option is recommended in cases where there may be controversial or complex issues involved in the site plan. Use of the informal review provides the applicant with the opportunity to work through any changes the planning commission may require prior to the plan being considered for approval by the planning commission in formal session. 
If the informal review is desired by the applicant, the zoning administrator shall set the date for such review. If informal review is not desired, the zoning administrator shall set the date for review in formal session. 
E.	Site plan distributed to reviewing parties. The zoning administrator shall distribute the site plan and the planning commission's comments from informal session, if used, to the following: 
1.	The city manager, 
2.	The police department, 
3.	The fire department, 
4.	The zoning administrator, 
5.	The planning director/consultant, 
6.	The department of public works, and 
7.	The city engineer/consultant. 
F.	Zoning administrator's options for action. The zoning administrator, upon receipt of comments from the above-stated reviewing parties, shall either submit the site plan to the planning commission for formal review or return the site plan to the applicant for revisions. 
G.	Submittal to planning commission. Once the site plan has met approval by reviewing city staff, the zoning administrator shall forward the site plan to the planning commission for review in formal session. 
H.	Planning commission options for action. The planning commission may approve, approve with modifications, reject, or table any site plan. 
I.	Approved site plan becomes official site plan. If the planning commission approves the site plan, the zoning administrator shall prepare two copies of the site plan, as approved by the planning commission, for signature by both the zoning administrator and the applicant. These signed copies of the site plan shall represent the official site plan and be made part of the permanent zoning file for the site. 
J.	Rejection notice. If the planning commission rejects the site plan, they must include in their official minutes the reason(s) for such rejection. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the reasons for the rejection of the site plan. 

Figure 15-1 Site Plan Approval Process 
Sec. 15-9. - Required contents of site plan. 
A.	Information included on application. Information to be included on the application form includes: 
1.	Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, owner, developer, and designer; 
2.	The address and or parcel number of the property; 
3.	The existing zoning classification of the property; 
4.	The existing use of the property; 
5.	The proposed use(s); 
6.	The project title and description; 
7.	The project completion schedule and development phases; and 
8.	The signature of the owner of the property (authorizing the submission of the application), and authorization of a representative, if one is to be used. 
B.	Information included in site plan. The site plan shall consist of an accurate, reproducible drawing at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less, showing the site and all land within 100 feet of the site. Each site plan shall depict the following: 
1.	North arrow, scale, and date of original submittal and last revision; 
2.	A vicinity map; 
3.	A legal description of the property; 
4.	The gross and net acreage of all parcels in the project; 
5.	The land uses and zoning classifications of subject parcel and adjoining parcels, including those parcels which are adjoining but are divided by a road right-of-way; 
6.	The location of proposed and/or existing lot lines and dimensions of same; 
7.	All required building setbacks; 
8.	The grading plan showing finished contours at a minimum interval of two feet, and correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate cut and fill required (All finished contour lines are to be connected to existing contour lines at or before the lot lines); 
9.	The description of measures to be taken to control soil erosion and sedimentation during and after completion of grading and construction operations. This description shall include the location of proposed retaining walls, dimension and materials of same, fill materials, typical vertical sections, and plans for restoration of adjacent properties, where applicable; 
10.	The location and type of significant vegetation, including woodlots and individual trees of six inches in diameter or greater; 
11.	The location and elevations of existing water courses and water bodies, including county drains, and manmade surface drainage ways, 100-year floodplains, and all wetlands; 
12.	The location of existing and proposed buildings, as well as the length, width, height and total square footage of each building; 
13.	Information for multiple-family residential developments, including: 
a.	Total number of residential units, 
b.	Breakdown of units by number of bedrooms, 
c.	Dwelling unit sizes including dimensions and total square feet, and 
d.	Distance between buildings; 
14.	The location of all existing buildings or structures within 50 feet of the subject property; 
15.	The proposed location of accessory structures, buildings, and uses, including, but not limited to, all flagpoles, light poles, storage sheds, transformers, air conditioners, generators, and similar equipment (Details of the method of screening, where applicable, shall be included.); 
16.	The name, location, dimensions, and associated right-of-way of all existing and proposed streets (public or private), and typical cross section of same (Cross section shall show surface, base, and sub-base materials; location and typical details of curbs; location, dimensions, and details of all passing lanes and deceleration/acceleration tapers or lanes; and the location, width, surface elevations, radii, and grade of all access points to the site); 
17.	The information necessary to demonstrate that required sight distance and driveway spacing standards as identified in article 9 of this ordinance are being met (All driveways located within 100 feet of the site must be shown on the site plan); 
18.	The location, design, and number of all parking spaces and unloading areas, including information on proposed curbing, barrier-free access design, and dimensions for parking spaces, circulation aisles, and unloading spaces (A determination of the number of parking spaces as required in article 6 shall be provided); 
19.	The design and dimensions for all exterior lighting, including any element relative to shielding light spillover onto adjacent properties and roadways; 
20.	The location and design of all sidewalks, walkways, bicycle paths, and areas for public use; 
21.	The location, design, sizing, and easements related to all existing and proposed utility systems to be located on the site, including, but not limited to: 
a.	Water lines and fire hydrants, 
b.	Storm sewers, 
c.	Sanitary sewer lines, 
d.	Septic systems, if applicable, and 
e.	Retention and detention areas; 
(Inverts, hydrants, drainage-flow patterns, location of manholes and catch basins, calculations for size of storm drainage facilities, underground tanks, and transportation pipelines shall also be shown or included in the site plan submittal); 
22.	The location, size, and specifications of all signs with cross sections, including signs to be placed on buildings (No sign, except those exempted in article 7, shall be erected unless it has received approval by the planning commission); 
23.	The location and specifications for all fences, walls, and other screening features with cross sections; 
24.	The location and specifications for all proposed perimeter and internal landscaping, and other buffering features (For each new landscape material, the proposed size at the time of planting must be indicated. All vegetation to be retained on the site must also be indicated, as well as its typical size by general location, or range of sizes as appropriate); 
25.	The location, size, and specification for screening of all trash receptacles and other solid-waste disposal facilities; 
26.	The number of employees on largest shift (If shifts overlap, indicate the number of employees for the largest two shifts which overlap); and 
27.	The proposed deed restrictions, if applicable. 
28.	The front facade of all proposed building elevations in the CBD-1-G, CBD-1-OS, CBD-2, LC, HC, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts shall meet the standards of the Architectural Design Elements Portfolio as most recently adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 6, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 15-10. - Expiration of site plan approval. 
A.	Expiration due to failure to initiate. Unless a zoning compliance permit and a building permit has been issued within 180 days of the date of the planning commission's approval of the site plan, approval of a site plan shall expire and be of no effect. Approval of a site plan shall expire and be of no effect one year following the date of planning commission approval unless construction has begun on the property and is diligently pursued to completion in conformance with the approved site plan. 
B.	Completion deadline. Development shall, in any case, be completed within 18 months of the date of planning commission approval of a site plan. 
C.	Continuance requirements. If an approved site plan has expired as set forth herein, no permits for development or use of the subject property shall be issued until the site plan has been resubmitted and approved, subject to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 15-11. - Amendment of an approved site plan. 
A.	Information to be included on application form. If a developer wishes to make changes to a site plan following approval by the planning commission, they must petition the planning commission for a determination as to whether the desired change(s) constitute a major or minor change as defined in this section. The developer in filing such petition shall clearly state the reasons for the desired changes. 
    Major changes shall require the developer to resubmit the site plan, following the procedures and conditions herein required for original site plan submittal and review. 
    Minor changes may be authorized by the zoning administrator. A public hearing shall not be required for minor changes. 
B.	Major changes defined. Changes to be considered major shall include one or more of the following: 
1.	A change in the original concept of the development; 
2.	A change in the original use or character of the development; 
3.	A change in the type of dwelling unit as identified on the approved site plan; 
4.	An increase in the number of dwelling units planned; 
5.	An increase in non-residential floor area of over five percent or 500 square feet per building; 
6.	The rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts; 
7.	A change in the character, function, or location of any street or access driveway; 
8.	A reduction in the amount of land area set aside for common open space, or the relocation of such area(s); 
9.	An increase in building height; and 
10.	A change which involves a request for variance to the ordinance. 
C.	Minor changes defined. Minor changes shall include the following: 
1.	A change in residential floor area; 
2.	Increases in nonresidential floor area which do not exceed either five percent of gross floor area or 500 square feet per building; and 
3.	Minor variations in design of the building or site which do not constitute major changes. 
Sec. 15-12. - Modifications of site plan during construction. 
A.	Compliance. All site improvements and building construction shall conform to the approved site plans, approved amendments authorizing their implementation, and to all approved engineering and architectural plans related thereto. 
    If the applicant or developer makes any changes in the improvements and buildings during construction, in relation to such approved plans, they shall do so at their own risk, without assurance that the city commission, planning commission, or city official, whichever is applicable, will approve such changes. 
B.	Procedure to be followed when field changes are required. Where field changes are necessary, the applicant or developer shall, if reasonably possible, first obtain approval from the appropriate body or official. If such prior approval cannot be obtained, and the changes are made, the applicant shall immediately notify the appropriate body or official of such changes and shall, as soon thereafter as is reasonable, submit as-built drawings of all such changes. So as to conform to the approved plans, the city commission, planning commission, zoning administrator, or city engineer, whichever is applicable, may require the applicant to correct any change made in the field without prior approval. 
Sec. 15-13. - Standards for site plan review. 
    To promote orderly development which is safe, efficient, attractive, sensitive to environmental concerns, and generally promotes the welfare of the city's citizens, all developments and uses, in addition to meeting applicable specific standards as identified in this ordinance, shall also meet the following general standards: 
A.	Organization of elements. All elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and type of the lot, the character of adjoining property, and the type and size of buildings. The site shall be so developed as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this ordinance. 
B.	Landscape preservation. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and by topographic modifications which result in maximum harmony with adjacent areas. 
Use of existing, prime nature features (woodlots, wetlands, attractive vegetation etc.) shall be preserved and allocated for required open space areas where feasible. 
C.	Drainage provisions. Special attention shall be given to proper site drainage so that removal of storm waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or overload watercourses in the area. 
D.	Soil preservation. Proposed developments or uses shall not result in soil erosion or sedimentation problems. 
E.	Privacy provisions. The site plan shall provide reasonable, visual and sound privacy for all dwelling units located therein. Fences, walks, barrier and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and for the privacy of its occupants. 
F.	Emergency vehicle accessibility. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle accesses, by some practical means, to all sides. 
G.	Connective access to public streets. Every structure or dwelling unit shall have connective access to a public street by some form of pedestrian sidewalk or pathway. 
H.	Pedestrian circulation system. There shall be provided a pedestrian circulation system which is insulated as completely as reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system. 
I.	Compatibility with existing or planned streets and pathways. The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the pattern of existing or planned streets and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. Streets and drives which are part of an existing or planned street pattern shall be of a width appropriate to the traffic volume they will carry, and shall have a dedicated right-of-way equal to that specified in any formally adopted street plan or platted right-of-way. 
J.	Efficient and safe traffic systems. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic ways within the site, as well as to and from the site, shall be designed in a manner which is both efficient and safe. 
K.	Compliance with all applicable statutes. Site plans shall conform to all applicable requirements of state and federal statutes. Site plan approval and an occupancy permit may be conditioned on the applicant receiving necessary state and federal permits. 
L.	Sexually oriented businesses. Shall comply with the requirements of subsection 13-7.I. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, § 4, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 15-14. - Computer-formatted as-built drawing required. 
A.	Rationale and requirements. Due to the city's ongoing program of developing an accurate and updated computerized graphic database of all lots, utilities, buildings, structures, natural features, rights-of-way, roads, and other features necessary for the efficient management of the city, it shall be required for the site plan applicant to either submit computer-formatted as-built plans of their development to the city, or pay a fee as approved by the city commission for converting the manual drawings to the city's computer files. 
B.	Computer database format. The computerized graphics database must be developed in either an IGDS or DXF format, delivered on 3-1/2 inch or 5-1/4 inch floppy disk. To be accepted, all information must meet the city's file structure and layering scheme. Graphic database standards are available at the city offices. 
C.	Responsibility of applicant. If the applicant submits a computer file of the site plan which has not been prepared consistent with the city's graphic database standards, the applicant shall be required to either resubmit the computer file in a form consistent with the city's standards or be responsible to the city for all costs incurred by the city in converting such file into the proper format. 
D.	Penalty for noncompliance. The city, in the event of the applicants failure to either provide the city with the proper computer files of the as-built plans or to pay the appropriate fee to accomplish this task, may withhold an occupancy permit until such failure is satisfactorily resolved. 
Sec. 15-15. - Inspection. 
A.	Zoning administrator responsibilities. 
1.	The zoning administrator shall be responsible for inspecting all improvements for conformance with the approved, final site plan. All sub-grade improvements, such as utilities, sub-base installations for drives and parking lots, and similar improvements, shall be inspected and approved by appropriate agencies prior to covering. 
2.	The zoning administrator shall notify the planning commission in writing when a development for which a final site plan is approved has passed inspection with respect to the approved site plan. 
3.	The zoning administrator shall notify the planning commission in writing of any development for which a site plan was approved which does not pass inspection. Additionally, the zoning administrator shall advise the planning commission of steps taken to achieve compliance. In such case, the zoning administrator shall periodically notify the planning commission of progress toward compliance with the approved site plan and when compliance is achieved. 
B.	Applicant responsibilities. The applicant shall be responsible for requesting the necessary inspections. All inspection requests shall be first directed to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall obtain inspection assistance from the appropriate city official or consulting professional. 
Sec. 15-16. - Performance guarantee required. 
A.	Purpose To ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance, relative to the approval of a site plan, the planning commission may require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee as set forth in this section. The purpose of the performance guarantee is to ensure completion of improvements required by this ordinance and contained on the approved site plan. 
B.	Performance guarantee definition. Performance guarantee, as used herein, shall mean a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or corporate surety bond, as determined by the applicant and verified by the planning commission or city consultant, in the amount of the estimated cost of the improvements, plus the amount of any applicable fee established from time to time by resolution of the city commission to cover the city's costs related to determining compliance with the zoning ordinance in connection with performance guarantee. 
C.	Acceptance of performance guarantee. No performance guarantee will be accepted by the city without the applicant first obtaining a zoning compliance permit from the zoning administrator pursuant to section 16-3. 
D.	Deposit requirements. Where the planning commission requires a performance guarantee, said performance guarantee shall be deposited with the city treasurer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development and use of the land, or prior to issuance of an occupancy permit in those cases where the guarantee is being required for improvements delayed due to weather conditions. Upon the deposit of the performance guarantee, the city shall deposit the performance guarantee, if in the form of a cash deposit or certified check, in an interest-bearing account to the applicant. 
E.	Time of completion for performance-guarantee-backed improvements. An approved site plan shall also prescribe the period of time within which the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been required are to be completed. The period will begin from the date of the issuance of the building permit. 
F.	Rebate of performance guarantee to applicant. 
1.	In the event the performance guarantee deposited is a cash deposit or certified check, the city shall rebate to the applicant 50% of the deposited funds when 60% of the required improvements are completed, as confirmed by the zoning administrator. The remaining 50% of the deposited funds will be rebated when 100% of the required improvements are completed, as confirmed by the zoning administrator. 
2.	If a request is made by the applicant for a temporary certificate of occupancy without completion of required exterior improvements, the performance guarantee herein required may be applied by said applicant to assure compliance with the zoning ordinance standards and the specifications of the approved site plan. 
3.	Upon the satisfactory completion of the improvement for which the performance guarantee was required, as determined by the zoning administrator, the treasurer shall return to the applicant the performance guarantee deposited and any interest earned thereon. 
G.	Defaults in making performance-guarantee-backed improvements. 
1.	In the event the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which the performance guarantee was required, within the time period established by the city, the city shall have the right to use the performance guarantee deposited and any interest earned thereon to complete the improvements through contract or other means. The city shall specifically have the right to enter upon the subject property to make the improvements. 
2.	If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the city to complete the improvements for which it was posted, the applicant shall be required to pay the city the amount by which the costs of completing the improvements exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee deposited. 
3.	Should the city use the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof, to complete the required improvement, any amounts remaining after said completion shall be applied first to the city's administrative costs in completing the improvement. Any balance remaining shall be refunded to the applicant. 
4.	At the time the performance guarantee is deposited with the city, and prior to the issuance of a building permit or occupancy permit, the applicant shall enter an agreement with the city incorporating the provisions of the performance guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 03-242, § 3, 8-12-03) 
Sec. 15-17. - Fees. 
    Fees for the review of site plans, inspections, and computer-formatted as-built plans, as required by this article, shall be established and may be amended by resolution of the city commission. 
Sec. 15-18. - Violations. 
    The approved site plan shall become part of the record of approval, and subsequent action, relative to the site in question, shall be consistent with said approved site plan unless the pertinent administrative body agrees to such changes as are provided for in this article. Any violations of the provisions of this article, including any improvement not in conformance with the approved final site plan, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance as provided in article 16 of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 16. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-1. - Administration and administrator. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be administrated by the planning commission in accordance with the State of Michigan Municipal Planning Commission Act, Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended, and the provisions of Act 207 of the Public Act of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended, where and if possible, is also relied upon as statutory authority. 
    The planning commission, with the advice and consent of the city manager, shall designate a zoning administrator to administer this ordinance. 
    The zoning administrator, and deputies of same, shall have the responsibility of administering the City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance, as amended, and, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall have the power of a police officer. 
Sec. 16-2. - Duties and powers of zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the authority to administer the City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance precisely as it is written. Under such authority, the zoning administrator shall have the following responsibilities: 
A.	Assist citizens with understanding the zoning ordinance and completing all forms pursuant to processing their zoning related requests. 
B.	Fulfill management duties related to processing all zoning related requests. Provide administrative support to the planning commission and zoning board of appeals relative to zoning issues. 
C.	Review and investigate building permit and site plan applications to determine compliance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
D.	Issue the appropriate permit(s) when all provisions of the zoning ordinance have been complied with, and, when applicable, site plan approval from the planning commission has been obtained. 
E.	Perform inspection duties to ensure that all developments are being constructed in conformance with their permit or site plan approvals. 
F.	Make periodic tours of the city for general zoning ordinance enforcement purposes. Investigate reported alleged violations of the ordinance and enforce corrective measures when required. 
G.	Keep the zoning map, text, and office records up to date by recording all amendments and retaining a copy of pertinent official documents. 
H.	Make recommendations to the planning commission on ways to solve problems or otherwise improve zoning operations. 
I.	Perform other duties as authorized elsewhere in this ordinance or as may be assigned to the zoning administrator by other city ordinances. 
Sec. 16-3. - Zoning compliance permit. 
A.	Purpose. The zoning compliance permit shall be an official acknowledgment from the city that all proposed uses and construction plans have been reviewed and are in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
B.	Activities requiring a zoning compliance permit. No activity which requires the issuance of a zoning compliance permit shall be undertaken until such permit has been obtained from the zoning administrator. Activities requiring a zoning compliance permit shall include: 
1.	Grading, excavation, or filling in preparation for construction; 
2.	The erection, addition to, alteration of, or moving of any building or structure; 
3.	Initial use of any property; and 
4.	The changeover of any building or property from one type of use to a different type of use. 
5.	In the CBD-1-G, CBD-1-OS, CBD-2, LC, HC, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts improvements that include, but are not limited to, signage, lighting, doors, windows and wall treatments that make up less than 50 percent of the front facade are encouraged to meet the standards of the Architectural Design Elements Portfolio as most recently adopted by the city commission. 
C.	Process of issuance. The zoning administrator shall provide a copy of the zoning compliance permit to the applicant and the building official, if that official is other than the zoning administrator. The building permit issued by the building official may serve as the zoning compliance permit if signed by the zoning administrator before issuance. 
    Except upon the granting of a variance by the zoning board of appeals, a zoning compliance permit shall not be issued for any building or use in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
D.	Zoning compliance application requirements. Application requirements for proposed uses or developments requiring site plan review are given in article 15. Application requirements for proposed uses or developments not requiring site plan review are as follows: 
1.	The location, shape, area, and dimensions of the lot; 
2.	The location, dimensions, and height of all structures; 
3.	The intended uses; 
4.	The location of building setbacks from all lot lines; 
5.	The location of driveways and parking areas; 
6.	Any other information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance; and 
7.	A fee in accordance with the fee schedule, established by the city commission. 
8.	All drawings submitted with an application shall be professionally prepared and drawn to scale. 
E.	Voiding of permit. Unless the development proposed has passed its first building inspection within 180 days from the date of the granting of the permit, any zoning compliance permit granted under this article shall become null and void. Before voidance is actually declared, the zoning administrator shall make every effort to notify the holder of a zoning compliance permit that such permit is liable for voiding action. A void zoning compliance permit will also void the building permit issued for the same development, requiring resubmittal for both permits before the applicant may construct or use any of the property affected by these permits. 
F.	Zoning inspection. The construction or usage affected by any zoning compliance or building permit shall be subject to inspections. The first inspection shall be when excavation for foundations has been completed and building lines have been established. The second shall be when the building is completed. 
    It shall be the duty of the holder of every zoning compliance permit and building permit to notify the zoning administrator and building official (if other than the zoning administrator), as to the time when the construction will be ready for inspection. Failure to make proper notification of the time for inspection shall automatically cancel the permit, requiring the issuance of a new permit(s) before construction may proceed or occupancy may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 06-258, § 7, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 16-4. - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.	Requirements. Certificates of occupancy shall be required in the following cases to ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance: 
1.	When any land, building, or part thereof is being occupied for the first time; 
2.	When an existing use of land, building(s), or part(s) thereof are being changed to another use having different zoning requirements; and 
3.	Upon expansion of an existing land use, or expansion to an existing building or structure. 
B.	Conditions for issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any land use, building, or part thereof, unless the following conditions exist: 
1.	All provisions of this ordinance and other applicable city ordinances have been met. 
2.	All improvements contained on any approved site plan have been completed, or if not completed, that a performance guarantee has been provided to the city. 
3.	All development related fees owed to the city by the applicant seeking the certificate of occupancy have been paid, or mutually satisfactory arrangements for such payment have been made. 
Sec. 16-5. - Zoning board of appeals (ZBA). 
A.	Establishment of the board. In order that the objectives of this ordinance may be more fully and equitably achieved; that there shall be provided a means for competent interpretation of this ordinance; that adequate, but controlled, flexibility be provided in the application of this ordinance; that health, safety, and welfare of the public be secured; and that justice be done; there is hereby established a zoning board of appeals (also referred to as ZBA). 
B.	Membership and terms of office. The zoning board of appeals shall consist of five members. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city commission. The members shall consist of one member from city commission, one member from the planning commission, and three electors from the city at large. 
    The three elector members shall not be members of the city commission, planning commission, or employees of the city. 
    Elector members shall serve three-year terms, and the commission members shall serve during their terms on their respective commissions. If a person is appointed to the zoning board of appeals in replacement of a member who did not complete a term, that person's initial term shall only be for the balance of time remaining in the term they are assuming. 
    The six-member zoning board of appeals, existing at the time of this ordinance adoption, may continue to function as they did under the previous zoning ordinance. However, the first elector member to not seek reappointment to the zoning board of appeals shall not be replaced, so as to achieve the transition to a five-member board. As the current terms of the zoning board of appeals expire, terms for reappointment or new appointments shall be for the periods as specified in this ordinance. 
    The city commission may also approve, at its discretion, up to two alternate members of the zoning board of appeals to serve three-year terms. If alternate members are appointed, they shall serve on a rotation basis as determined by the chairman of the zoning board of appeals. Alternate members may be called on to serve as a regular member of the zoning board of appeals, in the absence of a regular member, or to reach a decision in a case where a member has chosen to abstain from voting due to a conflict of interest. Alternate members shall have the same voting rights as a regular member, and if used on a case, shall continue to serve on that case until a final decision is made. 
C.	Organization and procedures. 
1.	Rules of procedure. The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure as may be necessary to conduct its meetings properly. 
2.	Majority vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator, to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which they are required to pass under this ordinance; or to effect any variation in this ordinance. 
3.	Officers. The zoning board of appeals shall appoint a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary, as prescribed in their rules of procedure. 
4.	Meetings. 
a.	Meetings shall be held at the call of the zoning board of appeals chairman and at such other times as the zoning board of appeals shall specify in its rules of procedure. 
b.	The business which the zoning board of appeals may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the board held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976 (MCL sections 15.261 to 15.275), as the same may be amended. 
c.	The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, and compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
5.	Records. Minutes shall be recorded of all proceedings which shall contain evidence and data relevant to every case. Minutes shall contain the vote of each member upon each question, and if the member is absent or failing to vote. The zoning board of appeals shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. Such minutes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall become public record. 
D.	Duties and powers of the zoning board of appeals. 
1.	Hear an appeal for interpretation. 
a.	The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide upon requests for the interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
b.	The zoning board of appeals shall determine the precise location of boundary lines between zoning districts when there is dissatisfaction expressed by the zoning administrator, or when assistance in interpretation is sought by the zoning administrator. 
2.	Hear an appeal for administrative relief. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by an appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the zoning administrator in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. 
3.	Hear an appeal for a dimensional variance. In considering dimensional variances, the zoning board of appeals shall only have the authority to authorize variances in matters relating to the following: 
a.	Building setbacks, 
b.	Building height, 
c.	Principal building area, 
d.	Percent of lot coverage, 
e.	Lot dimensions or size, 
f.	Driveway setbacks from intersections, 
g.	Driveway spacing requirements, 
h.	Sign dimensions or area, 
i.	Parking and loading requirements, 
j.	Landscape requirements, and 
k.	Number of accessory structures. 
4.	Hear appeals regarding inability to use land for permitted uses. The zoning board of appeals may hear appeals from property owners regarding their inability to use their property for the uses which are permitted by right in the zoning district where their property is located. If upon evaluation of the information submitted, the zoning board of appeals finds that the applicant's property cannot be reasonably used for the uses which are permitted by right within the designated zoning district, they shall formally make such finding of fact and file a report to the planning commission. The planning commission may initiate a process of amending the ordinance in such manner that the applicant's property may be reasonably used in a way which is consistent with the City of Hudsonville Master Plan and which does not adversely affect adjoining properties. 
E.	Limitation of powers. 
1.	The zoning board of appeals shall not have any authority other than that expressly conferred upon it by this ordinance. 
2.	The zoning board of appeals shall not hear any appeal regarding special uses. 
3.	The zoning board of appeals shall not hear any appeal regarding planned unit developments. 
4.	The zoning board of appeals shall not grant a use variance. 
F.	Appeal process. 
1.	Eligibility for filing an appeal. An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau affected by a decision made by the zoning administrator in the administration of this ordinance. 
2.	Official with whom to file appeal application. All appeal applications, to include the grounds for appeal, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. 
3.	Fees for appeal. A fee, as established by the city commission, shall be paid to the zoning administrator at the time of filing an appeal application. The purpose of the fee is to cover any necessary advertisement and investigation expenses incurred by the zoning board of appeals in connection with the appeal. 
4.	Time frame for filing. An appeal shall be filed with the zoning administrator within 14 days of receiving official notice of the decision which is the basis for appeal. 
5.	Stay. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the zoning administrator certifies to the zoning board of appeals that, for reasons stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. If the zoning administrator makes such certification, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the zoning board of appeals, or on application by the circuit court when cause can be shown. 
6.	Distribution of appeal materials to zoning board of appeals members. The zoning administrator shall transmit to all zoning board of appeals members all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
7.	Date and notice of hearing. The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal. And further, the ZBA shall give due notice of same to the persons to whom real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single- and two-family dwellings within 300 feet. The notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not known, the term occupant may be used. 
8.	Representation at hearing. Upon the hearing, a party may appear in person, by agent, or by legal representative. 
9.	Zoning board of appeals decision options. Either wholly or partly, the zoning board of appeals may reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed. And, the zoning board of appeals shall make an order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken. If an affirmative decision is made, the zoning board of appeals may impose conditions to such decision. 
If there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, the zoning board of appeals, in considering an appeal for variance, may modify any of the ordinance requirements regarding those matters listed in section 16-5.D.3, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
10.	Time frame for zoning board of appeals decision. The zoning board of appeals shall make a decision within a reasonable time frame. However, a decision shall not exceed 90 days from the time the zoning board of appeals is in receipt of all information which it needs to base its decision. 
11.	Final authority. The decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be final. 
G.	Variance appeal hearings. If all of the conditions listed below are satisfied, the zoning board of appeals may authorize dimensional variances in those matters listed in section 16-5.D.3: 
1.	The applicant must be able to demonstrate practical difficulty in complying with this ordinance. 
a.	An example of practical difficulty would be if dimensional zoning requirements could not be met on an existing lot; due to narrowness, irregular shape, or location of natural features such as wetlands or floodplains on the site. 
b.	Demonstration of practical difficulty should have a bearing on a condition relative to the site, or use upon the site, and not to the applicant personally. Economic hardship or optimal profit potential are not considerations for practical difficulty. 
2.	The practical difficulty which is demonstrated must be due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to general neighborhood conditions. 
3.	The applicant shall not have created the problem for which a variance is being sought. 
4.	The zoning board of appeals shall only approve a variance appeal if in so doing the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done for both applicant and other property owners in the district. 
Substantial justice, as it relates to the applicant, shall be aimed toward permitting the applicant substantial property rights, such as those enjoyed by adjoining properties in the same zoning district. Substantial justice, as it relates to other property owners in the district, shall be aimed toward trying to ensure that special development rights are not bestowed on the applicant that are not enjoyed by the other property owners in the same district, or that the granting of the applicant's variance does not result in substantial adverse impacts to adjoining properties. 
5.	In approving a variance appeal, the zoning board of appeals shall only approve the minimum variance which is necessary to relieve the practical difficulty. 
H.	Recording of variance appeal decisions. The zoning board of appeals shall record into the official record of any variance appeal hearing: 
1.	The decision made (to include vote count); 
2.	The condition(s), if any, shall be attached to any approval; 
3.	For variances approved, a statement indicating the satisfaction of all required conditions; and 
4.	For denials, a statement containing reasons for denial. 
I.	Variance period of validity. The construction authorized by the issuance of a variance by the zoning board of appeals shall commence within 90 days, or the variance shall become void. 
J.	Resubmittal for variance. No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the zoning board of appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the last denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid upon inspection by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 00-217, § 7, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 16-6. - Enforcement. 
A.	Purpose. It is the intent of this article to outline procedures and responsibilities for enforcement of the City of Hudsonville Zoning Ordinance. 
B.	Violations and penalties. 
1.	Violation a nuisance. Buildings erected, altered, moved, razed, or converted, or any other use of land or premises carried on in violation of any provision of this ordinance are declared to be unlawful and a nuisance per se. 
2.	Violation reporting requirements. Any and all buildings or land use activities considered possible violations of this ordinance shall be reported to the zoning administrator, particularly when observed by or communicated to any city official or employee. 
3.	Penalty for violations. Every person, corporation, or firm who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this ordinance; or any permit, license, or exception granted hereunder; or any lawful order of the zoning administrator, planning director, zoning board of appeals, planning commission, or the city commission issued in pursuance of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon issuance of a zoning citation and conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction, any violation shall be punished by a fine, not to exceed $500.00 dollars, or by imprisonment, not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.	Enforcement procedure. 
1.	When a violation is initially determined by the zoning administrator, it shall be the administrator's responsibility to issue a notice to the owner(s) and occupant(s) of the lot or parcel upon which the zoning violation has occurred. This notice shall be issued on a special form for this purpose and shall at least include the following information pertinent to the violation: 
a.	Date and location of each violation observed by the zoning administrator; 
b.	Names and addresses of owners and occupants; 
c.	Specific sections of the zoning ordinance which have been violated (If more than one violation, each violation and each section violated shall be listed); and 
d.	length of time allowed before further prosecution of the violation(s). 
    (Unless the violation constitutes a clear and present danger to the health or safety of the public, the length of time allowed shall not be less than ten days, in which case the violation may be prosecuted civilly or criminally without notice.) 
2.	The notice required by the above subsection may be either personally served upon an individual or upon an officer, director, or resident agent of a corporation; or may be served by sending a copy of the notice by registered mail with a return receipt executed by the person being served. In the event the appropriate person is not served after reasonable inquiry or attempts, the notice shall be effective upon the posting of the notice in a reasonably conspicuous place upon the property. 
3.	Upon a violation of this ordinance and upon the giving of the appropriate notice, the violation may be enjoined, abated, remedied, corrected, removed, or prosecuted as follows: 
a.	The zoning administrator may issue a zoning ordinance violation appearance ticket in accordance with Act 366 of the Public Acts of 1984 (MCLA 764.9c, 764.9f; MSA 28.868(3), 28.868(6), as amended, to an owner, tenant, or occupant. 
b.	The zoning administrator may file a criminal complaint and seek a warrant in accordance with the Michigan Statutes made and provided. 
c.	The zoning administrator or city attorney may institute a civil proceeding seeking to enjoin, abate, remedy, correct, or remove any violation of this ordinance, together with the recovery of costs and damages. The judgement may provide that the city shall have a lien upon the subject real property to the extent that the city has incurred costs and expenses in the abatement, removal, or correction of the violation. 
d.	The election to pursue any of the above remedies shall not bar pursuit of other remedies. 
ARTICLE 17. - ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 17-1. - Who may amend. 
    Only the city commission may amend, supplement, or change any of the regulations, provisions or boundaries stated in this ordinance. 
Sec. 17-2. - Who may initiate. 
    Proposals for amendments, supplements, or changes may be initiated by the city commission on its own motion, by the planning commission, or by petition of one or more owners of property to be affected by a proposed amendment. 
ARTICLE 18. - VALIDITY 
    Should any article, section, or provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or part thereof, other than the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
    If a provision of this ordinance is determined to be invalid or unenforceable because of its scope or breadth, that provision shall be valid and enforceable to the extent of the scope or breadth permitted by law. 
ARTICLE 19. - VESTED RIGHT 
    Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, zoning district, or any permissible activities therein. Such uses, districts, and activities are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendments or modification as may be necessary for the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
ARTICLE 20. - REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE 
    The zoning ordinance adopted by the City of Hudsonville Commission, being Ordinance Number 114, adopted July 8, 1986, and all subsequent amendments thereof, are hereby repealed, effective coincident with the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 21. - ADOPTION 
    This ordinance was adopted at a regular meeting of the Hudsonville City Commission on September 8, 1992, with a unanimous aye vote by commissioners Raterink, Lamain, Prins, Wesseling, Tamminga, and Brandson, and Mayor Holtrop. 
ARTICLE 22. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
    This ordinance became effective on September 17, 1992, upon publication of notice of adoption. 
APPENDIX B - FRANCHISES[1] 
GranteeOrdinance 
No. Expiration Date (1) 
Michigan Consolidated Gas Company    11 1989 (2) 
Century Television of Michigan, Inc.    95 1997 (3) 
Consumers Power Company   103 Revocable at will of city 
commission (4) 
Michigan Bell Blanket permit each year (5) 
Michigan Consolidated Gas Company   157 2023 (6) 
Nordic Electric, L.L.C. 00-221 Ten years (7) 
DTE Energy Marketing, Inc. 00-222 30 years  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public utility franchise, Ch. XII. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); administration, Ch. 2; cable communications, Ch. 7; steets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 5 10-28-58 1-8 17-16-17-23 9-12 17-25-17-28 7 10-28-58 16-171 8 10-28-58 1 15-3 2-6 15-2 7 5-7 8 15-2 12 15-4-15-8 13 15-9 9 10-28-58 1 4-1 2 4-5 4-21 3 4-22, 4-23 4, 5 4-24, 4-25 6(b) 4-27 6(d) 4-28 6(e) 4-26 6(f) 4-23 7 4-29 8-10 4-2-4-4 11 4-30 10 7-12-60 1.1, 1.2 21-1, 21-2 2.1, 2.2 21-21, 21-22 2.3 21-24 3.1 21-23 3.2 21-25 4.1-4.5 21-41-21-45 5.1-5.12 21-61-21-72 7.1 21-3 8.2 21-4 14 10-9-62 1-5 24-16-24-20 17 10-12-65 1(2.2(1)) 16-163 1(2.2(5)) 16-186 1(2.2(8)) 16-5 1(2.2(9)) 16-188 1(2.2(11)) 16-161 1(2.2(12)) 16-189 1(2.2(13)) 16-3 1(2.2(14)) 16-226 16-231, 16-232 1(2.2(15)) 16-212 1(2.2(16)) 16-4 1(2.2(17)) 16-101 1(2.2(18)) 16-52 1(2.2(19)) 16-6 1(2.2(20)) 16-165 1(2.2(21)) 16-167 1(2.2(22)) 16-164 1(2.2(23)) 16-166 1(2.2(24)) 16-192 1(2.2(25)) 16-190 1(2.2(26)) 16-193 1(2.2(27)) 16-191 1(2.2(28)) 16-170 1(2.2(29)) 16-27 1(2.2(32)) 16-162 1(2.2(33)) 16-30 1(2.2(34)) 16-51 1(2.2(36)) 16-86 1(2.2(37)) 16-7 1(2.2(38), (39)) 16-211 1(2.2(41)) 16-124 1(2.2(42)), (43)) 16-126, 16-127 1(3) 3-1, 3-2 1(4) 3-4 18 10-12-65 14(a), (b) 22-91, 22-92 14(c), (d) 22-93 14(e) 22-94 14(f)-(h) 22-95 14(i) 22-93 14(k), (l) 22-96, 22-97 19 12-14-65 1, 2 22-16 21 5-10-66 2 22-67, 22-68 3 22-66 26 5-14-68 1 2-16 27 6-11-68 1 22-67 2 22-66 28 11-12-68 1 22-16 29 12-10-68 1 22-41, 22-42 2 22-43 3 22-47 4 22-45 5 22-44 6 22-46 7 22-48 33 11-11-69 1 22-46 35 3-10-70 1 13-2 2 13-1 36 3-16-70 1-6 14-16-14-21 41 3-9-71 1 9-2 43 4-11-72 1 2-176-2-181 2 2-182 129  9-12-89 2 3-6 130 10-10-89 1 22-46 135  9-11-90 1-5 13-1-13-5 136 11-13-90 1-3 6-16-6-18 137 11-13-90 1-4 6-71-6-74 138 11-13-90 1, 2 11-16, 11-17 139 11-13-90 1-4 6-111-6-114 5       Rpld 15-2(5)-(8), (14) 141 10-31-90 Arts. I-X 23-91-23-100 142 12-20-90 1-10 17.5-1-17.5-10 143  3-12-91 1 22-17(8.10) (1)(n) 144  9-10-91 1, 2 22-101, 22-102 145  9-10-91 1-4 22-2 147  1-14-92 1 23-51-23-57 148  2-11-92 1 22-17(1.006c, 1.007b, 1.014a, 1.025b) 2 22-17(5.15, 5.15a-5.15d, 5.15h) 3, 4 22-17(5.16b, c) 5, 6 22-17(5.62a, b) 149  3-10-92 1, 2 6-31, 6-32 3 6-34 150  5-12-92 1 22-17(5.97) 2 22-17(9.3) 151  7-14-92 1-4 22-3 153 11-10-92 11-4 5-1-5-4 6       Rpld 5-1-5-7 157  7-13-93 App. B 159  9-20-93 1-19 7-90-7-105.3 160 11- 9-93 1 23-19(a) 2 23-98(f) 161 12-14-93 1 13-1 2 13-2(c) 3       Rpld 13-3 4 13-4 162 12-14-93 1 20-51-20-59 163 12-14-93 1 22-201-22-203 164 12-14-93 1       Rpld 3-1-3-4 2 16-1-16-16-3, 16-21, 16-31- 16-34, 16-41- 16-44, 16-51- 16-59, 16-61- 16-63 165  1-11-94 1 20-2 168  4-12-94 1       Rpld 21-1-21-4, 21- 21-21-25, 21- 41-21-45, 21- 61-21-72 2       Added 21-1-21-5, 21- 10-21-20, 21- 30-21-41 169  4-12-94 1 21-50-21-55 172  7-12-94 1-5 20-17-20-21 174  8- 9-94 1 8-20(a) 178  2-14-95 1 16-57 182 11-14-95 1       Added 6-120-6-134 184  1-9-96 1 16-42 Amend. of 
6-96 App. A, §§ 5-4(D)(6), 5-5(D)(6), 5-6(D)(6) 96-187 10- 8-96 1 11-20-11-27 96-188 10- 8-96 1 6-111 2 11-16 96-189  1-14-97 1 5-1 2 15-1 3 16-1 4       Rpld 16-21(5), (6) 5-7 16-49-16-51 97-195  5-13-97 1 16-57 Amend. of 
8-97 App. A, § 9-2(A) 97-199 11-11-97 1       Rpld 18-1, 18-16-18-23 97-200 12- 9-97 1 App. A, § 3-2 2 App. A, § 5-16(C) 3 App. A, § 13-7.I 4 App. A, § 15-13.L 97-201 12- 9-97 8-19(note) Amend. of 
12-97 App. A, § 13-7(I) 98-204  2-10-98 1-3 App. A, § 5-20(B), (C), (E) 98-205  6- 9-98 1 7-181-7-183 98-208 10-13-98 1 App. A, § 9-3 98-209 10-13-98 1, 2 App. A, § 5-11(I)(3), (4) 98-210 10-13-98 1 App. A, § 3-2 2 App. A, § 13-7(J) Amend. of 11- 3-98 2 9-2 99-214  7-13-99 1, 2 20-2, 20-3 Amend. of 
10-99 App. A, § 6-6(D)(5) 00-217  3-14-00 1 App. A, § 3-2 2, 3 App. A, § 4-3(A), (C) 4 App. A, § 4-4(tit.) 5 App. A, Table 4.1 6 App. A, § 13-7(K) 7 App. A, § 16-5(D)(3) 8       Rpld App. A, Table 16.1 00-218  3-14-00 1 6-31 00-220  6-13-00 1 1-14, 1-15 2       Rpld 4-28 00-221  7-11-00 App. B 00-222  7-11-00 App. B 00-225 11-14-00 1 16-54 00-226 11-14-00 1 App. A. § 5-1.B, Fig. 5.1 01-227  2-13-01 1       Rpld 21-50-21-55       Added 21-50-21-56 01-228  2-13-01 1 App. A, § 5-1.B, Fig. 5.1       Rltd App. A, § 11.5.L       as App. A, § 11.5.K 2       Rpld App. A, § 11.5.K 01-229  5- 8-01 1 App. A, § 5-1.B, Fig. 5.1 01-232  9-10-01 1 6-16 2 6-51 3 6-71 4       Rpld 6-17, 6-18, 6-72 5       Rnbd 6-73-6-75       as 6-72-6-74 02-235  7- 9-02 1 App. A, § 4-35 2 App. A, § 5-4D.6.a 3 App. A, § 5-5D.6.a 4 App. A, § 5-6D.6.a 02-236  7- 9-02 1 10-1-10-7 02-237  7- 9-02 1 2-200-2-209 02-238 11-12-02 1 21.5-1-21.5-18 03-239  1-14-03 1       Added 6-140, 6-141 03-242  8-12-03 1 App. A, Fig. 4.1 2 App. A, Fig. 9.1 3 App. A, § 15-16       Rltd 15-16(C)-(F)       as 15-16(D)-(G) 03-245 12- 9-03 1 Ch. 22 04-247  1-13-04 1 Ch. 22 (title) 2 Ch. 22, 
Art. I (title) 3       Added Ch. 22, Art. II, 22-10 04-249 12-14-04 1       Dltd 23-126-23-136       Added 23-110-23-203 05-251 10-11-05 1       Added 6-150-6-154 05-253  9-13-05 1       Added 4-31-4-42 05-255 11-15-05 1 6-124 05-256 12-13-05 1       Added 6-141(b) 06-257  4-11-06 1 5-1 2, 3 5-2(c), (e), (f) 4 5-3(a) 06-258 10-10-06 1 App. A, § 5-12.D.4 2 App. A, § 5-13.C.1 3 App. A, § 5-14.D.8 4 App. A, § 5-15.D.3 5       Added App. A, § 15-2.H 6       Added App. A, § 15-9.B.28 7       Added App. A, § 16-3.B.5 07-260  1- 9-07 1       Added App. A, § 4-36 07-263 12-11-07 1       Added App. A, Art. 5, § 5-20 E. 12. 08-264  3-11-08 1       Rpld Ch. 3, §§ 3-1-3-6 1       Added Ch. 3, Arts. I, II 08-265  4- 8-08 1       Added 6-153(c), (d)       Rnbd 6-153(c)-(e)       as 6-153(e)-(g) 08-268  6-10-08 1 3-1 2 3-3(a) 3 3-33 4 3-42(a) 08-269  9-16-08 1       Added 3-7 08-270 10-14-08 1 6-153 08-271 11-11-08 1 3-7 09-272  2-10-09 1(1)       Added 20-60 09-273  4-14-09 1       Added 20-61 10-275  9-14-10 1 1-13(a) 2       Added Ch. 25 10-277 12-14-10 1 25-8(10), (15) 10-278 12-14-10 1       Added 3-8 11-281 11-15-11 1 23-21 11-282 12-13-11 1 12-1-12-3 Memo of  1-16-13 App. A, § 5-1(map) 12-285  6-12-12 1       Added 11-40-11-52 2 16-49(13) 3 16-50(3) 12-287  9-11-12 1       Added 4-51-4-56 13-291  5-14-13 2       Added App. A, § 5-16.C.5 13-294  7- 9-13 1 11-44 13-296 12-10-13 2 App. A, § 4-3C.4 3       Added App. A, § 4-3.E 14-297  3-18-14 1 16-21 2       Added 16-22 Memo. of 11-19-15 Ch. 21, 
Apps. A-I 
Fig. 5.1 16-304  9-13-16 1       Added 2-190-2-193 16-305 11-15-16 1 3-42 17-306  3-14-17 1       Added 6-126(4) 2 6-127 17-307  3-14-17 1 11-16 17-308  3-14-17 1       Rpld 3-8  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
STATE CONSTITUTION 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the State Constitution. 
Article Section Section 
this Code II 8 Pt. I, § 13.2 III 1 Pt. I, § 3.14(1) VII 22 Pt. I Pt. I, Ch. VI Pt. I, § 13.4 24 Pt. I, Ch. XII Pt. I, § 2.3(7) 25 Pt. I, Ch. XII Pt. I, § 12.3 30 7-42 XI 1 Pt. I, § 5.5  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 1-2 15.231 Pt. I, § 4.10 Pt. I, § 7.4 Pt. I, § 13.7 15.261 Pt. I, § 6.3 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. V 2-16 17-18 15.265 Pt. I, § 6.2 15.341 Ch. 2, Arts. II-V 29.1 Ch. 11 46.401 Pt. I, § 3.6 Pt. I, § 4.3 117.1 et seq. 25-1 117.1 Pt. I 117.3(a) Pt. I, § 4.2 Pt. I, § 8.5 117.3(c) Pt. I, Ch. III Pt. I, § 3.14 117.3(d) Pt. I, Ch. IV Pt. I, §§ 5.1-5.3 117.3(e) Pt. I, § 3.2 Pt. I, § 6.12 117.3(f) Pt. I, § 8.2 117.3(g) Pt. I, § 8.1 117.3(h) Pt. I, § 7.6 117.3(i) Pt. I, §§ 8.4, 8.5 117.3(j) Pt. I, § 6.6 117.3(k) Pt. I, Ch. VI Pt. I, § 6.9 6-16 6-31 6-51 6-71 11-16 117.3(l) Pt. I, § 6.3 Pt. I, § 13.7 117.3(m) Pt. I, § 4.10 Pt. I, § 6.5 117.4a Pt. I, Ch. IX 117.44(a)(1), (2) Pt. I, 
§§ 10.1, 10.2 117.4b Pt. I, Ch. IX 117.4b(1) Pt. I, § 2.3(1) 117.4c Pt. I, § 2.3(7) Pt. I, Ch. XII 117.4d Pt. I, Ch. IX 117.4e(1) Pt. I, § 2.3(4) 117.4e(2) Pt. I, § 2.3(3) 117.4f Pt. I, § 2.3(7) Pt. I, Ch. XII 117.4h(1), (2) Pt. I, § 2.3(8), (9) 117.4h(2) Pt. I, § 12.6 117.4h(3), (4) Pt. I, 
§ 2.3(10), (11) 117.4h(6) Pt. I, § 2.3(12) 117.4i 1-13 117.4i(2)-(5) Pt. I, 
§ 2.3(13)-(16) 117.4i(6) Pt. I, § 6.11 117.4i(10) Pt. I, § 6.10 117.4j(3) Pt. I, § 2.2 117.5 Pt. I, § 2.3 Pt. I, Ch. IX 117.5(i) Pt. I, § 12.3 117.5b Pt. I, § 6.9 1-1 117.5c Pt. I, §§ 5.2, 5.3 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 2-186 117.5c(a) 2-176-2-181 117.5c(b) 2-182 117.5c(c) 2-183, 2-184 117.5c(f) 2-185 117.21 Pt. I, § 13.4 117.61 Pt. I, Ch. I 123.241 Ch. 13 123.361 Ch. 13 124.151 Ch. 24, Art. II 125.31 Ch. 17 17-16 App. A, § 3.1 125.32-125.41 17-16-17-25 125.43-125.45 17-26-17-28 125.71 Ch. 8 125.581 et seq. 25-1 125.581 Ch. 17 App. A App. A, § 3.1 125.583a App. A, § 5.6 125.584 App. A, Art. VII 125.584a App. A, Art. VI         App. A, Art. VIII 125.584b       App. A, Art. IVA         App. A, Art. VIII 125.584d       App. A, Art. VIA         App. A, Art. VIII 125.584e       App. A, Art. VIII App. A, § 3.4 125.601 Ch. 8 125.651 Ch. 8 125.901 Ch. 8 125.1101 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. II 14-16 125.1501 Ch. 6 6-71 125.1501 et seq       6-101, 6-111 125.1501 et seq.       6-31 125.1508 6-16 11-16 125.1509 6-51 6-71 125.1601 Ch. 8, Art. III 125.1605 8-42 125.1628- 
125.1636 8-42 125.1651 Ch. 8, Art. II 8-16 129.12 Pt. I, § 4.7 Pt. I, § 7.8 129.121 Pt. I, § 10.3 131.1 Pt. I, Ch. X 141.421 Pt. I, § 4.7 168.1 Pt. I, Ch. III Ch. 9 168.24a Pt. I, § 3.12 168.491 Pt. I, § 3.14 168.631 Pt. I, § 3.5 168.639 Pt. I, § 3.5 168.644a Pt. I, § 3.3 9-1 168.644b Pt. I, § 3.4 168.644f Pt. I, § 3.7 168.644g(3) Pt. I, § 3.6 9-2 168.653 Pt. I, § 3.14 168.654 Pt. I, § 3.2 168.720 Pt. I, § 3.14 168.861 Pt. I, § 3.15 168.951 Pt. I, § 13.2 211.1 Pt. I, Ch. VIII 211.1, 211.2       Pt. I, §§ 8.2, 8.3 211.7 Pt. I, § 8.10 211.10 Pt. I, § 8.3 211.24 Pt. I, § 8.4 211.30a Pt. I, § 8.6 211.43b Pt. I, § 4.7 Pt. I, § 7.8 211.44 Pt. I, § 8.7 211.741 Ch. 19 19-6, 19-7 19-12 211.761 Ch. 19 213.21 Pt. I, § 2.3(3) 242.1 Pt. I, § 13.1 247.51 Ch. 24, Art. II 247.61 Ch. 24, Art. II 247.183 Ch. 7 282.1 Ch. 12 Ch. 18 282.101 Ch. 18 18-16, 18-17 18-19 18-21 18-23 287.290 Ch. 5 311.1321 16-227 323.1 Ch. 12 12-5 12-15(a) 12-15(b)(1) 12-17(1) 23-95(g) 333.7101 16-194 333.12501 Ch. 14 336.11 Ch. 15 338.881 Ch. 6, Art. III 338.901 Ch. 6, Art. IV 399.5 Pt. I, § 4.10 436.1 Ch. 3 560.101 Ch. 21 App. A, § 5.1(F)(g) 600.1 et seq. 25-1 600.8302 25-9 600.8715(3)(b) 25-1 600.8715(4) 25-1 600.8719 25-1 600.8721 25-1 600.8729 25-9 600.8731 25-9 600.8733 25-9 600.8733(2) 25-9 600.9921 Pt. I, §§ 3.6, 3.7 Pt. I, §§ 4.16, 4.17 691.1201 Ch. 15 750.49 Ch. 5 750.141 3-5 750.200 Ch. 11 750.240 Ch. 11 750.463 Ch. 4 752.811 Ch. 4 764.9c App. A, § 
3.5(6)(B)(5) 17.5-3(e)(1) 764.9f App. A, § 
3.5(B)(5) 17.5-3(e)(1)  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
 This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section this Code 2.212 1-2 3.521 Ch. 12 12-5 12-15(a) 12-15(b)(1) 12-17(1) 23-95(g) 3.560(101) 22-17(5.82(1)) 22-17(5.82(6)) 3.560(186) 22-17(5.15f(3)) 3.752 Pt. I, § 4.7 Pt. I, § 7.8 3.996(1) Pt. I, § 10.3 4.450(1) 22-17(1.024) 4.559(1) Ch. 11 4.1700(71) Ch. 2, Arts. II-V 4.1800(11) Pt. I, § 6.3 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. V 2-16 17-18 4.1800(5) Pt. I, § 6.2 4.1801(1) Pt. I, § 4.10 Pt. I, § 7.4 Pt. I, § 13.7 5.359(1) Pt. I, § 3.6 Pt. I, § 4.3 5.2071 Pt. I 5.2073(a) Pt. I, § 4.2 Pt. I, § 8.5 5.2073(c) Pt. I, Ch. III Pt. I, § 3.14 5.2073(d) Pt. I, Ch. IV Pt. I, §§ 5.1-5.3 5.2073(e) Pt. I, § 3.2 Pt. I, § 6.12 5.2073(f) Pt. I, § 8.2 5.2073(g) Pt. I, § 8.1 5.2073(h) Pt. I, § 7.6 5.2073(i) Pt. I, §§ 8.4, 8.5 5.2073(j) Pt. I, § 6.6 5.2073(k) Pt. I, Ch. VI Pt. I, § 6.9 6-16 6-31 6-51 6-71 11-16 5.2073(l) Pt. I, § 6.3 Pt. I, § 13.7 5.2073(m) Pt. I, § 4.10 Pt. I, § 6.5 5.2074 Pt. I, Ch. IX 5.2074(1), (2)       Pt. I, §§ 10.1, 10.2 5.2075 Pt. I, Ch. IX 5.2075(1) Pt. I, § 2.3(1) 5.2076 Pt. I, Ch. XII 5.2077 Pt. I, Ch. IX 5.2078(1) Pt. I, § 2.3(4) 5.2078(2) Pt. I, § 2.3(3) 5.2079 Pt. I, § 2.3(7) Pt. I, Ch. XII 5.2081(1), (2) Pt. I, § 2.3(8), (9) 5.2081(2) Pt. I, § 12.6 5.2081(3), (4) Pt. I, § 2.3(10), (11) 5.2081(6) Pt. I, § 2.3(12) 5.2082 1-13 5.2082(2)-(5)       Pt. I, § 2.3(13)-(16) 5.2082(6) Pt. I, § 6.11 5.2082(10) Pt. I, § 6.10 5.2083(3) Pt. I, § 2.2 5.2084 Pt. I, § 2.3 Pt. I, Ch. IX 5.2084(2) Pt. I, § 6.9 1-1 5.2084(3) Pt. I, §§ 5.2, 5.3 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 2-186 5.2084(3)(a) 2-176-2-181 5.2084(3)(b) 2-182 5.2084(3)(c) 2-183, 2-184 5.2084(3)(f) 2-185 5.2084(i) Pt. I, § 12.3 5.2085 Pt. I, Ch. I 5.2100 Pt. I, § 13.4 5.2661 Ch. 13 5.2726(1) Ch. 13 5.5931 App. A App. A, § 3.1 5.2932 Ch. 17 5.2933(1) App. A, § 5.6 5.2934 App. A, Art. VII 5.2934(1) App. A, Art. VI 5.2934(1), (2) App. A, Art. VIII 5.2934(2)       App. A, Art. IVA 5.2934(4)       App. A, Art. VIA         App. A, Art. VIII 5.2934(5)       App. A, Art. VIII 5.2935       App. A, Art. VIII App. A, § 3.4 5.2949(1) Ch. 6 6-71 5.2949(8) 6-16 11-16 5.2949(9) 6-51 6-71 5.2991 Ch. 17 17-16 App. A, § 3.1 5.2992-5.3001 17-16-17-25 3003-5.3005 17-26-17-28 5.3010(1) Ch. 8, Art. II 8-16 5.3011 Ch. 8 5.3057(1) Ch. 8 5.3058(1) Ch. 8 5.3188(1) Pt. I, Ch. X 5.3228(21) Pt. I, § 4.7 5.3501 Ch. 8 5.3520(1) Ch. 8, Art. III 5.3520(5) 8-42 5.3520(28)- 
5.3520(36) 8-42 5.3534(1) Ch. 19 19-6, 19-7 19-12 5.3536(1) Ch. 19 6.1001 Pt. I, Ch. III Ch. 9 6.1024(1) Pt. I, § 3.12 6.1491 Pt. I, § 3.14 6.1631 Pt. I, § 3.5 6.1639 Pt. I, § 3.5 6.1644(1) Pt. I, § 3.3 9-1 6.1644(2) Pt. I, § 3.4 6.1644(6) Pt. I, § 3.7 6.1644(7)(3) Pt. I, § 3.6 9-2 6.1653 Pt. I, § 3.14 6.1654 Pt. I, § 3.2 6.1720 Pt. I, § 3.14 6.1861 Pt. I, § 3.15 6.1951 Pt. I, § 13.2 7.1 Pt. I, Ch. VIII 7.1, 7.2 Pt. I, §§ 8.2, 8.3 7.7 Pt. I, § 8.10 7.10 Pt. I, § 8.3 7.24 Pt. I, § 8.4 7.30(1) Pt. I, § 8.6 7.86 Pt. I, § 4.7 Pt. I, § 7.8 7.87 Pt. I, § 8.7 8.11 Pt. I, § 2.3(3) 9.263 Ch. 7 9.591 Pt. I, § 13.1 9.631(1) Ch. 24, Art. II 9.1801 Ch. 22 9.1801(2) 22-17(1.001a) 9.1804(2) 22-17(1.004) 9.1808(2) 22-17(1.007a) 9.1821 22-17(1.012c) 9.1825(1) 22-17(1.002a) 9.1832(2) 22-17(1.016) 9.1842 22-17(1.024) 9.1857 22-17(1.031a) 9.1952 22-67(d) 9.1952(1) 22-17(2.5) 9.1952(2) 22-17(2.5a) 9.1952(3), (4) 22-17(2.6), (2.7) 9.1952(5)-(7) 22-17(2.7a)-2.7c) 9.2001 22-17(2.10i(1)) 9.2011 22-17(2.10i(1)) 22-17(5.63) 9.2011(1) 22-17(2.10i(1)) 22-17(2.17c(3)) 22-17(5.63(1)) 9.2022 22-17(5.15f(2)) 9.2023       22-17(5.15f(3), (4)) 9.2305, 2306 Ch. 22 9.2310 Ch. 22 9.2317 22-17(2.10(1)) 9.2319 22-17(2.10) 9.2325 22-17(5.15) 9.2325(6), (7)       22-17(5.15f), (5.15g) 9.2374 22-17(8.10) 9.2375(5) 22-17(8.10(r)(i)) 9.2382 22-17(5.76(5)(c)) 22-17(5.97) 9.2383 22-17(2.5a) 9.2397 22-17(5.76(8)) 9.2397(1) 22-17(5.76(8)) 9.2398 22-17(5.76) 9.2398(1) 22-17(5.76(8)) 9.2409 22-17(5.81) 9.2410(2) 22-17(5.82(3)) 9.2410(4), (5)       22-17(5.82), (5.83) 9.2417 22-17(2.10b(2)) 9.2419(1) 22-17(2.10b(2)) 9.2422 22-17(2.10b(2)) 9.2424 22-17(2.10b(2)) 9.2425 22-17(2.10b(2)) 9.2426 22-17(2.10b(2)) 9.2427 22-17(2.10(5)) 22-17(2.17c) 9.2427(1)-(3) 22-17(2.10) 9.2427(3) 22-17(2.8) 9.2427(4) 22-17(2.10i(1)) 9.2428(1) 22-17(2.15) 9.2428(1)-(5) 22-17(2.10) 9.2428(4) 22-17(2.17a) 9.2442 22-17(2.10b) 9.2447 22-17(2.10g) 9.2449 22-17(2.10i) 9.2603(4))       22-17(8.10(r)(ii)) 9.2607 22-17(2.10g) 22-17(2.10i(1))         22-17(2.10i(6), (7)) 9.2651 Ch. 22, Art. II 22-16 9.3200(10) 22-17(6.23) 12.270(1) Ch. 24, Art. II 12.541 Ch. 5 13.1321 16-227 1781 Ch. 12 Ch. 18 13.1820(1) Ch. 18 18-16, 18-17 18-19 18-21 18-23 14.15(7101) 16-194 22-17(1.007a) 14.15(12501) Ch. 14 14.15(20301) 22-17(1.001a) 14.58(1) Ch. 15 14.451 Ch. 6, Art. IV 528(201) Ch. 15 15.1805 Pt. I, § 4.10 18.185(1) 22-17(5.76(7)) 18.204(1) Ch. 6, Art. III 18.971 Ch. 3 19.855(1) Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. II 14-16 26.4301(101)       App. A, § 5.1(F)(g) 27A.8312 22-17(2.7a(2)) 27A.8395       Ch. 22, Art. III, Div. 2 22-17(2.10b(9)) 22-41 27A.9921       Pt. I, §§ 3.6, 3.7         Pt. I, §§ 4.16, 4.17 28.181 Ch. 24, Art. II 28.244 Ch. 5 28.336 3-5 28.397 Ch. 11 28.437 Ch. 11 28.643(101) Ch. 4 28.718 Ch. 4 28.843 22-17(2.8(3)) 28.868(3)       App. A, § 3.5(B)(5) 17.5-3(e)(1) 28.868(6)       App. A, § 3.5(B)(5) 17.5-3(e)(1) 28.871(1) 22-17(2.17c)  
