
Hamtramck, MI Code of Ordinances


CITY OF HAMTRAMCK, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2017 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local Legislation current through Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-29-2017



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHARTER



Chapter



CHAPTER 1
INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES



   1-01   Body corporate politic; general powers



   1-02   Boundaries



CHAPTER 2
WARD AND ELECTION PRECINCTS



   2-01   One ward



   2-02   Election precincts; number, boundaries



CHAPTER 3
REGISTRATION, NOMINATION AND ELECTION



   3-01   Registered voters; registration required, state law



   3-02   Candidates; nomination at primary election



   3-03   Primary elections; time



   3-04   Precinct election inspectors; compensation



   3-05   Candidates; statement of candidacy; filing, forms; petitions,
signatures; restriction, inspection



   3-06   Challengers, appointment



   3-07   Conducting primary elections; state law



   3-08   Canvass of votes; returns



   3-09   Candidates nominated for general election; tie vote, recount;
determination



   3-10   Number of candidates; primary election not required



   3-11   Filling vacancies; petitions, ballots, statements of
candidacy, requirements



   3-12   Municipal general elections; time, state law



   3-13   Special elections; council authority



   3-14   Qualified voters



   3-15   Ballots, ballot boxes; printing, filing; city clerk, duties



   3-16   City election commission; composition, meetings; special
officers; powers and duties enumerated



   3-17   Election officers, compensation



   3-18   Elections; notice required; city clerk, duties



   3-19   Conduct of elections; state law



   3-20   Canvass of votes; declaration, statement required; state law



   3-21   Tie vote; determination



   3-22   Recount; petition, procedure; state law



CHAPTER 4
ELECTIVE OFFICERS



   4-01   Elective officers enumerated; term



   4-02   Elective officers; qualifications



   4-03   Elective offices; filling vacancies



   4-04   Council members who run for mayor



   4-05   Mayor who runs for council



CHAPTER 5
APPOINTED DEPARTMENT HEADS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



   5-01   Appointed department heads, boards, commissions;
qualifications, removals; filling vacancies



   5-02   Appointed boards and commissions, term



   5-03   Department heads, boards and commissions; term; oath
required; removal



   5-04   Department heads, boards and commissions; nepotism,
political, religious consideration prohibited



   5-05   Elective officers; appointments, compensation, restrictions



   5-06   Appointed department heads, boards or commissions;
compensation, determination



CHAPTER 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ELECTIVE OFFICERS, AND DEPARTMENT HEADS,
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



   6-01   Elective officers; notice of election required



   6-02   Oath of office required; form



   6-03   Officers; bonds, filing; requisites



   6-04   Officers; additional, new bonds



   6-05   Bonds, liability



   6-06   Oaths, bonds; failure to file, penalty



   6-07   Oaths, bonds; failure to file; declaration of vacancy



   6-08   Elective, appointive office; persons in default disqualified



   6-09   Delivery of books, papers, etc., to successor required



   6-10   Officers, employees; surety bonds; prohibition



   6-11   Declaration of vacancy in office; causes enumerated



   6-12   Appointive officers; powers and duties



   6-13   Fees; duty to pay to city treasurer



   6-14   Officers; charter violations, penalty; city attorney, duty



   6-15   Officers; expenditures, commitments in excess of
appropriations prohibited; penalty; city attorney, duty



   6-16   Principles of personnel management



   6-17   Appointments to office, restriction



   6-18   Officers; resignations, procedure



   6-19   Filling vacancies; procedure, term



CHAPTER 7
COUNCIL



   7-01   Council, composition; compensation



   7-02   Legislative authority; administrative, executive powers



   7-03   Meetings; presiding officer; determination; clerk; appointive
officers; attendance, duty



   7-04   Journal of proceedings required; rules of procedure;
disorderly conduct, ordinance authorized



   7-05   General welfare; ordinances, regulations



   7-06   Resolutions, majority vote; mayor’s voting rights



   7-07   Specific powers; enumeration not construed as limitation



   7-08   Officers, employees, departments; city council, authority



   7-09   Regular, special meetings; time, place; open to public; quorum



   7-10   Accounts, claims; audit, approval required; requisites



CHAPTER 8
POWERS OF CITY AND COUNCIL IN GENERAL



   8-01   General powers



   8-02   Intergovernmental contracts



CHAPTER 9
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS



Mayor



   9-01   Powers and duties



   9-02   Mayor pro tem



   9-03   Compensation of mayor and mayor pro tem



City Clerk



   9-04   Powers and duties



City Controller



   9-05   Powers and duties



   9-06   Monthly, annual financial statements, contents; funds,
management, liability; records, bond required



   9-07   Controller, records; audit required



City Treasurer



   9-08   Powers and duties; bond; taxes, collection



   9-09   City funds, custody; disbursements, duty; accounts



   9-10   Monthly, annual reports required contents



   9-11   Disbursements; vouchers required



   9-12   City funds; separate accounts



   9-13   Depositories, designation by council; interest; daily deposits



City Assessor



   9-14   Powers and duties



City Attorney



   9-15   Qualifications; powers and duties



Chief of Police



   9-16   Qualifications; powers and duties



Chief of Fire Department



   9-17   Qualifications; powers and duties



City Manager



   9-18   City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation



Civil Service System



   9-19   Establishment; city council, authority



CHAPTER 10
POLICE DEPARTMENT



   10-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments



   10-02   City manager; regular appointments, vacancies, authority



Chief of Police



   10-03   Chief of police; powers and duties



   10-04   Police; powers and duties



   10-05   Police, compensation



CHAPTER 11
FIRE DEPARTMENT



   11-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments



   11-02   Fire chief, firemen; appointment



Chief of the Fire Department



   11-03   Fire department, supervision



   11-04   Extinguishing fires; authority to command aid; violation,
penalty



   11-05   Fire hazards, nuisances; abatement



   11-06   Fire chief, firemen, department employees; compensation



CHAPTER 12
ORDINANCES



   12-01   Enacting clause, style



   12-02   Adoption, requisites; effective date



   12-03   Record, authentication required



   12-04   Record, publication; city clerk, duties



   12-05   Violations of ordinances; penalty, restriction



   12-06   Violations; fines, recovery; procedure



   12-07   Complaints, pleadings; reference to ordinances



CHAPTER 13
TAXATION AND FINANCE



   13-01   Power to tax; limitations



   13-02   Exemption from taxes



   13-03   Tax day



   13-04   Preparation of the assessment roll



   13-05   Board of review



   13-06   Duties and functions of board of review



   13-07   Clerk to certify tax levy



   13-08   City tax roll



   13-09   Tax roll certified for collection



   13-10   Tax lien on property



   13-11   Taxes due; notification



   13-12   Collection fees



   13-13   Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax



   13-14   Delinquent tax roll to county treasurer



   13-15   Protection of city lien



   13-16   Additional rights, duties, powers, immunities and procedures



   13-17   Budget procedure contracts



   13-18   Purchasing and contractual procedure



   13-19   Contracts, purchases, expenditures; regulations, restrictions



   13-20   Authority to expend funds



   13-21   Contracts, expenditures; budget provision required



   13-22   Contracts, expenditures; controller, approval prerequisite



CHAPTER 14
GENERAL FINANCE BORROWING POWERS



   14-01   General borrowing



   14-02   Special assessment bonds



   14-03   Other bonds



   14-04   Preparation and record



   14-05   Limitations of indebtedness



CHAPTER 15
IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS



   15-01   General power relative to special assessments



   15-02   Lien for special assessments



   15-03   Contested assessments



CHAPTER 16
STREETS, PARKS, TREES, AND SIDEWALKS



   16-01   Public ways; supervision and control



   16-02   Public ways; naming; vacation, abolition; notice, procedure



   16-03   Parks; vacation



   16-04   Improvements; taxes, special assessments authorized;
procedure



   16-05   Special assessment districts; city; expense, apportionment



   16-06   Public ways; encumbrances, obstructions; prohibitions, remedy



   16-07   Trees; regulations authorized



   16-08   Sidewalks; council authority



   16-09   Sidewalks; snow, ice, encumbrances; council authority



   16-10   Compliance with orders required; violations, remedy;
procedure



   16-11   Signs, awnings, etc.; regulations, prohibitions authorized



CHAPTER 17
SEWERS



   17-01   Maintenance, construction; appropriation of private property



   17-02   Construction, etc.; costs; special assessments, taxes
authorized



   17-03   Private drains; authority to require; costs; connection to
public drains



CHAPTER 18
PUBLIC UTILITIES



   18-01   General powers regarding utilities



   18-02   Rates



Water Works



   18-03   Water system; city manager responsibilities



   18-04   Water and sewer rates; meters; assessments for water



   18-05   Water for public purposes; appropriations required



   18-06   Connecting pipes; construction, maintenance; ordinance
required; connections, permit required



   18-07   Ordinances, resolutions authorized



Franchises



   18-08   Use of public ways; franchise required



   18-09   Franchises, licenses; term, restriction



   18-10   Irrevocable franchises; approval of registered voters
required



   18-11   Exclusive franchise prohibited; renewal, requisites



   18-12   Leasing, assigning franchises



   18-13   Changing, modifying franchises, procedure



   18-14   Public utilities; license fees authorized



   18-15   Franchises; reservations in favor of city required



   18-16   Joint use of franchise property; compensation; council
authority



CHAPTER 19
APPROPRIATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY



   19-01   Procedure, state law



   19-02   Awards in condemnation proceedings; special assessments
authorized; conditions, procedure; portion payable from general taxes



CHAPTER 20
RECALL; REMOVAL; INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM



   20-01   State law



   20-02   Appointive officers; removal



   20-03   Petitions; contents, signatures, requisites



   20-04   Form of petition



   20-05   Petition; filing; city clerk, duties



   20-06   Petitions; signatures; examination, determination; city
clerk duties



   20-07   Petitions; insufficiency; additional signatures, procedure



   20-08   Petitions; sufficiency; return to council



   20-09   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; special election



   20-10   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; regular election



   20-11   Referendum; petition, requisites; suspension of ordinance;
procedure



   20-12   Referendum; submission by council; time, restriction



   20-13   Conflicting ordinances; adoption; construction, determination



   20-14   Ordinances; submission to registered voters; notice,
publication required



   20-15   Ordinance adopted by referendum; amending, repealing;
restriction



   20-16   Additional regulation authorized, restriction



CHAPTER 21
MISCELLANEOUS



   21-01   Definitions



   21-02   Notice; posting, publication; requirements, evidence



   21-03   Process against city; service upon designated officers



   21-04   “Newspaper of general circulation” defined



   21-05   Records required



   21-06   Records; public inspection



   21-07   Fiscal year



   21-08   Uniform system of accounts; state law



   21-09   Books, records, accounts, etc.; examination, audit



   21-10   Misdemeanors; penalty



   21-11   Officers, employees; service in military forces;
compensation authorized



   21-12   Severability of provisions



   21-13   Charter; amending, revising; procedure; state law



   21-14   City seal; design, contents



   21-15   “He”, “masculine form” defined



   21-16   Council, officers; powers construed



CHAPTER 22
SUBMISSION AND ELECTION



   22-01   Charter; submission to registered voters, date



   22-02   Charter; publication required; official ballot



Official Ballot



   22-03   Effective date of charter




      (a-c)   Elected officers transition to revised charter





      (d)   Continuation of public and private rights





      (e)   Rights of employees





      (f)   Pension system





      (g)   One-year exemption for city clerk and treasurer





      (h)   Compensation for city clerk, city treasurer, council,
mayor and mayor pro tem





      (i)   General provision





      (j)   Conflicts of Interest and ethics ordinance




Preamble



   We, the people of the City of Hamtramck, County of Wayne, and State of
Michigan, pursuant to the authority granted by the Constitution and Statutes
of the State of Michigan, desiring to promote the peace, health, safety,
contentment, equitable treatment, and general welfare of all its people,
perfect a municipal government to meet the growing needs of our diverse
community, ensure effective and efficient administration of all City affairs
and secure the fullest measure of self-government allowed by the Constitution
and general law of our State, do ordain and establish this charter.



Chapter 1 - Incorporation and Boundaries



Sec. 1-01   Body corporate and politic; general powers



   The municipal corporation heretofore created by the voters on the 10th
day of October, A. D. 1921, pursuant to the Constitution and Statutes of the
State of Michigan and known as, “The City of Hamtramck” shall be a body
corporate and politic, under the name and style of “The City of
Hamtramck,” and shall have the powers as provided below.



   (a)   Powers of the City



   The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the
constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they
were specifically enumerated in this charter.



   (b)   Construction



   The powers of the City under this charter shall be construed liberally
in favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the
charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power in
this chapter.



   (c)   Intergovernmental relations



   The City may exercise any of its power or perform any of its functions
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states, or any state civil
division or agency, or the United States, or any of its agencies.



Sec. 1-02   Boundaries



   The boundaries of said City of Hamtramck shall be the same as those
fixed and established as the boundaries of the former Village of Hamtramck,
to which municipal corporation the City of Hamtramck is successor, which
boundaries are described as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of the Easterly line of Quarter Section
Sixty (60), Ten Thousand Acre Tract, Township of Hamtramck, Wayne County,
Michigan, with the Northerly boundary line of the City of Detroit, Wayne
County, Michigan, thence Westerly along the said Northerly boundary line of
the City of Detroit to the Easterly line of St. Aubin Avenue, thence
following said City of Detroit boundary line Northerly along said Easterly
line of St. Aubin Avenue and said Easterly line of St. Aubin Avenue extended
to a point in Quarter Section Thirty-Nine (39) of the Ten Thousand Acre
Tract, said point being 233 feet Northerly of the Southerly line of said
Quarter Section Thirty-Nine (39), thence again following the boundary lines
of the City of Detroit, Westerly on a line parallel with the Southerly line
of said Quarter Sections Thirty-Nine (39) and Thirty-Eight (38) and being 233
feet Northerly of the Southerly line of said Quarter Sections Thirty-Nine
(39) and Thirty-Eight (38) to the Westerly line of the Detroit, Grand Haven
and Milwaukee Railway Right-of-Way, thence Northerly following the Westerly
line of said Right-of-Way to the Northerly line of Quarter Section
Twenty-Three (23) Ten Thousand Acre Tract, thence Easterly along the
Northerly line of Quarter Sections 23, 22 and 21, all in the Ten Thousand
Acre Tract, to the Northeast corner of said Quarter Section Twenty-One (21),
thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Quarter Section Twenty-One
(21), of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract to the Northwest corner of Fractional
Section Twenty (20), Township One (1), south of Range Twelve (12) East,
thence East along the East line of said Fractional Section Twenty (20) to the
Northeast corner thereof, thence South along the East line of said Fractional
Section Twenty (20), Township One (1) South of Range Twelve (12) East to the
Southeast corner thereof, thence West along the South line of said Section
Twenty (20), to the East line of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract, thence
Southerly along the Easterly line of Quarter Sections Forty-One (41) and
Sixty (60) of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract to the Northerly boundary lines of
the City of Detroit, Wayne County, Michigan, and being the place of beginning.



Chapter 2 - Ward and Election Precincts



Sec. 2-01   One ward



   The City of Hamtramck shall consist of one ward.



Sec. 2-02   Election precincts; number, boundaries



   The City of Hamtramck shall establish the number of election precincts
and boundaries by ordinance.



Chapter 3 - Registration, Nomination and Election



Sec. 3-01   Registered voters; registration required, state law



   The voters of the City of Hamtramck shall be registered as provided by
state law.



Sec. 3-02   Candidates; nomination at primary election



   Candidates for all offices to be voted for at any municipal election
under the provisions of this charter shall be nominated at a primary
election, and no other names shall appear on the election ballot for election
of such officers, except those selected in the manner hereinafter prescribed.



Sec. 3-03   Primary elections; time



   A primary election for the nomination of candidates for all elective
municipal offices to be filled at the succeeding general municipal election
shall be at a date and time to be established by ordinance or resolution of
the city council and in conformity with state law.



Sec. 3-04   Precinct election inspectors; compensation



   Precinct election inspectors for all elections shall be appointed and
compensated in the manner provided by law.



Sec. 3-05   Candidates; statement of candidacy; filing, forms; petitions,
signatures; restriction, inspection



   Any person desiring to become a candidate for any elective office in
the City of Hamtramck, shall on or before the time provided by state law
prior to the primary election, file with the city clerk an affidavit of
identity.



   Each candidate shall at the time file a petition of at least
twenty-five (25) and not more than fifty (50) registered voters, requesting
such candidacy. Each petition shall be verified by one or more persons as to
the qualifications, residence, and street number of each of the persons
signing the petition, and the petition shall be in the form required by state
law. In lieu of a petition, candidates may pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
filing fee.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sign more than one such
nominating petition for the same office, except when there are two or more
candidates to be elected for the same office, when he may sign as many
petitions as there are persons to be elected for such office.



   The city clerk shall prepare and keep on hand blank forms of the
nominating petitions, and shall furnish the petition, free of charge, for the
use of the voters and candidates.



   All such nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection after
being filed in the office of the city clerk in accordance with such rules and
regulations as shall be prescribed by him and in conformance with state law.



Sec. 3-06   Challengers, appointment



   Challengers may be appointed in such manner and with such rights and
privileges as are provided in the general laws of the state.



Sec. 3-07   Conducting primary elections; state law



   Primary elections, except as otherwise provided, shall be conducted as
provided for the holding of elections under this charter and state and
federal law.



Sec. 3-08   Canvass of votes; returns



   Immediately upon the closing of the polls, the inspectors of each
precinct shall count the ballots and ascertain the number of votes cast in
the precinct for each of the candidates whose names shall be printed or
written upon such ballots, and shall count the votes for and against any
charter amendment or other special question which may be submitted to the
registered voters at such primary election and return the count forthwith to
the city clerk in accordance with state law.



Sec. 3-09   Candidates nominated for general election; tie vote, recount;
determination



   When only one person is to be elected to any office, then the two
candidates receiving the highest number of votes for that office shall be the
only candidates whose names shall be placed on the ballots for that office at
the general election.



   When two or more persons are to be elected to any office, then the
names of the persons receiving at the primary election the highest number of
votes for the office up to a number equal to twice the number of persons to
be elected to the office at the general election, shall be placed upon the
ballot for that office.



   In case of a tie vote, or if a recount of the votes cast at a primary
election is desired, the same proceedings shall apply as provided in this
chapter relative to vote recounts and tie votes.



Sec. 3-10   Number of candidates; primary election not required



   If at the expiration of the time for the filing of nomination
petitions, the number of candidates for each and every office to be voted
upon shall not exceed the number of candidates to be nominated for such
respective offices, then no primary election shall be held and the persons
who have filed such petitions and nominating statements shall be nominated.



   The names of such candidates shall be printed upon the ballot to be
voted at the next municipal election in the same manner as though such
candidates had been nominated at a regularly held primary election.



Sec. 3-11   Filling vacancies; petitions, ballots, statements of
candidacy, requirements



   Whenever it shall be necessary to nominate candidates to fill
vacancies, the candidates for the nomination for such office shall state such
fact in their petitions and affidavit of identity. The primary ballot shall
distinguish the candidates for the unexpired terms from the candidates for
the regular full term.



Sec. 3-12   Municipal general elections; time, state law



   All municipal general elections held in the City of Hamtramck, shall be
held in odd-numbered years in the manner prescribed by the law of the State
relative to general elections except that they will be on a non-partisan
basis.



Sec. 3-13   Special elections; council authority



   Special elections may be appointed by resolution of the council and
held at such times as it shall determine. The purpose and object of such
election shall be fully set forth in the resolution. No more than two special
elections, including a primary election, shall be held within one year unless
otherwise allowed by state law. All special elections shall be held on a
non-partisan basis.



Sec. 3-14   Qualified voters



   The inhabitants of the City who are registered to vote in the City
under state law shall vote in the election district where he shall reside.
The term “reside” means having an established residence in the city not
less than thirty (30) days before the next election.



Sec. 3-15   Ballots, ballot boxes; printing, filing; city clerk, duties



   The city clerk shall cause ballots to be printed and filed in his
offices, in accordance with the general election laws. The council shall also
provide and cause to be kept by the clerk for use at all elections suitable
ballot boxes of the kind required by law.



Sec. 3-16   City election commission; composition, meetings; special
officers; powers and duties enumerated



   There shall be a commission of four members to be known as the City
Election Commission, consisting of the city attorney, city clerk, chief of
police and city manager. The members shall meet at the council chamber
preceding the day of each election, and shall report to the commission as a
whole as to the preparation each member has made for the election as herein
provided, and the city election commission shall complete all arrangements
for the holding of such elections.



   The city clerk shall be chairperson of the city election commission and
direct all election activities according to law. The city attorney shall
advise the city election commission on all legal matters.



   The city clerk shall furnish all materials and supplies necessary for
the conducting of elections by the several election boards, and shall report
to the city election commission at the council chamber preceding the day of
election, a correct list and tabulation of all ballots, supplies, stationery,
and accessories to be furnished ready for delivery to the chief of police on
the morning of election day, and such delivery shall be made by the clerk to
the chief of police on the morning of election day at the office of the clerk
at least one-half hour before the time of opening the polls.



   The chief of police shall have charge of, supervise, and be responsible
for the delivery of all ballots, ballot boxes, materials and supplies, to the
election inspectors and election boards at each place of voting before the
time of opening of the voting places and shall take charge of the ballot
boxes immediately upon their being sealed by the board of election
inspectors, and at once deliver them to the city clerk at his office. He
shall properly guard the boxes and secure them from tampering or disturbance
from the time they may be delivered to him by the various precinct boards
until they are returned to the office of the clerk after sealing.



   The city manager shall have charge of, and supervise, and be
responsible for the places of voting. He shall see that the polling places
are prepared, arranged, furnished, lighted, heated, and properly cleaned
before each election and that suitable polling places shall be rented in case
the City has not provided polling places and that the rent shall be paid by
the city council.



   The inspectors of election shall hear the reports of the members of the
city election commission as herein before provided, and shall receive
instructions from the city election commission as to their duties, and shall
be privileged to make inquiry concerning their duties if they so desire.



   If any complaint shall be made to the city election commission that any
inspector of election or other election officer has been guilty of any
violation of the provisions of this charter or any general law governing
elections, or shall be unfit or disqualified for the performance of his
duties for any reason, the city election commission may, in its discretion,
after the investigation of such complaint, remove such inspector or other
election officer, and the city clerk at the time of such removal may appoint
another suitable person who shall act in place of the inspector or election
officer so removed for the balance of election day. The city election
commission shall report such action, with its reasons therefore, to the
council at its next regular meeting, and the inspector so appointed shall
receive all or such proportionate part of the compensation allowed by the
council for the performance of such duties as the council may direct.



Sec. 3-17   Election officers, compensation



   All inspectors of election, clerks, and other election officers shall
receive as full compensation for the services required of them at any
election, such sum as shall be determined by the council prior to the date of
the holding of any election.



Sec. 3-18   Elections; notice required; city clerk, duties



   Notice of the time and place of holding any election and of the
officers to be elected and questions to be voted upon shall be, except as
herein otherwise provided, or as required by state law, given by the clerk at
least ten days before the date of the election by posting such notices in at
least three conspicuous places in each election precinct of the city, and by
publishing a copy at least twice, the first publication not less than ten
days before the date of election in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, designated by the council, and if the council shall so direct, by the
further publication of such notices in any other newspaper or newspapers of
general circulation in the city, and in case of a special election the notice
shall set forth the purpose of the election as fully as the same is required
to be set forth in the resolution appointing such election.



Sec. 3-19   Conduct of elections; state law



   All elections in the City shall be conducted as nearly as may be in the
manner provided by the law for holding general elections in the State, except
as herein otherwise provided. The election inspectors at all municipal
elections shall have the same powers and authority for the preservation of
order and for enforcing obedience to their lawful commands during the time of
holding the election and the canvass of votes, as are conferred by law.



Sec. 3-20   Canvass of votes; declaration, statement required; state law



   Immediately after closing the polls the inspectors and clerks of
election shall, without adjourning, publicly canvass the votes received by
them and declare the results and shall immediately thereafter make a
statement in writing upon a blank form furnished by the city clerk setting
forth in words at full length the whole number of votes given for each
office, the names of the persons for whom such votes for each office were
given and the number of votes so given for each person, and the whole number
of votes given upon each question voted upon and the number of votes for and
against the same, which statement shall be certified under their hands to be
correct, and they shall deposit such statement and certificate, together with
the poll list and the register of voters, with the city clerk. The manner of
canvassing the votes shall be the same as prescribed by law for canvassing
votes at general elections held in this State, and the inspectors and clerks
shall in all other respects, except as herein otherwise provided, conform as
nearly as may be to the duties required of inspectors and clerks of election
at general elections.



Sec. 3-21   Tie vote; determination



   If at any election two or more candidates for the same office receive
an equal number of votes and not all can be elected, then the board of
canvassers must set a date for those persons to appear in order to determine
by lot the right to that office and must give notice, so that all interested
persons may attend. The manner of determining by lot must be in accordance
with law.



Sec. 3-22   Recount; petition, procedure; state law



   Any candidate for office failing of election, or any citizen interested
in any charter amendment or other proposition who shall not be satisfied with
the results of the vote as shown by the returns of the boards of election
inspectors to the city clerk or as shown by the canvass of the returns of
such inspectors, may seek a recount of the votes cast as provided in Michigan
Election Law.



Chapter 4 - Elective Officers



Sec. 4-01   Elective officers enumerated; term



   One mayor and six council members shall be elected on a non-partisan
ballot from the City at-large for four-year staggered terms, in accordance
with section 22-03. Terms shall begin on January 1 following the election.



Sec. 4-02   Elective officers; qualifications



   Only registered voters of the City are eligible to hold office as a
council member or mayor. No individual shall, at the same election, be a
candidate for both mayor and councilperson, nor may such individual be an
employee of the City while a candidate for elective office.



Sec. 4-03   Elective offices; filling vacancies



   a)   If a vacancy occurs on council, the fourth place finisher in
the last general election for city council shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the term. If the fourth place finisher is
ineligible or unwilling or unable to be appointed, the fifth place finisher
in the last general election for city council shall be appointed. If the
fifth place finisher is ineligible or unwilling or unable to be appointed,
the sixth place finisher in the last general election for city council shall
be appointed. If the sixth place finisher is ineligible or unwilling or
unable to be appointed, the council shall have thirty (30) days to fill the
vacancy.



   b)   Each member of council may nominate one candidate to fill the
vacancy to be considered by council. If council is unable to agree on a
candidate within thirty (30) days, the mayor shall appoint one of the
nominated candidates to fill the vacancy. The person appointed to fill the
vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of the position vacated.



   c)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the mayor pro
tem shall fill the vacancy until the next municipal general election, which
election shall be effective upon certification of election and oath of office
for the remainder of the term. If there is less than two years remaining on
the term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term.



Sec. 4-04   Council members who run for mayor



   Any councilperson who decides to become a candidate for mayor shall,
unless his term as councilperson shall expire in the year of the election,
resign his seat on the city council not later than sixty (60) days prior to
the filing deadline for council or mayor by tendering his irrevocable,
written resignation to the city clerk, such resignation to become effective
upon the seating of the next succeeding city council in January. If the
resignation is not received by the city clerk at least sixty (60) days prior
to the filing deadline for mayor or council, the councilmember shall be
deemed ineligible to seek the office of mayor in that election. The vacancy,
if any, created by such resignation shall be nominated at the primary and
filled at the general election for the balance of the council term so
vacated. No individual shall at the same election be a candidate for both
mayor and councilperson.



Sec. 4-05   Mayor who runs for council



   Any mayor who decides to become a candidate for council shall, unless
his term as mayor shall expire in the year of the election, resign his
position as mayor not later than sixty (60) days prior to the filing deadline
for mayor or council, by tendering his irrevocable, written resignation to
the city clerk, such resignation to become effective upon the seating of the
next succeeding city council in January. If the resignation is not received
by the city clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the filing deadline for
mayor or council, the mayor shall be deemed ineligible to seek the office of
council in that election. The vacancy, if any, created by such resignation
shall be nominated at the primary and filled at the general election for the
balance of the mayor’s term so vacated. No individual shall at the same
election be a candidate for both mayor and councilperson.



Chapter 5 - Appointed Department Heads, Boards, and Commissions



Sec. 5-01   Appointed department heads, boards, commissions;
qualifications, removals; filling vacancies



   (a)   Members appointed to boards and commissions do not require
approval by council- and mayor-elect unless otherwise provided by statute,
this charter; or ordinance in existence prior to the effective date of this
charter. The powers and duties of such boards or commissions may be
prescribed by ordinance subject to the provisions of this charter or state
statute.



   (b)   The members of all boards and commissions that are created by
ordinance shall be appointed by the mayor if the ordinance creating the board
or commission does not specify the method by which members to that board or
commission are appointed.



   (c)   The city clerk must post notice of expiring or vacated board
and commission positions as they occur, stating the general duties and that
application forms are available from the city clerk.



   (d)   The mayor shall appoint, a library board consisting of five
members appointed to three-year staggered terms beginning with the third
Monday of April, 2006, with two members appointed for three years, two
members appointed for two years and one member appointed for one year, and
thereafter, all members shall be appointed to three-year terms.



   (e)   The mayor shall appoint a board of review consisting of three
residents of the City with qualifications required by this Charter for
officers of the City, and such other boards or commission members as shall be
provided by ordinances of the city council to be appointed by the mayor.



   (f)   All appointed department heads shall be appointed by the city
manager, subject to approval by a majority vote of the council- and
mayor-elect. “Department head” shall mean the city clerk, city treasurer,
police chief, fire chief, city controller, city assessor, city attorney, and
such other department heads as may be established by ordinance.



   (g)   All department heads shall be subject to the administration
and under the jurisdiction of the city manager.



   (h)   The appointing authority may remove, without assigning cause,
except where prohibited by state law, any department head or member of any
board or commission who by the terms of this charter or ordinance of the City
shall be appointed by the appointing authority provided, that for the first
ninety (90) days after his election or appointment, the appointing authority
may remove such department head, and commission or board members only for
cause.



   (i)   The appointing authority shall have the power to fill any
vacancy, caused by his removal of a department head or member of a board or
commission. This appointment shall be in the same manner that is defined by
this charter regarding appointing department heads, and board and commission
members.



Sec. 5-02   Appointed boards and commissions, term



   All boards or commissions shall be appointed at such time, and for such
term as shall be prescribed in this charter or in the ordinance or State
statute creating such office. If any appointment shall not be made on the day
specified in this charter or in the ordinance or statute creating such
office, it may be made at any subsequent time. After confirming such
appointment, it shall be the duty of the city clerk within five days to
notify in writing by certified mail the person receiving such appointment.



Sec. 5-03   Department heads, boards and commissions; term; oath required;
removal



   All department heads and board and commission members shall enter upon
the duties of their several offices upon taking and filing the oath of office
and filing the requisite surety, if any be required of them. All appointments
shall expire on their expiration, unless sooner removed.



Sec. 5-04   Department heads, boards and commissions; nepotism, political,
religious consideration prohibited



   All department heads and boards and commissions shall be appointed with
reference to their qualifications and fitness, and for the good of the public
service, and without any regard whatever to their religious faith or party
affiliations. The spouse, spousal equivalent, child, parent, grandchild,
grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the spousal
equivalent of any of them, whether by marriage, or by blood, or by adoption
of the mayor or any councilperson, shall be disqualified for appointment to a
board or commission during the term for which the mayor or councilperson is
elected.



Sec. 5-05   Elective officers; appointments, compensation, restrictions



   No elective officer shall after his election and during the term for
which he was elected, or within one year thereafter, be appointed to any
department head, board, or commission which shall have been created, or the
salary of which has been increased during his term of office, except that the
elected clerk and treasurer shall be eligible for appointment as a department
head, in accordance with section 22-03.



Sec. 5-06   Appointed department heads, boards or commissions;
compensation, determination



   a)   Every department head and board or commission member shall
receive such salary or compensation as the council- and mayor-elect may by
ordinance or resolution provide.



   b)   The members of the library board may not receive compensation
for their services on or in connection with the affairs of the board, unless
provided by state law.



Chapter 6 - General Provisions Relating to Elective Officers, and Department
Heads, Boards and Commissions



Sec. 6-01   Elective officers; notice of election required



   It shall be the duty of the city clerk, within five days after the
meeting of the Board of Canvassers and the determination as to the result of
any election, to notify, by certified mail each person elected of his
election.



Sec. 6-02   Oath of office required; form



   Every officer, department head, board, or commission member elected or
appointed shall within ten days of the effective date of the term of election
or appointment and before entering upon the duties of his office, take and
subscribe to an oath of office, which shall be kept and filed in the office
of the city clerk, which oath of office shall be as follows:



   State of Michigan )



   County of Wayne ) ss.



   I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of this State, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ______, of the City of
Hamtramck, according to the best of my ability.



   (Signed)_____________________



   Subscribed and sworn to before me________________on
this________________day of________



   Notary Public, Wayne County, Michigan,



   My commission expires_________________



   In case of his failure to take, subscribe, and file the oath within ten
(10) days after the effective date of his term of election or appointment,
unless the council shall extend the time by resolution, he shall be deemed to
have declined the office.



Sec. 6-03   Officers; bonds, filing; requisites



   Every elected officer or elective or appointed board or commission
member, before entering upon the duties of his office, and within the time
prescribed for filing his oath of office, if a bond be required, shall file
with the city clerk such bond or surety as may be required by law or any
ordinance or resolution of the council, and with such sureties as shall be
approved by the council, conditioned for the due performance of the duties of
his office, except that the bond or security given by the city clerk shall be
deposited with the city treasurer.



Sec. 6-04   Officers; additional, new bonds



   The council may at any time require any elected officers or board or
commission members to execute and file with the city clerk additional or new
official bonds, with such new or further security as the council shall deem
requisite. Failure to comply with such requirements within fifteen (15) days
shall subject the officer to immediate removal from office by the council.



Sec. 6-05   Bonds, liability



   The resignation or removal of any elected officer or appointed board or
commission member shall not, nor shall the appointment or election of another
to the office, exonerate such officer, board or commission member, or his
sureties from any liability incurred by them.



Sec. 6-06   Oaths, bonds; failure to file, penalty



   At the next regular meeting of the council after the expiration of the
time in which any official bond or oath of office is required to be filed,
the clerk shall report in writing to the council the name of any person
elected or appointed to any office who shall have neglected to file such oath
or bond. Unless the council shall for good cause shown, extend the time for
the filing of such bond or oath, such office shall be deemed to be vacant,
following such a meeting.



Sec. 6-07   Oaths, bonds; failure to file; declaration of vacancy



   If any person elected or appointed to office shall fail to file his
oath of office or to give the bond or surety required for the due performance
of the duties of his office within the required time, the council may declare
the office vacant, unless he files the oath and gives the required bond or
surety before the office is declared vacant.



Sec. 6-08   Elective, appointive office; persons in default disqualified



   No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who is a
defaulter to the City or to any board, or office, or department thereof, or
to any school district, county, or other municipal corporation of the State,
now or heretofore existing. All votes for the election or appointment of any
such defaulter shall be void.



Sec. 6-09   Delivery of books, papers, etc., to successor required



   Whenever any officer, department head or board or commission member
shall resign or be removed from office, or the term for which he has been
elected or appointed shall have expired, he shall on demand deliver over to
his successor in office all the books, papers, money, and effects in his
office; and any person willfully violating this provision shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.



Sec. 6-10   Officers, employees; surety bonds; prohibition



   No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall become surety on the
official bond of another officer, agent, or employee of the City, nor upon
any bond or contract executed or made to the City.



Sec. 6-11   Declaration of vacancy in office; causes enumerated



   If any person elected to office shall die, resign, move from the city,
be removed from office, or be convicted of a felony, or if any councilperson
or mayor shall absent himself from council meetings for a period of five
unexcused consecutive regular meetings or ten unexcused regular meetings
within a year without good and sufficient reason, and without the permission
of the council, the office held by such person shall be deemed to be vacant.



Sec. 6-12   Appointive officers; powers and duties



   All department heads or board and commission members shall perform such
duties other and further than those prescribed in this charter as shall be
prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council that are not in conflict
with Chapter 7 Sec. 7-03.



Sec. 6-13   Fees; duty to pay to city treasurer



   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this charter or in the
ordinance or resolution fixing the salary or compensation of any officer, no
department head, employee, or board or commission member, shall be entitled
to retain for his own use and benefit any fee or money payable to him by
virtue of his office or position, but shall collect all such fees and monies
for the use and benefit of the City and shall pay the same into the city
treasury to be credited to the proper funds.



Sec. 6-14   Officers; charter violations, penalty; city attorney, duty



   Failure, neglect, or refusal by any elected official to comply with the
provisions of the charter shall be a cause for his removal from office, and
it shall be a duty of the city attorney to file a complaint against such
offending officer before Council immediately upon receiving information of
such offense. Should the city attorney fail, neglect, or refuse to file such
complaint, any citizen of the City of Hamtramck may file and prosecute such
complaint on behalf of the city. A copy of the complaint shall be provided to
the offending officer, who will be provided an opportunity to appear at a
hearing before Council to be heard, to present witnesses and to cross-examine
witnesses.



Sec. 6-15   Officers; expenditures, commitments in excess of
appropriations prohibited; penalty; city attorney, duty



   Every elected officer or employee of the City who shall knowingly or
without proper authorization expend money or incur liability in excess of his
budget allowance shall be personally liable to the City of Hamtramck for the
overdraft, and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to bring action
against such officer or employee for collection of such overdraft immediately
upon receiving the information of the overdraft; and if the city attorney
shall fail or neglect to bring said action within thirty (30) days after
receiving the information, then any taxpayer of the City may bring and
prosecute such action on behalf of the City. In addition to the foregoing,
overdrawing a budget allowance by any elective or appointive officer shall be
a cause for his removal from office.



Sec. 6-16   Principles of personnel management



   (a)   All appointments and promotions of city officials and
employees must be made on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by a
valid and reliable examination or other evidence of competence.



   (b)   No person who is a spouse, spousal equivalent, child, parent,
grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the
spousal equivalent of any of them, whether by marriage, or by blood, or by
adoption, of any member of city council, of the mayor, or of the city manager
may be hired or promoted during the term or tenure of that officer, and no
employee of the city may be supervised by a relative.



   (c)   In accordance with law, city council may provide by ordinance
for the establishment, regulation, and maintenance of merit based personnel
policies necessary to conduct effective administration of the employees of
the city’s departments, offices, and agencies, including but not limited to
classification and pay plans, examinations, force reduction, removals,
working conditions, provisional and exempt appointments, in-service training,
grievances, relationships with employee organizations, and severance for
those employees not otherwise covered by an employment contact or labor
agreement. There must be an employee reference manual that outlines the
personnel policies.



   (d)   Employees of the city have the right to organize and bargain
collectively in accordance with law.



   (e)   The city council may provide for a hearings board to which
employees not otherwise covered by a grievance system may appeal any
proceedings or situations having a bearing on employment status or conditions,



   (f)   Each employee must be protected against retaliation for lawful
disclosure of information which she or he reasonably believes evidences a
violation of any law, rule, or regulation; mismanagement; gross waste of
monies; abuse of authority; or a substantial and specific danger to public
health or safety.



   (g)   No former employee who is drawing a pension from the City may
hold a paid position with the City or may be a paid consultant for more than
seventy (70) hours in any one month. However, this does not preclude a
retired city employee from holding office as mayor or city council member.



Sec. 6-17   Appointments to office, restriction



   (a)   No elected official shall hold more than one position.
Appointed board or commission members or employees may not hold more than two
positions in the city except as provided by ordinance or unless prohibited by
law.



   (b)   Employees of the City of Hamtramck shall not be employed with
another governmental unit except where permission has been granted by
resolution of council. Outside employment of employees during their normal
work hours is prohibited unless approved by resolution of council.



Sec. 6-18   Officers; resignations, procedure



   Resignations of elective officers shall be made to the city council and
filed with the city clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made
to that officer who has in the first instance the power of making such
appointment.



Sec. 6-19   Filling vacancies; procedure, term



   Vacancy in any appointive office shall be filled by that appointing
authority who has in the first instance the power to make such appointment,
and unless otherwise in this charter specified, shall be made for the balance
of the unexpired term.



Chapter 7 - Council



Sec. 7-01   Council, composition; compensation



   (a)   The council of the City of Hamtramck shall consist of six city
councilpersons, three of which shall be elected every two years for four-year
terms. Council members shall be paid annually two percent (2%) of the State
of Michigan governor’s salary. Such compensation shall be paid monthly.



   (b)   Reasonable expenses may be allowed by the council by
resolution and budgetary authority when such expenses are actually incurred
on behalf of the City, upon proper documentation being furnished in such form
and manner as the council shall prescribe for all city employees seeking
reimbursement of expenses.



   (c)   Elected officials shall not be entitled to any fringe benefits.



Sec. 7-02   Legislative authority; administrative, executive powers



   The legislative authority of the City and all administrative and
executive powers not otherwise delegated, are hereby vested in the council.



Sec. 7-03   Meetings; presiding officer; determination; clerk; appointive
officers; attendance, duty



   The regular meetings of the city council shall be presided over by the
mayor, who along with the city manager shall establish the agenda for the
meetings, or in case of his absence or disability, by the mayor pro tem. The
mayor pro tem shall be that councilperson who is selected by the council at
their first regular meeting after the effective date of taking office
following a general election. The city clerk shall be the clerk of the
council.



   A representative of appointed boards or commissions of the City and
department heads shall attend regular meetings of the council at the request
of council through the city manager. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the
council and each of its members shall deal with the administrative branch of
the government solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor
any members shall give any order or directions, written or verbal, either
publicly or privately, to any of the subordinates of the city manager.



   The council may act only through resolution or ordinance.



Sec. 7-04   Journal of proceedings required; rules of procedure;
disorderly conduct, ordinance authorized



   The council shall keep in the English language a permanent, written or
printed journal of its proceedings, which shall be signed by the city clerk.
The council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may provide by
ordinance or resolution for the punishment of its members for disorderly
conduct during the meetings.



Sec. 7-05   General welfare; ordinances, regulations



   The council shall further have authority to enact all ordinances and to
make all regulations consistent with this charter and the laws and
constitution of this State as they may deem necessary for the safety, order,
and good government of the City and the general welfare of the inhabitants.
An ordinance shall require the vote of a majority of the council- and
mayor-elect for passage. The mayor may not propose an ordinance for
consideration by the council.



Sec. 7-06   Resolutions, majority vote; mayor’s voting rights



   Unless otherwise provided in this charter, a majority yea and nay vote
of a quorum of council-elect excluding the mayor shall be required for the
passage and final adoption of any resolution. In the event of a tie vote, the
mayor shall vote to break the tie on any resolution. The mayor may not
propose a resolution for consideration by the council.



   The council may act only through resolution or ordinance.



Sec. 7-07   Specific powers; enumeration not construed as limitation



   The granting of the City or council of any specific power in this
charter shall not be construed as limiting any general granting of powers
unless the intention to so limit is clearly indicated.



Sec. 7-08   Officers, employees, departments; city council, authority



   The City of Hamtramck shall have all power and authority to provide by
ordinance or resolution for the appointment or employment by the respective
city officers, departments, or boards, of such deputies, assistants, and
employees as the city council- and mayor-elect shall deem necessary, and also
in resolutions to fix, subject to the provisions of this charter, the
compensation and period of appointment or employment.



Sec. 7-09   Regular, special meetings; time, place; open to public; quorum



   (a)   The city council must meet regularly at least twice in every
month, at least fourteen (14) days apart, and at times and places which the
city council provides by resolution. Special meetings may be called by the
mayor, or by two or more city council members, or by the city manager. An
organizational meeting shall be held on the first Tuesday after January 1st
at 7:00 p.m. EST. Meetings must be held in accordance with the Open Meetings
Act.



   (b)   The majority of the council-elect, excluding the mayor, shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; a less number may
adjourn from time to time, and compel the attendance of absent members in
such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council;
and all pending business and business noticed or set down for hearing at any
meetings at which there shall not be a quorum present shall be taken up and
heard at such adjourned meeting, or at the next regular meeting.



Sec. 7-10   Accounts, claims; audit, approval required; requisites



   To the extent permitted by State law, the council shall audit and allow
all accounts chargeable against the City, but no account or claim or contract
shall be received for audit or allowance unless it be accompanied with the
certificate of an officer of the corporation or an affidavit of the person
rendering it, to the effect that he verily believes that the services therein
charged have been actually performed; or the property or goods have been
delivered to the city; that the sums charged are reasonable and just; and
that to the best of his knowledge and belief no actual set off exists nor
payment has been made on account thereof except such as are endorsed or
referred to in such account or claim. Every such account shall exhibit in
detail all the items making up the amount claimed and the true date of each.



Chapter 8 - Powers of City and Council in General



Sec. 8-01   General powers



   Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the City and its
officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges, and
immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or
hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters
under the Statutes and Constitution of the State of Michigan, including all
powers, privileges, and immunities granted to cities and their officers by
Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 of the State of Michigan [MCL 117.1 et
seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.], as amended, and including all powers, privileges,
and immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in their
charters, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers,
privileges, or immunities herein be held to be exclusive.



   The City and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal
powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the
administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be herein
expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the
city, good government, and prosperity of the municipality and its
inhabitants; to make, continue, amend, repeal, and enforce all ordinances and
resolutions which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution
the foregoing powers and all other powers vested by the Constitution and
Statutes of the State of Michigan in cities, except where forbidden, or where
the subject is covered exclusively by a general law. The City and its
officers should have power to provide for the public peace and health, and
for the safety of persons and property, and to provide that the levy,
collection, and return of state, county, and school taxes shall be in
conformity with the general laws of the State, except that the preparation of
the assessment roll, the meeting of the board of review, and the confirmation
of the assessment roll shall be as provided by this charter.



Sec. 8-02   Intergovernmental contracts



   The City shall have the power to join with any governmental unit or
agency, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract or otherwise
as may be permitted by law, to have performed (a) jointly, or (b) by one or
more of them for or on behalf of the other or others, or (c) by any other
person, firm, or corporation, any function which is permitted to be so
performed by law by such governmental unit or agency, and to provide for the
financing thereof.



Chapter 9 - Powers and Duties of Officers and Department Heads



Mayor



Sec. 9-01   Powers and duties



   The mayor shall be presiding officer of the council and chief executive
officer of the city and shall perform such other duties as are, or may be,
imposed or authorized by the laws of the State or this charter. He shall
execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as the council,
this charter, or any statute of the State of Michigan or law of the United
States shall require, including certifying the minutes.



   He shall be the conservator of the peace and may in emergencies
exercise within the City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot
and disorder and shall have the authority to command the assistance of all
able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City
and to suppress riot and disorder.



   In times of public danger or emergency, he may, with consent of the
council, take command of the police and such other departments and
subordinates of the City as may be deemed necessary by the council to
maintain order and enforce laws.



   The mayor shall keep an office in some convenient place in the City to
be provided by the city council.



   The mayor may recommend such appointments to office as are prescribed
by this charter or ordinance of the council and may remove such appointees
without assigning cause, except as provided in Chapter 5 Sec. 5-01, and may
recommend appointment to the vacancy caused thereby.



   The mayor shall perform all acts required by the constitution and laws
of this State and this charter, whether herein specifically enumerated or not.



   The mayor shall be ex-officio a member of such boards or commissions of
which he is appointed a member by the terms of this charter or ordinances of
the city.



   The mayor shall notify the council of any prolonged absence or
inability to perform his duties. Council by resolution may define what
“prolonged absence” means.



Sec. 9-02   Mayor Pro tem



   The mayor pro tem shall, during the absence or inability of the mayor
to perform his duties, act in the name and stead of the mayor and shall,
during the time of such absence or inability, exercise all the duties and
possess all the powers of the mayor. The mayor pro tem, when acting as mayor,
shall preside over the meeting and may vote on resolutions or ordinances. In
the absence of the mayor pro tem, the council members present shall select an
acting mayor pro tem.



Sec. 9-03   Compensation of mayor and mayor pro tem



   The mayor shall be paid annually four percent (4%) of the salary set
for the governor of the State of Michigan. The mayor pro tem shall be paid
annually three percent (3%) of the salary set for the governor of the State
of Michigan. Such compensation shall be paid monthly. The mayor, or mayor pro
tem while serving as mayor, shall receive no further compensation for his
official duties or for any other purpose. Reasonable expenses may be allowed
by the council by resolution and budgetary authority when such expenses are
actually incurred on behalf of the City, upon proper documentation being
furnished in such form and manner as the council shall prescribe for all city
employees seeking payment for such expenses.



   Elected officers shall not be entitled to any fringe benefits.



City Clerk



Sec. 9-04   Powers and duties



   The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be directly responsible
to the city manager. The functions and duties of the city clerk shall be as
follows:



   (a)   The clerk shall be the clerk of the council. He shall give
notice of its meetings, attend all meetings of the council, and shall keep a
permanent, written or printed journal of its proceedings in the English
language. He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions
of the council.



   (b)   He shall have the power to administer all oaths required by
state law, this charter and the ordinances of the city.



   (c)   He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to
all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest to the
same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records
pertinent to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by
this charter. All records of the city shall be made available to the general
public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 to
15.246. He shall give to the proper officers of the City ample notice of the
expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts, or
agreements to which the City is a party.



   (d)   He shall at all times cooperate with the city manager and
provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested
by the city manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of
his office as herein provided.



   (e)   He shall certify by his signature all ordinances, resolutions,
and minutes enacted or passed by the council and perform other duties
required of him by state or federal law, this charter, the council, and
ordinances of the city.



   (f)   He shall be responsible for the issuance of licenses within
the City by ordinance or state statute.



City Controller



Sec. 9-05   Powers and duties



   The city controller shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager, and shall be directly responsible
to the city manager. He shall be a qualified and competent accountant and
shall be the chief financial officer of the city.



   The functions and duties of the city controller shall be as follows:



   (a)   He shall receive and audit all accounts and demands against
the City and prepare vouchers for the same. Such accounts and demands, or
such parts thereof, as to the correctness of which he has no doubt, he shall
list in the order of their allowance, and certify to the council the
correctness of the same. Such accounts and demands concerning which he has
any doubt as to their correctness, he shall list separate from those allowed
by him, and send them to the council with his objections.



   (b)   After the allowance by the council of any account or demand,
the city clerk shall certify the same to the city controller, who shall draw
his warrant upon the city treasurer, which warrant shall be countersigned by
the city treasurer, city controller, and city manager. The controller shall
not sign such warrants until he has first registered the same against the
fund or funds from which they are payable. He shall keep a complete set of
books exhibiting the financial conditions of the City, with all its resources
and liabilities, in its various departments and funds.



   (c)   He shall keep a bond register in which shall be entered a
record of all bonds issued by the City, with the name, amount, and the date
thereof, and complete details of all coupons attached thereto.



   (d)   He shall keep an account of all funds, taxes, receipts, and
expenditures of the City, as obtained from the daily reports of receipts and
disbursements received by him from the city treasurer.



Sec. 9-06   Monthly, annual financial statements, contents; funds,
management, liability; records, bond required



   (a)   Within three weeks after the end of each month, the controller
shall present to the council and city manager a financial statement of the
City for the preceding month, which statement shall provide a comparison of
the actual revenues and expenditures of each fund, including all the various
budgeted funds compared to the budgeted amounts prepared on a basis of
accounting generally accepted in the United States for local units of
government.



   (b)   The controller shall also file a true copy of the financial
statement with the city clerk, who shall keep and preserve it as public
record and shall give access to it to every citizen of the City of Hamtramck
at any time during the business hours of the day. Such copy shall be verified
to the truthfulness and correctness of the facts stated therein, by the oath
or affirmation of the controller. For the purpose of preparing the financial
statement and list, the controller shall require every board, officer, and
employee to file with him all information which he may deem necessary, and
every such board, officer, and employee shall file with the controller the
information at the time and in the manner as he may prescribe.



   (c)   On or before three months after July in each year, he shall
make out and present to the council and city manager a financial statement of
the City for the fiscal year ending on the 30th day of June of each year,
consistent with accounting generally accepted in the United States for local
units of government and complying with the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting
Act, MCL 141.425-428. He shall at other times, if directed by the council,
furnish statements showing the condition of the several funds and accounts.



   (d)   He shall charge the city treasurer with the whole amount of
taxes and assessments, special or general, levied for the City and placed in
the treasurer’s hands for collection, crediting the various funds and
accounts according to the various appropriations.



   (e)   He shall also charge the city treasurer with all sums received
from licenses, rents, and other monies which are payable to the treasurer,
and the various proceeds of all bonds, coupons, notes, leases, mortgages,
bills receivable, or bills payable, or revenue of whatsoever nature. When any
fund or appropriation has been exhausted by warrants already drawn, or by
appropriations, liabilities, debts, and expenses actually made, incurred, or
contracted for and to be paid out of such fund or appropriations, the
controller shall advise the council thereof in writing at its next meeting
and, he shall be personally liable to the City in an action brought in any
court of law or in any suit in equity by the City or by any taxpayer of the
city for the full amount or amounts of payments where no funds are available
if he shall fail or neglect to so advise the council.



   (f)   He shall keep in his office a complete list of all the
property - real, personal, and mixed - belonging to the city.



   (g)   He shall keep a record of all receipts, disbursements, debts,
and liabilities of the city, in order that the amount of the monies and all
of the liabilities of the City may at any time be known at his office. The
controller shall exercise a general supervision over the financial concerns
of the City.



   (h)   He shall be charged with the leasing, repairs, insurance, and
general supervision of the City property not herein otherwise provided for,
and for his information may require reports from all officials or persons
having city property in charge or in their possession, and shall report the
same when required by the council.



   (i)   He shall also perform such other duties as are prescribed by
this charter or may be required by ordinance or resolution of the council.



   (j)   He shall keep on file in his office the city budget to which
he shall give access to every taxpayer of the city at any time during the
business hours of the day for inspection or taking copies. Within two weeks
after his appointment he shall file with the city clerk a bond in such amount
and with such sureties as shall be satisfactory to the council. The premium
on the bond shall be paid by the City.



   (k)   He is authorized generally to administer oaths, affirmations,
take affidavits, and to certify copies of all papers in his office.



Sec. 9-07   Controller, records; audit required



   The controller shall obtain and record all activities of all funds of
the City and annually audit such records.



City Treasurer



Sec. 9-08   Powers and duties; bond; taxes, collection



   The city treasurer shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be directly responsible
to the city manager.



   The city treasurer shall perform all duties of the treasurer as
prescribed by this charter and the general laws of the state, together with
such other duties as may be required by the city manager or assigned to him.
He shall give a bond in such amount and with such sureties as shall be
satisfactory to the council. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the
City, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. The treasurer shall be the
chief collection officer of the city, except as otherwise provided by
ordinance, and shall aggressively pursue all delinquencies to the City.



   The city treasurer shall also give to the treasurer of the County of
Wayne such further securities as are or may hereafter be required by law of
the several city treasurers in this state. For the purpose of collection and
return of all taxes, and the return of property delinquent for the
non-payment of taxes, and for the purpose of suit for the collection of
taxes, the treasurer, on giving the bond so required, shall possess all the
powers and perform all the duties as are performed by the several city
treasurers of this state, as prescribed by law.



Sec. 9-09   City funds, custody; disbursements, duty; accounts



   The city treasurer shall have the custody of all monies, bonds,
mortgages, notes, leases, and evidences of value belonging to the City; he
shall receive all monies belonging to and receivable by the City, and keep an
account of all receipts and expenditures; he shall pay no money out of the
treasury, except in pursuance of, and by authority of law, and upon warrants
signed by the city manager and controller, which shall specify the purpose
for which the amounts are to be paid; he shall collect and keep an account of
and be charged with all taxes and monies appropriated, raised, or received
for each fund for the City, and shall keep an account of each fund and shall
credit all monies raised, paid in, or appropriated therefor, and shall pay
every warrant out of the particular fund raised for the purpose for which the
warrant was issued. He shall countersign all licenses and permits upon
receiving proper fees.



Sec. 9-10   Monthly, annual reports required contents



   The city treasurer shall render to the council by the third week of
each month, a report on the previous month’s revenues and sources and cash
and investment balances of each fund including details of financial
institutions, types of accounts, maturity dates, and interest rates.



Sec. 9-11   Disbursements; vouchers required



   The city treasurer shall take vouchers for all money paid from the
treasury, showing the amount and fund from which payment was made, which
vouchers upon settlement with the proper officers of the city shall be
surrendered and filed with the controller.



Sec. 9-12   City funds; separate accounts



   The city treasurer shall keep all city monies in his hands belonging to
the City separate and distinct from his own monies, and he is hereby
prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the city monies,
warrants, or evidences of debt in his custody or keeping, for his own use or
benefit, or that of any other person.



Sec. 9-13   Depositories, designation by council; interest; daily deposits



   All money belonging to the City of Hamtramck shall be deposited in such
depositories as may be selected by the city council, and all interest
received on such deposits shall be charged to the city treasurer and credited
to the City in the proper funds. The city treasurer shall report to the
mayor, city manager and council each month the amount of interest credited to
the City and shall deposit all city monies received by him.



City Assessor



Sec. 9-14   Powers and duties



   The city assessor shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be directly responsible
to the city manager. The functions and duties of the city assessor shall be
as follows:



   (a)   He shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be
charged with the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by statute.



   (b)   He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in
the manner prescribed by statute, this charter, and by ordinance.



   (c)   He shall at all times cooperate with the city manager and
provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested
by the city manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of
his office as herein provided.



City Attorney



Sec. 9-15   Qualifications; powers and duties



   The city attorney, which may be an individual or a law firm, shall be
appointed by the city manager, subject to approval by a majority vote of the
council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city
manager. The functions, duties, and compensation of the attorney shall be as
follows:



   (a)   The attorney shall act as legal advisor to and be attorney for
the council and mayor in the performance of their duties as elected
officials, and shall be responsible solely to the city manager. He shall
advise any officer or department head of the city in matters relating to his
official duties when so requested by resolution of the city council, or the
city manager and shall file with the clerk a copy of all written opinions
given by him.



   (b)   He shall prosecute ordinance violations and conduct for the
City such cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals as
the council may request. He shall file with the clerk copies of such records
and files relating thereto as the council may direct.



   (c)   He shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds,
and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the council,
mayor, or city manager, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the
legality thereof.



   (d)   He shall call to the attention of the council, mayor, and the
city manager all matters of law and changes or developments therein affecting
the City.



   (e)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for
him by this charter, by resolution or ordinance, or as prescribed by state or
federal law or regulation.



   (f)   He shall at all times cooperate with the city manager and
provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested
by the city manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of
his office as herein provided.



   (g)   He shall recommend the retention of special legal counsel to
handle any matter in which the City has legal interest or to assist him when
he believes it to be in the best interest of the City.



   (h)   The compensation set by resolution for the attorney shall be
in contemplation of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation
may be provided by resolution for appeals to, or litigation in, the federal
courts, the circuit court or state appellate courts; for work requiring
extensive hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals; for
legal work in connection with the issuance of bonds of the city; for
condemnation proceedings; or for other matters outside the scope of his
normal duties. No special compensation, nor any compensation to special legal
counsel, shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement made between
the City and the attorney or special counsel prior to the time such special
services have been rendered.



   (i)   No person shall be appointed city attorney of the City of
Hamtramck unless he shall have been admitted to practice law before the
Supreme Court of the State of Michigan at least two years prior to the time
of his appointment.



Chief of Police



Sec. 9-16   Qualifications; powers and duties



   The chief of police shall be the head of the police department of the
City of Hamtramck. He shall have the qualifications prescribed by Chapter 5
Sec. 5-01 of this charter for appointive officers, and in addition shall
reside within a thirty (30) mile radius of the city, except as otherwise
provided in MCL 15.602.



   (a)   He shall be responsible for the faithful performance of his
duties to the city manager. It shall be his duty to see that all laws,
ordinances, and regulations of the city council made or enacted for the
preservation of peace, good order, safety, and protection of the inhabitants
of the city are enforced. He shall have the power and authority to make all
proper rules for the government and discipline of the police department
subject to the approval of the city attorney and city manager.



   (b)   As police officer, he shall, within the City, be vested with
the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs for the preservation of peace and
good order.



   (c)   He shall have power to serve and execute all process directed
or delivered to him in proceedings for violation of the ordinances of the
city or in which the City may be interested or a party.



   (d)   He shall design an effective training program for the police
department, and recommend such training program to the city manager. Such
training shall be reported to council by the city manager on a semi-annual
basis.



   (e)   He shall be responsible for making application for available
resources for the police department and shall provide a quarterly report to
the city manager regarding these applications.



   (f)   He shall submit to the city manager each year, as in this
charter provided, an estimate in detail of the expenditures of his department
for the ensuing year, to be included in the yearly budget, and shall make
such other reports as may be required by the city manager, provisions of this
charter or by law or ordinance of the city.



   (g)   He shall have the custody and control of all evidentiary
property, books, records, and equipment belonging to the police department.



   (h)   He shall have such further powers, duties, and
responsibilities as are conferred by the laws of the State, the provisions of
this charter, and the ordinances of the city council.



Chief of Fire Department



Sec. 9-17   Qualifications; powers and duties



   The chief of the fire department shall be the head of the fire
department of the City of Hamtramck. He shall have the qualifications
prescribed by Chapter 5 Sec. 5-01 of this charter for appointive officers,
and in addition shall reside within a thirty (30) mile radius of the city,
except as otherwise provided in MCL 15.602.



   (a)   He shall be responsible for the faithful performance of his
duties to the city manager. He shall have the power and authority to make all
proper rules for the government and discipline of the fire department,
subject to the approval of the city attorney and city manager.



   (b)   He shall be responsible for making application for available
resources for the fire department and shall provide a quarterly report to the
city manager regarding these applications.



   (c)   He shall design an effective training program for the fire
department, and recommend such training program to the city manager. Such
training shall be reported to council by the city manager on a semi-annual
basis.



   (d)   He shall submit to the city manager each year, as in this
charter provided, an estimate in detail of the expenditures of his department
for the ensuing year, to be included in the yearly budget, and shall make
such other reports as may be required by the city manager, provisions of this
charter or by law or ordinance of the city.



   (e)   He shall have the custody and control of all evidentiary
property, books, records, and equipment belonging to the fire department.



   (f)   He shall have such powers, duties, and responsibilities as are
conferred by laws of the state, and the provisions of this charter, and the
ordinances of the city council.



City Manager



Sec. 9-18   City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation



   The council- and mayor-elect shall, by a majority vote of its total
membership, appoint a city manager solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications. The council- and mayor-elect shall set the
manager’s compensation and conditions of employment in a written contract.
The city manager shall serve as an “at will” employee of the city. Upon a
vacancy in the position of city manager, the job description shall be
published in professional publications of city management and municipal
associations. The manager need not be a resident of the city or State of
Michigan at the time of appointment, but shall reside within a thirty (30)
mile radius of the City of Hamtramck except as otherwise provided in MCL
15.602.



   In addition to the required qualifications of the city manager provided
elsewhere in this charter, any city manager hired shall have the following
qualifications: a minimum of three years experience as a city manager or
assistant city manager in a city with a population of at least 10,000, and
that the candidate shall be a member of a professional city or county manager
association. The search for a city manager shall begin in January 2005. An
interim city manager who has the above qualifications may be appointed by the
council- and mayor-elect.



   (a)   Powers and duties.  The city manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the City. He shall be responsible to the council
and mayor for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by
this charter. He shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the
good of the City, suspend or remove all city employees and department heads
provided for in this charter or by ordinance, except as otherwise provided by
law. He may authorize any person appointed by him who is subject to his
direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to
subordinates in that officer’s department, office, or agency.



      (2)   He shall be responsible for the efficient administration
of all departments of the city government, control and supervise the
department heads of the city government that he appoints and their
subordinates, and see that all such officers of the city faithfully comply
with and discharge their official duties, except as otherwise provided by
this charter or state law.



      (3)   He shall attend all council meetings, unless excused by
a resolution of council, and have the right to take part in discussion, but
shall not vote.



      (4)   He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter,
and acts of the council subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject
to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed.



      (5)   He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and
capital improvement program to the council.



      (6)   He shall submit a monthly report and shall within ninety
(90) days after the end of each fiscal year submit to the council and make
available to the public a complete report on the financial operations
prepared by the Controller, financial condition, and administrative
activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year.



      (7)   He shall keep the council fully advised as to the
financial condition and future needs of the city and make such
recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems
advisable.



      (8)   He shall make such other reports as the council may
require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices, and
agencies subject to his direction and supervision.



      (9)   He shall be responsible for implementing and maintaining
an effective training program for the police and fire departments. Such
training shall be reported to council on a semi-annual basis.



      (10)   He shall have the custody and control of all property,
books, records, and equipment belonging to the several departments under his
control, with the exception of any evidentiary property, records, books and
equipment as determined by the discretion of the chief of the police
department or the chief of the fire department.



      (11)   He shall perform such other duties as are specified in
this charter or may be required of him by the council.



      (12)   He shall be responsible for scheduling and performing
maintenance and improvements to all city property.



   (b)   Acting City Manager.  The city manager shall, by letter filed
with the city clerk, designate, subject to approval by resolution of city
council, an administrative employee of the City of Hamtramck to exercise the
powers and perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence,
disability, or vacancy in office. During such absence, disability, or
vacancy, council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another
acting city manager to serve until the city manager shall return, or his
disability shall have ceased or, a new city manager shall have been appointed.



   (c)   No person who has been elected or appointed a member of the
council or the mayor under this charter, or who is a member of the council or
is the mayor at the effective date of this charter shall be eligible for
appointment as city manager or as acting city manager until two years have
elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he was elected or
appointed.



   (d)   Petition to Remove the City Manager.  In the event that a
petition requesting the removal of the city manager by the council- and
mayor-elect be filed with the clerk, signed by not less than fifteen percent
(15%) of the registered voters of the city and setting forth as reasons for
the requested removal specific act(s) or failure(s) to act on the part of the
city manager which constitute violations of the Charter, or failure to
perform the duties of his office as set forth in this Charter, a committee of
three (3) members shall be designated from among the mayor and
councilmembers. Such committee shall make a report of its investigation of
such statement of reason at the second regular meeting of the council
following its appointment. If the committee finds and reports that the
statements contained in the petition do not constitute violations of this
Charter or that the acts or failures to act complained of were performed at
the direction of the council or in conformance with policies established by
it, no further action shall be taken on such petition. If the committee finds
and reports that the reasons set forth in the petition are true and the acts
or failures to act were not in accordance with directives or policies of the
council, the council shall, at its next regular meeting, vote to remove or to
retain the city manager.



Civil Service System



Sec. 9-19   Establishment; city council, authority



   The city council of the City of Hamtramck may in its discretion
establish a civil service system in the City, and for that purpose authorize
the appointment of such civil service board or officers, assistants, and
employees having such powers, duties, and responsibilities, and receiving
such compensation as the city council shall determine.



   In case of the establishment of such board, the council- and
mayor-elect may by ordinance, prescribe such qualifications for the members
and officers as the council shall see fit, and may in its discretion include
within the scope of the authority of the civil service system all officers,
deputies, assistants, police officers, fire fighters, and employees of the
city other than the elective officers prescribed in this charter, and such
officers and members of boards as are by the provisions of this charter
prescribed to be appointed by the city council and mayor.



Chapter 10 - Police Department



Sec. 10-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments



   The city council of the City of Hamtramck shall maintain a police
department for the protection of the persons and property of the inhabitants
of the city and others temporarily in the city and for good government. In
cases of emergency and danger, the mayor shall have the power to authorize
the chief of the police department to appoint temporarily such number of
policemen and special officers in addition to the regular police department,
as the chief of the police department determines the particular occasion may
require.



Sec. 10-02   City manager; regular appointments, vacancies, authority



   The city manager shall appoint a chief of police, and such number of
police officers, patrolmen, and other officers and members of the police
department as established by ordinance or resolution. He shall in the same
manner fill all vacancies that may occur from time to time in the police
department as are permitted by the budget of the city.



Chief of Police



Sec. 10-03   Chief of police; powers and duties



   The chief of police shall at all times be subject to the supervision of
the city manager. The police chief shall supervise the police department in
the performance of its duties.



Sec. 10-04   Police; powers and duties



   It shall be the duty of the police department of the city to suppress
all riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace; to arrest all persons
fleeing from justice; to apprehend upon view any person found in the act of
committing any offense against the laws of the State or violating the
ordinances of the City, or any provisions of this charter, or in any manner
involving the breach of peace, and to take the offender so arrested before
the proper magistrate or officer to be punished; to make complaint before the
proper magistrate of any person known or believed by it to be guilty of any
crime or violation of the laws of this State, the ordinances of this City, or
the provisions of this charter, and to serve all processes that may be
delivered to it for that purpose; and generally to perform all such duties as
may be required of it by the police chief under the supervision of the city
manager for the good government of the City. It shall be the duty of the
police department of the City to see that all ordinances and regulations of
the City made for the preservation of peace and good order and for the safety
and protection of the inhabitants of the City are promptly enforced. For the
preservation of peace and good order, and as peace officers, each policeman
shall be and is hereby vested within the territorial limits of the City with
all the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs for the preservation of peace
and good order, and shall have and is hereby vested with all the powers given
by law to constables for such purposes. Such police officers shall have power
to serve and execute all processes directed or delivered to them, in all
proceedings for violation of the ordinances of the City. Such processes may
be served by such police officers anywhere within the County of Wayne. When
any person has committed or is suspected of having committed any crime or
misdemeanor within the city or has escaped from the city jail, the police
officers of the city shall have the same right to pursue, arrest, and detain
such persons outside the city limits as the sheriff of the County.



Sec. 10-05   Police, compensation



   The chief of police and all officers, policemen, and employees of the
police department shall receive such compensation as the council may
prescribe.



Chapter 11 - Fire Department



Sec. 11-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments



   The city council of the City of Hamtramck shall maintain an efficient
fire department for the protection of the people and property located
therein, and shall provide all necessary apparatus and equipment and make
provision for a suitable and adequate supply of water for the use of the
department for extinguishing fires. In cases of emergency and danger, the
mayor shall have the power to authorize the chief of the fire department to
appoint temporarily such number of firemen and special officers in addition
to the regular fire department, as in the judgment of the chief of the fire
department the particular occasion may require.



Sec. 11-02   Fire chief, firemen; appointment



   The city manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department and such
number of firemen and other officers in the department as the council shall
by ordinance or resolution direct to be appointed. He shall in the same
manner fill all vacancies that may occur in the department from time to time
as are permitted by the budget of the city.



Chief of the Fire Department



Sec. 11-03   Fire department, supervision



   The chief of the fire department shall at all times be subject to the
supervision of the city manager, and shall have supervision and direction of
the fire department and all fire fighters and other employees thereof.



Sec. 11-04   Extinguishing fires; authority to command aid; violation,
penalty



   The chief of the fire department or other officer acting as such may
command any person present at a fire to aid in extinguishing thereof and to
assist in the preservation of life or property. If any person shall willfully
disobey any such lawful requirement or other lawful order of such officer, he
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as in this charter
provided.



Sec. 11-05   Fire hazards, nuisances; abatement



   Every building or structure which may be erected, placed, enlarged, or
kept in violation of any provisions of this charter or of any ordinance or
regulation lawfully made for the prevention of fires, or any material which
shall be stored or kept in violation of this charter or any ordinance or
regulation lawfully made for the prevention of fires, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and, except as otherwise in this charter provided, the same may
be abated or removed by the direction of the council, after notice as may be
provided in State law of a hearing before Council provided to the property
owner, with an opportunity to appear, present evidence and witnesses, and to
cross-examine any witnesses.



Sec. 11-06   Fire chief, firemen, department employees; compensation



   The chief of the fire department and all officers, firemen, and
employees of the fire department shall receive such compensation as the
council may prescribe.



Chapter 12 - Ordinances



Sec. 12-01   Enacting clause, style



   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: “The City of
Hamtramck ordains.” Such caption may be omitted, however, when the
ordinances are published in book form or are revised and digested by
authority of the council.



Sec. 12-02   Adoption, requisites; effective date



   Every proposed ordinance or summary thereof shall first be read at a
council meeting. Thereafter, the ordinance shall be made available to the
public for fourteen (14) days at the city clerk’s office. No less than
fourteen (14) days following its initial reading, the council shall hold a
public hearing regarding the proposed ordinance. At that same public hearing,
the council may pass a resolution adopting the ordinance, including any
changes.



   Every ordinance, unless otherwise provided for in this charter, shall
require for its passage and adoption a majority vote of the council- and
mayor-elect and shall take effect fourteen (14) days after the publication of
the ordinance unless otherwise provided in the ordinance itself, but not
before publication.



Sec. 12-03   Record, authentication required



   All ordinances when regularly enacted shall be recorded by the city
clerk in a book called “The Record of Ordinances”, and it shall be the
duty of the mayor and the clerk to authenticate the same by their official
signatures upon such record.



Sec. 12-04   Record, publication; city clerk, duties



   Within ten days after the passage of any ordinance, the ordinance or a
summary thereof shall be recorded by the clerk and published in a newspaper
of general circulation; and the clerk shall, immediately after such
publication, enter in the record of ordinances, in a blank space to be left
for such purpose under the record of the ordinance, a certificate under his
hand, stating the time and place of such publication. Such certificate shall
be prima facie evidence of the due publication of the ordinance.



Sec. 12-05   Violations of ordinances; penalty, restriction



   When by the provisions of this charter the council has authority to
pass ordinances for any purpose, it may prescribe a penalty for each
violation thereof. Such penalty shall be a fine or forfeiture of not
exceeding the maximum allowed by state law, or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding ninety (90) days or ninety-three (93) days in cases where state law
so provides, or both, in the discretion of the court, together with payment
of the costs of prosecution. Such ordinances may further provide that in case
any person shall fail to pay any fine so imposed, together with the costs of
prosecution, that he may be imprisoned until such fine and costs shall be
paid. Provided, however, that no person shall be imprisoned for a single
violation of any ordinance for a longer period than ninety (90) days or
ninety-three (93) days in cases where state law so provides. Such penalty
shall be prescribed in the ordinance.



Sec. 12-06   Violations; fines, recovery; procedure



   Whenever a penalty shall be incurred for the violation of any
ordinance, and no provision shall be made for imprisonment of the offender
upon conviction thereof, such penalty may be recovered in an action of debt.
And when a corporation shall incur a penalty for the violation of any such
ordinance, the same shall be sued for in one of the actions aforesaid.
Prosecutions for violations of the ordinances of the City, may, in all cases,
except against corporations, be commenced by warrant for the arrest of the
offender. Such warrant shall be in the name of the People of the State of
Michigan, and shall set forth the substance of the offense complained of, and
shall be issued upon complaint made as provided for criminal cases cognizable
by the appropriate court. The proceedings relating to the arrest and custody
of the accused during the pendency of the suit, the pleadings in procuring
the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and in rendition of judgments and
the execution thereof, shall, except as otherwise provided by this charter,
be governed by and conform, as nearly as may be, to the provisions of law
regulating proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by the appropriate court.



Sec. 12-07   Complaints, pleadings; reference to ordinances



   It shall be a sufficient statement of the cause of action in any such
complaint or warrant, to set forth substantially, and with reasonable
certainty, the act or offense complained of, the date, the time when, and
place where committed, and alleging a violation of an ordinance of the city,
referring to the ordinance number and section, and signed by the enforcement
officer or official.



   It shall not be necessary in any suit, proceeding, or prosecution for
the violation of any ordinance, to state or set forth such ordinance or any
of the provisions thereof, in any complaint, warrant, process, or pleading
therein, but the same shall be deemed sufficiently set forth or stated by
reciting its number.



Chapter 13 - Taxation and Finance



Sec. 13-01   Power to tax; limitations



   The City is authorized annually to levy property taxes for municipal
purposes not to exceed two percent (20 mills) on all real and personal
property in the city. The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes must be
in accordance with statute and the same as for state, county, and school
taxes. The City levies, collects, and returns state, county, and school taxes
as provided by ordinance in accordance with law.



Sec. 13-02   Exemption from taxes



   No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as expressly
required or permitted by statute.



Sec. 13-03   Tax day



   The taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of
the 31st day of December, which shall be deemed the tax day for the
immediately succeeding calendar year, which is also the tax year, subject to
the exceptions provided or permitted by statute.



Sec. 13-04   Preparation of the assessment roll



   The assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll for the city,
in the manner and form provided in the general tax law of the state, not
later than the first Monday in March each year. On that date he shall file
such roll with the clerk for public inspection during the normal office hours
of the clerk, and such period of inspection shall continue until the date of
convening of the board of review. On that date the clerk shall turn such
assessment roll over to the board of review. Further, the assessor shall, by
first class mail addressed to the owner named on the tax roll, notify the
owner of any change in the assessment of the property; such notice shall be
mailed prior to March 1st. Failure on the part of the assessor to give such
notice shall not invalidate the assessment roll nor release the person or
property assessed from any taxes provided in this charter.



Sec. 13-05   Board of Review



   The board of review shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to
approval by a majority vote of council- and mayor-elect, and shall be
comprised of three persons who are residents in the city, and have the
qualifications required by this charter for officers of the city. The term of
office shall be for two years. The members of the board, during their term of
office, shall not be city officers, employees, nominees, or candidates for
elective city office. The assessor shall be secretary of the board and shall
attend its meetings prepared to present the position of his office without
the right to vote upon any decision of the board.



Sec. 13-06   Duties and Functions of board of review



   For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments, the board of
review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all aspects as
are by statute conferred upon and required of boards of review, except as
otherwise provided in this charter. It shall hear the complaints of all
persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments; and if it shall
appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted
from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems
just. In all cases, the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts
existing on the tax day, and no change in the status of any property after
said day shall be considered by the board in making its decisions. Except as
otherwise provided by statute, no person other than the board of review shall
make or authorize any change upon or additions or corrections to the
assessment roll.



Sec. 13-07   Clerk to certify tax levy



   Within three days after the council has adopted the budget for the
ensuing year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which
the council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall
also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all
other amounts which the council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or
charged upon any property or against any person.



Sec. 13-08   City tax roll



   After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment
roll, the assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll, to be known
as the “City Tax Roll”, and upon the certifications of the several
amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 10, the assessor shall spread
upon said roll the several ad valorem taxes according to and in proportion to
the several valuations set forth in the assessment roll. To avoid fractions
in computation on any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amounts as
prescribed by statute. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall
belong to the city.



Sec. 13-09   Tax roll certified for collection



   After spreading the taxes, the assessor shall certify the tax roll and
the mayor shall sign his warrant thereto directing and requiring the
treasurer to collect from the several persons named in the tax roll, the
several sums mentioned thereon opposite their respective names as a tax or
assessment, and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes,
assessments and charges on the roll, all statutory powers and immunities
possessed by city treasurers for the collection of taxes.



   Such warrant shall further direct that all taxes paid on or before the
20th day of August shall be collected without additional charge. If any
person shall pay one-half of the general city taxes on or before the 31st day
of July of the year in which said taxes are assessed, he may pay the
remaining one-half of such taxes on or before the 30th day of December of
that year without additional charge, but, should the remaining one-half not
be paid on or before 30th day of December, then the same shall be subject to
collection charges as in section 13-12. Failure to pay the second half on or
before December 30th shall subject the property to all the provisions of this
charter relating to delinquent taxes the same as if the first half had not
been paid, except that no interest or penalty shall be charged against the
one-half that is paid. Payment of one-half a tax shall not in any manner
nullify the provisions of section 13-12. The persons liable for a tax under
the provisions of this charter on July 15 of each year shall be liable for
the full amount of the tax, and such tax shall not be considered ‘paid’
until paid in full.



Sec. 13-10   Tax lien on property



   The taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the City from the
persons to whom they are assessed. The amounts assessed on any interest in
real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts
and for all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become
a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien
shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens to the
extent provided by statute and shall continue until such taxes, interest, and
charges are paid.



Sec. 13-11   Taxes due; notification



   The treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayers of the City, by
publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
(which publication of notice shall be made at least ten days prior to the
first day of July), of the time when the taxes will be due for collection and
shall give such notice of the time when the taxes will be due for collection
by first class mail addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes
are assessed, according to the names of such owners and their addresses as
indicated on the tax roll. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient for the
payment of all taxes on the tax roll. Failure on the part of the treasurer to
give notice shall not invalidate the taxes on the tax roll nor release the
person or property assessed from any penalty or interest provided for in this
charter in case of nonpayment of the same.



Sec. 13-12   Collection fees



   When property taxes shall become delinquent, the treasurer shall add to
all taxes paid thereafter a collection fee of four percent (4%) of the amount
of the taxes. Such collection fee shall belong to the City and constitute a
charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves
apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added.
The City may by ordinance provide interest and penalties for delinquent city
real and personal property taxes.



Sec. 13-13   Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax



   If any person, firm, or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any
personal property tax assessed to him or them as required by state law, the
treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such
person, firm, or corporation in an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees,
and charges for subsequent sale whenever the same may be found in the State.



   No property shall be exempt from such seizures. The treasurer may sell
the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges
in accordance with statutory provisions. The treasurer may, if otherwise
unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue, in accordance with
statute, the person, firm, or corporation to whom it is assessed.



Sec. 13-14   Delinquent tax roll to County treasurer



   If the treasurer has been unable to collect any of the city taxes on
the City Tax Roll on real property before the first day of March following
the date when the roll was received by him, it shall be his duty to return
all such unpaid taxes on real property to the county treasurer, in the same
manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of townships,
school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax
roll to be prepared by the treasurer and shall include all the additional
charges and fees herein before provided; which charges shall, in such return,
be added to the amount assessed in the tax roll against each description. The
taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes
returned to the county treasurer under the provisions of the general laws of
the State and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they
are assessed, until paid.



Sec. 13-15   Protection of city lien



   The City shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not
conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the State,
to acquire by purchase any premises within the City at any tax or other
public sale of by direct purchases from the State of Michigan or the fee
owner when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the City for
taxes, or special assessments, or both, on said premises. The City may hold,
lease, or sell the same solely for the purpose of securing therefrom the
amount of such taxes, or special assessments, or both, together with any
incidental expenses incurred in connection with the exercise of this power.
Any such procedure exercised by the City in the protection of its tax lien
shall be deemed to be for a public purpose.



Sec. 13-16   Additional rights, duties, powers, immunities and procedures



   Except as otherwise provided by this charter or ordinance, the rights,
duties, powers, immunities, and procedures established by state general law
shall apply in the collection and enforcement of city property taxes.



Sec. 13-17   Budget procedure



   By the first of March each calendar year, the city council shall adopt
a budget calendar that establishes deadlines for the preparation, review, and
adoption phases for the ensuing fiscal year general, special revenue,
enterprise, internal service, and debt service fund budgets.



   As part of that resolution, the city council shall also adopt
guidelines that the city manager shall follow in preparing the budget. At the
time of this charter, the guidelines recommended by the Government Finance
Officers Association are suggested.



   As part of the budget adoption phase, the city council shall set all
service fees for the ensuing fiscal year and adopt a five-year capital
improvement plan, both of which may be amended during the fiscal year,
provided that no action is taken until the city council by resolution gives
notice of intention to make such changes at least six days before considering
such changes.



   All budgets shall be adopted by the city council no later than the
second day of June each year in accordance with this charter and state law.
No deficit budget shall be approved. All systems of accounting used by the
City shall conform to the uniform system of accounts as required by law.



Contracts



Sec. 13-18   Purchasing and contractual procedure



   (a)   The City must provide, by ordinance based upon a national
standard, for a purchasing procedure to be followed in purchasing city
supplies, materials, equipment, contractual services, or other personal
property. Before making any purchase or contract to purchase, competitive
bids or proposals must be obtained, except when the purchasing official for
the city is exempted from the bidding requirements by the purchasing
ordinance because of value or when the city council determines that no
advantage to the City would result from competitive bidding or a request for
proposal.



   (b)   Purchases must be made from the lowest responsible bidder or
party making a proposal which meets specifications, unless the city council
determines that the public interest would be better served by accepting a
higher bid or proposal or by rejection of all submitted bids or proposals. At
any time that the bid of the lowest responsible bidder is not accepted, the
city council must specify the reason in its resolution concerning the
purchase.



   (c)   The City must provide in the ordinance the definition of
“lowest responsible bidder,” the dollar limit within which the purchasing
official may make purchases without the necessity of obtaining competitive
bids, and the dollar limit within which purchases may be made without city
council approval.



   (d)   The purchasing official must provide the city council with all
certifications required by law prior to city council action on any contract.
The city manager must, before the final payment for any work for which a bond
has been furnished, report to the city council whether the work has, in the
city manager’s judgment, been done in all respects in accordance with the
specifications. The report does not waive any rights the City may have to
pursue any action for non-compliance.



   (e)   No contract shall be split into multiple contracts in order to
avoid any provisions of the bid procedure.



   (f)   All contracts require the signature of the mayor, city
manager, and city clerk.



   (g)   When it becomes necessary or prudent during any work or
improvement project done under contract to make substantial alterations or
modifications in the contract which exceed an amount set by resolution of the
city council, the alterations or modifications must be made only upon
resolution of the city council. The city council must by resolution determine
what is “substantial” and may do so as a general policy or on a
contract-by-contract basis. No order may be effective until the price to be
paid for the material, or work, or both, under the altered or modified
contract has been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and the
city clerk, upon authority of the city council, and a copy of the
modification documents are filed in the office of the city clerk.



Sec. 13-19   Contracts, purchases, expenditures; regulations, restrictions



   Except as otherwise herein provided, the council by resolution shall
have full power to make and authorize contracts on behalf of the City with
due consideration of short- and long-term cost projections. The city manager
shall act as purchasing official, by whom all purchases of supplies for the
City shall be made, and who shall approve all vouchers for the payment of the
same. All such purchases and sales shall conform to such rules and
regulations as the council may from time to time prescribe.



Sec. 13-20   Authority to expend funds



   No city officer, department head, or board member shall have the
authority to expend funds of the City which should be turned into the city
treasury, or to obligate the City of Hamtramck in any way beyond the amount
permitted by this charter or authorized by the city council.



   The city council shall have no power to authorize any contract on
behalf of the City for the expenditure of money in excess of the budget
allowance or to make or to authorize to make any purchase of materials or
supplies of the value exceeding the budget allowance.



Sec. 13-21   Contracts, expenditures; budget provision required



   No liability shall be incurred by any officer or employee of the city
except in accordance with the provisions of the budget, and all contracts not
in accordance with such provisions shall be void.



Sec. 13-22   Contracts, expenditures; controller, approval prerequisite



   Before any order or contract for improvement, service, supplies, etc.,
is issued by the city, council, or any board, officer, or employee, it shall
be presented to the city controller for his approval. The controller shall
examine such order or contract and shall not approve it unless he finds that
an appropriation has been made which has not been exhausted, and that the
order or contract has been otherwise legally authorized and approved. All
orders and contracts which have not been approved by the controller shall be
void.



Chapter 14 - General Finance Borrowing Powers.



Sec. 14-01   General borrowing



   Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this charter, the
council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of
money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City and
the issuance of bonds of the city or other evidence of indebtedness thereof,
and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City for the
payment of the obligations created therefore.



Sec. 14-02   Special assessment bonds



   The council shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general
law of the State, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the
payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of
any public improvement or in anticipation of the payment of any combination
of such special assessment, and to issue bonds therefore. Such special
assessment bonds may be solely an obligation of the special assessment
district or districts or a general obligation of the City. All collections on
each special assessment roll or combination of rolls may be set apart in a
separate fund for the payment of the principle and interest of the bonds
issued in anticipation of payment of such special assessment and shall be
used for no other purpose.



Sec. 14-03   Other bonds



   The City shall have power to issue revenue or other types of bonds in
the manner and for the purpose permitted by the constitution and general laws
of the State of Michigan.



Sec. 14-04   Preparation and record



   Each bond and other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face
a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and it shall
be unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds for any other
purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed
guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidence of indebtedness
issued by the City shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the
clerk under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with a
facsimile signatures of the mayor and clerk. A complete and detailed record
of all bonds and other evidence of indebtedness issued by the City shall be
kept by the controller. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of
indebtedness, the same shall be marked “Cancelled.”



Sec. 14-05   Limitations of indebtedness



   The City may not incur indebtedness by the issuance of bonds or
otherwise, which exceeds the greater of the following:



   (a)   Ten percent (10%) of the assessed value of all real and
personal property in the City;



   (b)   Fifteen percent (15%) of the assessed value of real and
personal property in the City, if that portion of the total amount of
indebtedness incurred exceeds ten percent (10%), is being, or has been used
solely for the construction and renovation of hospital facilities. However,
in the case of fire, flood, or other calamity, the council may borrow for the
relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal
property, the sum not to exceed three-eighths of one percent (.00375) of the
assessed value of all real and personal property in the City, due in not more
than five years, even if the loan would cause the indebtedness of the City to
exceed the limits established by this section. The indebtedness identified by
state statute as excluded from calculations or limitations set forth herein
and shall not be included for purposes of determining the maximum
indebtedness under this provision.



Chapter 15 - Improvements and Assessments



Sec. 15-01   General power relative to special assessments



   The city council shall, after public hearing, have power to determine
and declare by resolution that the whole or any part of the expense of public
improvement, repair, or abatement of nuisance shall be defrayed by special
assessments upon the property specifically benefited.



   (a)   Those roads, maintained by the City, which have been
designated as Basic Arterial Inter-County Roads shall be improved without
specially assessing any costs thereof to the residential property adjacent
thereto.



   (b)   Those paved roads which have been accepted and are maintained
by the city, and have been reported to and approved by the Michigan
Department of State Highways and Transportation for the purposes of Act 51 of
the Public Acts of 1951 [MCL 247.651 et seq., MSA 9.1097(1) et seq.] shall be
maintained, repaired and improved without specially assessing any costs
thereof to the residential property adjacent thereto.



Sec. 15-02   Lien for special assessments.



   From the date of confirmation of any roll levying any special
assessment, the City shall possess a lien on the premises subject thereto for
the full amount of the unpaid special assessment and the interest on all
unpaid installments thereof; and such amount shall also be a debt of the
person to whom assessed until paid and, in case of delinquency, may be
enforced as delinquent city property taxes or by a suit against such person.



Sec. 15-03   Contested assessments.



   No action of any kind shall be instituted for the purpose of contesting
or enjoining the collection of any special assessment, unless (a) a protest
is filed at the hearing held to confirm the special assessment roll; and
unless (b) such action shall be commenced within thirty (30) days after the
confirmation of the roll. If the city attorney submits a written opinion
finding said roll illegal, in whole or in part, the city council shall revoke
its confirmation, correct the illegality, if possible, and reconfirm the
same. Property which is not involved in the illegality shall not be assessed
more than was imposed upon the original confirmation without further notice
and hearing thereon.



Chapter 16 - Streets, Parks, Trees, and Sidewalks



Sec. 16-01   Public ways; supervision and control



   The council, except as otherwise in this charter provided, shall have
supervision and control of all public highways, bridges, streets, avenues,
alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds within the City, including establishing
new public ways or vacating or abolishing existing public ways, and shall
have the like authority over the same as is given by the general laws of the
state.



Sec. 16-02   Public ways; naming; vacation, abolition; notice, procedure



   When the City shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or
abolish any highway, street, lane, alley, or public ground or any part
thereof, or change the name thereof, they shall by resolution so declare, and
in the same resolution shall appoint a time not less than four weeks
thereafter when they will meet and hear objections thereto; notice of such
meeting, with a copy of the resolution, shall be given in such manner as
shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution. Objections to such proposed
action of the council may be filed with the city clerk in writing and if any
such shall be filed, the street, alley, or public ground, or any part
thereof, shall not be vacated, discontinued, or abolished, or the name
changed, except by a vote of five-sevenths (5/7) of the council- and
mayor-elect.



Sec. 16-03   Parks; vacation



   When the City shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or
abolish any park or any part thereof, it shall require a three-fifths (3/5)
vote of the electorate voting on the proposal. The issue shall be voted on no
later than the next general election.



Sec. 16-04   Improvements; taxes, special assessments authorized; procedure



   The expense of constructing and maintaining bridges and the whole or
such part as the council shall determine, of the expense of paving,
improving, and working, including grading and graveling upon the streets,
alleys, and highways, may be paid from the general city funds, to be raised
by tax upon all the property in the City. The expense of grading, paving, or
graveling or otherwise improving any street, alley, or highway, may be
defrayed by a special assessment upon the lots and premises abutting upon
such improvement, or a part of such expense may be so paid and the remainder
may be paid from the general city funds as the council may decide. The lots
and premises abutting upon a street, alley, or highway improvement shall
constitute a special assessment district. The term “paving” shall include
curbing and the construction of crosswalks in the paved streets. All
assessments for street improvements shall be made upon the abutting lots and
premises according to the number of feet frontage upon the improvement, and
all assessments for alley improvements shall be made upon abutting lots and
premises according to the benefits received by such lots and premises. When
such assessment is to be made upon lots in proportion to their frontage upon
the improvement, if from the shape or size of any lot an assessment thereon
in proportion to the frontage would be unjust and disproportionate to the
assessment upon other lots, the assessor making the assessments may assess
such lot for such number of feet frontage as in his opinion will be just.



Sec. 16-05   Special assessment districts; city; expense, apportionment



   When expenses for any such improvement shall be assessed in a special
assessment district, and there shall be lands belonging to the City or school
district fronting upon such improvement, such part of the expense of such
improvement as in the opinion of the assessor making the special assessment
would be justly apportionable to such City or school district property, and
to any interior squares or spaces formed by the intersection of streets, were
they assessable, shall be paid from the general city funds, and the balance
of such expense shall be assessed upon the remaining lots and premises
included in the special assessment district.



Sec. 16-06   Public ways; encumbrances, obstructions; prohibitions, remedy



   The council shall have power to prohibit and prevent obstructions and
encumbrances in and encroachments upon the public highways, streets, and
alleys of the City and remove the same; and to punish those who shall
obstruct, encumber, encroach or maintain any encroachment upon or in any such
highway, street or alley; and to require all such persons to remove every
such obstruction, encumbrance, or encroachment.



Sec. 16-07   Trees; regulations authorized



   The council may provide for and regulate the planting of shade and
ornamental trees in public highways, streets, and avenues of the city, and
for the protection thereof, and the trimming of all trees in or that overhang
such highway, streets, or avenues, or which obstruct public lighting, and may
light the streets and public places, and regulate the setting of lamp posts
therein and protect the same.



Sec. 16-08   Sidewalks; council authority



   The council shall have control of all sidewalks in the public streets
and alleys of the city and may prescribe the grade thereof and change the
same when deemed necessary. The council shall have power through and by the
proper officers, to build, maintain, and keep in repair sidewalks and
crosswalks in the public streets and alleys and to charge the expense of
constructing and maintaining such sidewalks upon the lots and premises
adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalks. The council shall also have
authority to require the owners and occupants of lots and premises to build,
rebuild, and maintain sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and
abutting upon such lots and premises and to keep them in repair at all times,
and to construct and lay the same upon such lines and grades and of such
width, materials, and manner of construction, and within such time as the
council shall by ordinance or resolution prescribe the expense thereof to be
paid by such owner or occupant; or the council may, by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of all the council-elect, pay such part of the expense of building or
rebuilding, maintaining and keeping in repair such walks as they deem proper
from the general city funds.



Sec. 16-09   Sidewalks; snow, ice, encumbrances; council authority



   The council shall also have power either by ordinance or resolution to
cause and require the owners and occupants of any lot or premises to remove
all snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such lot and
premises, and to keep the same free from obstructions, encroachments,
encumbrances, filth, and other nuisances; provided, that the council may
provide by ordinance for the removing of all ice or snow therefrom, and for
keeping the same free from encumbrances and pay the expense thereof from the
general city funds.



Sec. 16-10   Compliance with orders required; violations, remedy; procedure



   If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises shall fail to construct
or maintain any particular sidewalk as mentioned and prescribed in section
above, or shall fail to keep the same in repair, or to remove the snow, ice,
and filth therefrom, or to remove and keep the same free from obstructions,
encroachments, encumbrances, or other nuisances, or shall fail to perform any
other duty required by the council in respect to such sidewalks within such
time and such manner as the council shall require, the council may cause the
same to be done, at the expense of such owner or occupant, and the council
may cause the amount of all expenses incurred thereby to be reported to the
city treasurer, who shall cause a notice of such assessment to be mailed to
the owners of the premises if known.



   If the amount of the assessment is not paid to the treasurer within a
period of sixty (60) days from the date of mailing such notice, the treasurer
shall report the same to the council, and the council shall report the same
to the city assessor, to be by him levied, together with a penalty of ten
percent in addition thereto, as a special assessment upon the lot or premises
adjacent to or abutting upon such sidewalk, which special assessment shall be
subject to review after proper notice has been given as in all other cases of
special assessment provided for in this charter; and such assessment when
confirmed shall be a lien upon such lot or premises the same as other special
assessments and all proceedings subsequent to confirmation, provided for in
this chapter, in relation to special assessments shall apply; or the City may
collect such amount, together with the penalty from the owner or occupant of
the premises, together with costs of suit.



Sec. 16-11   Signs, awnings, etc.; regulations, prohibitions authorized



   The council shall have power to regulate and prohibit the placing of
signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things upon or over sidewalks, and to
regulate, license, or prohibit the construction and use of openings in the
sidewalks, and of all vault structures and excavations under the same.



Chapter 17 - Sewers



Sec. 17-01   Maintenance, construction; appropriation of private property



   The council may establish, construct, control, and maintain, either
within or without its corporate limits, sewers, drains, and water courses,
whenever and wherever necessary, and of such dimensions and materials, and
under such regulations as it may deem proper for the drainage of the city;
and private property, or the use thereof, may be acquired either by purchase
or condemnation. But in all cases where the council shall deem it practicable
such sewer, drain, and watercourses shall be constructed in the public
streets and grounds.



   The council shall establish from time to time a scale of rates to be
charged and paid for supply of water and sewage treatment system to be called
“water and sewer rates”, and which rates shall be appropriate, as nearly
as may be practicable, to different classes of buildings in the city with
reference to the dimensions, value, exposure to fires, ordinary or
extraordinary uses, yards, number of families or occupants, or consumption of
water. The council may provide for the installation of meters upon any
premises supplied with water, and for the payment for the water actually used
as registered by such meter. The council shall prescribe by ordinance the
manner of assessing water charges, the time when such charges shall be paid,
the date when the same shall become a lien upon the property, the penalties
for non-payment of such charges, and what steps shall be taken to enforce the
payment thereof, and may provide that in case of non-payment that the supply
of water to any premises may be shut off or stopped. All water and sewer
charges shall be paid to the city treasurer.



   The formula for establishing water and sewer rates shall be established
by ordinance and the rates approved by resolution.



Sec. 17-02   Construction, etc.; costs; special assessments, taxes
authorized



   The expense of constructing, reconstructing, or repairing and improving
sewers, drains, ditches, and water courses, may be paid by general tax upon
all the taxable property in the City; or such expenses may be defrayed by
special assessments upon the lands and premises benefitted by the drainage,
in proportion to the benefits resulting to each lot or parcel of land
respectively; or such part of the expense as the council shall determine may
be defrayed by special assessment; and the remainder may be paid by general
tax.



Sec. 17-03   Private drains; authority to require; costs; connection to
public drains



   Whenever the council shall deem it necessary for the public health, it
may require the owners and occupants of lots and premises to construct
private drains therefrom to connect with some public sewer or drain, and
thereby to drain such lots and premises; and to keep such private drains in
repair and free from obstruction and nuisances; and if such private drains
are not constructed and maintained according to such requirement, the council
may cause the work to be done at the expense of such owner or occupant, and
the amount of such expense shall be a lien upon the premises drained, and may
be collected by special assessment to be levied thereon.



   The owners and occupants of lots and premises shall have the right to
connect the same, at their own expense, by means of private drains, with the
public sewers and drains under such rules and regulations as the council
shall prescribe.



Chapter 18 - Public Utilities



Sec. 18-01   General powers regarding utilities



   The City reserves all the power granted to cities by statute and the
constitution to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend,
repair, and maintain either within or outside the corporate limits,
including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying
water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage systems, communication systems, and
garbage facilities, or any of them to the municipality; and to sell and
deliver water, light, heat, power, gas, communications, and other public
utility services within or outside its corporate limits to an amount not to
exceed the limitations set by state statute and the constitution.



Sec. 18-02   Rates



   Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and
reasonable rates and other charges as it may deem advisable for the supplying
of the inhabitants of the City and others with such public services as the
City may provide. No free service shall be permitted. Higher rates may be
charged for services outside the corporate limits of the city.



Water Works



Sec. 18-03   Water system; city manager responsibilities



   The public water system of the City of Hamtramck, is under general
direction and control of the city manager.



   The city manager shall from time to time recommend to the council a
schedule of rates such that the revenues of the public water system of the
city shall be sufficient to provide for the expense of operation and the
payment of all indebtedness incurred in the establishment and maintenance of
the public water system of the City.



Sec. 18-04   Water and sewer rates; meters; assessments for water



   The council shall provide by ordinance the formula to establish water
and sewer rates, which shall be set by resolution of the council upon
adoption of the annual budget. The council, by resolution, may provide for
the installation of meters upon any premises supplied with water, and for the
payment for the water actually used as registered by such meter; the time
when such charges shall be paid; the date when same shall become a lien upon
the property; the penalties for non-payment of such charges; the steps to be
taken to enforce payment thereof; and provide that in case of non-payment
that the supply of water to any premises may be shut off or stopped. All
water and sewer charges shall be paid to the city treasurer.



Sec. 18-05   Water for public purposes; appropriations required



   The council shall from time to time appropriate money to be raised by
general taxation for the payment for water used for fire purposes, street
cleaning, and other general public uses.



Sec. 18-06   Connecting pipes; construction, maintenance; ordinance
required; connections, permit required



   The connecting or supplying pipes leading from buildings or yards to
the distributing pipes shall be inserted and kept in repair at the expense of
the owner or occupant of the building or yard, and shall not be inserted or
connected with the main pipe until a permit shall be obtained from the city.
All such connecting or supply pipes shall be constructed and connected in the
manner prescribed by ordinance.



Sec. 18-07   Ordinances, resolutions authorized



   The council may enact such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as may
be necessary to regulate and control the taking and use of water from the
water system.



Franchises



Sec. 18-08   Use of public ways; franchise required



   No person, partnership, association, or corporation operating a public
utility shall have the right to the use of highways, streets, alleys, or
other public places of the city, for wires, poles, pipes, tracks, or
conduits, without the consent of the City; nor to transact a local business
therein without first obtaining a franchise from the City. The right of the
City to the reasonable control of its streets, alleys, and public places, and
of the space above and beneath them is hereby reserved to the City, except as
limited by state law.



Sec. 18-09   Franchises, licenses; term, restriction



   No franchise or grant shall be granted by the City for a longer period
than thirty (30) years. No license shall be granted by the council for a
longer period than one year.



Sec. 18-10   Irrevocable franchises; approval of registered voters required



   No franchise or grant which is not revocable at the will of the City
shall be granted or become operative until the same shall have been referred
to the people at a general or special election, and has received the approval
of three-fifths (3/5) of the registered voters voting at such election. The
expenses of such election as determined by the city council shall be paid by
the franchisee applicant or grantee prior the election.



Sec. 18-11   Exclusive franchise prohibited; renewal, requisites



   No person, firm, or corporation shall be granted any exclusive
franchise, license, right, or privilege whatever, and no franchise shall be
renewed before one year prior to its expiration.



Sec. 18-12   Leasing, assigning franchises



   No franchise granted by the City shall be leased, assigned, or
otherwise alienated except in accordance with the express provisions of the
franchise, and all franchises granted by the City shall provide how, in what
manner, and under what conditions the franchise may be leased, assigned, or
alienated, and no dealing with the lessee or assignee on the part of the
City, which shall recognize the performance of any act or payment of any
compensation by the lessee, shall be deemed to have operated as such consent.



Sec. 18-13   Changing, modifying franchises, procedure



   No change or modification of any franchise or grant of rights or powers
previously granted to any corporation, firm, person, or association of
persons shall be made except in the manner and subject to all the conditions
herein provided for the making of original grants and franchises.



Sec. 18-14   Public utilities; license fees authorized



   Except where the same may be in conflict with the laws of the State or
constitution, the City shall have the right to license and impose a license
fee on communication services, transportation systems, gas, electric, and
water meters, or any devices used for measuring services, also communication
devices, electric light and power poles, conduits, and wires. All license
fees shall be exclusive of and in addition to other lawful taxes upon the
property.



Sec. 18-15   Franchises; reservations in favor of city required



   The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right
of the City whether in terms reserved or not, to make all regulations which
shall be necessary to secure in the most ample manner the safety, welfare,
and accommodation of the public, including, among other things, the right to
pass and enforce ordinances, to require proper and adequate extensions of the
service of such grant, to protect the public from danger or inconvenience in
the operation of any work or business authorized by the grant of the
franchise, and the right to make and enforce all such regulations as shall be
reasonably necessary to secure adequate, sufficient, and proper service,
extensions, and accommodations for the people and insure their comfort and
convenience.



Sec. 18-16   Joint use of franchise property; compensation; council
authority



   The City, by and through its council, shall have the power to require
any corporation holding a franchise from the City, to allow the use of its
tracks, poles, conduits, and wires, or any facilities that can be jointly
used, by any other corporation to which the City shall grant a franchise,
upon the payment of a reasonable rental, and any franchise or right which may
hereafter be granted to any person or corporation to operate a public utility
within the city or its suburbs, shall be subject to the condition that the
City shall have the rights to grant to any other person or corporation
desiring to build or operate a street railway or interurban railway, or any
other public utility, within or into the city or its suburbs, the right to
operate; provided, that the person or corporation desiring to so operate
shall first agree in writing with the owner thereof to pay such owner
reasonable compensation for the use of such facilities. And if the person or
corporation desiring to use the same cannot agree with the owner as to the
compensation within sixty (60) days from offering in writing so to do and to
terms and conditions of the use of the facilities, then the council shall, by
resolution, after a fair hearing to the parties concerned, fix the terms and
conditions of such use and compensation to be paid, which award of the
council when so made shall be binding on and observed by the parties
concerned.



Chapter 19 - Appropriation of Private Property



Sec. 19-01   Procedure, state law



   Private property may be condemned by the City for any public use or
purpose within the scope of its powers in the manner provided for by the
general laws of the State.



Sec. 19-02   Awards in condemnation proceedings; special assessments
authorized; conditions, procedure; portion payable from general taxes



   In all cases where awards for damages have been made in condemnation
proceedings, if the council believes that a portion of the city in the
vicinity of the improvement will be benefitted by such improvement, they may,
by an entry in their minutes, determine that the whole or any just proportion
of the compensation awarded by the jury shall be assessed upon the owners or
occupants of real estate deemed to be thus benefitted, and thereupon they
shall, by resolution, fix and determine the district or portion of the city
benefitted, and specify the amount to be assessed upon the owners or
occupants of the taxable real estate therein. The amount of the benefit thus
ascertained shall be assessed upon the owners or occupants of such taxable
real estate in proportion, as nearly as may be, to the advantage which each
such lot, parcel, or subdivision is deemed to acquire by the improvement. The
assessment shall be made and the amount levied and collected in the same
manner and by the same officers and proceedings, as near as may be provided
in and by this charter for assessing, levying, and collecting the expense of
a public improvement. The assessment roll containing said assessment, when
ratified and confirmed by the council, shall be final, conclusive, and prima
facie evidence of the regularity and legality of all proceedings prior
thereto, and the assessment therein contained shall be and continue a lien on
the premises on which the same is made until payment thereof. Whatever amount
or portion of such awarded compensation shall not be raised in the manner
herein provided shall be assessed, levied, and collected upon the taxable
real estate of the City; as other general taxes are assessed and collected
therein. At any sale which takes place of the assessed premises, or any
portion thereof, delinquent for non-payment of the amount assessed and levied
thereon, the City may become a purchaser.



Chapter 20 - Recall; Removal; Initiative and Referendum



Sec. 20-01   State law



   Any holder of an elective office may be recalled and removed from their
office by the registered voters of the City of Hamtramck, in the manner
provided by the constitution and general laws of this State.



Sec. 20-02   Appointive officers; removal



   All appointive officers of the City of Hamtramck shall be subject to
removal as in this charter provided.



Sec. 20-03   Petitions; contents, signatures, requisites



   Any ordinance which may be legally adopted by the council of the City
of Hamtramck may be proposed by petition signed by a number of registered
voters of the City of Hamtramck equal to the percentage hereinafter provided,
but in no case shall the number of such signers be less than two hundred and
fifty (250). The petition shall be addressed to the council and shall set
forth at length the ordinance proposed to be enacted. With each signature
attached thereto shall be given the place of residence, with the street and
number of the registered voter so signing, and the date when such signature
was attached. The signatures need not all be on one paper, but all petitions
shall be filed with the city clerk at the same time. An affidavit or
affidavits shall be made by one or more registered voters of the city, which
affidavits shall state that each signature appearing upon such petition, to
which such affidavit is attached, is the genuine signature of the person
whose name it purports to be, and that to the best of affiant’s knowledge
and belief, the signers whose names are attached to the petition are
registered voters of the City of Hamtramck.



Sec. 20-04   Form of petition



   The petition proposing an ordinance shall be in the following form: To
the Honorable, the Council of the City of Hamtramck, County of Wayne, State
of Michigan:



   We, the undersigned registered voters of the City of Hamtramck, under
and by virtue of the authority granted by Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of
1909, as amended, and by Chapter 20 of the Charter of the City of Hamtramck,
do hereby propose and initiate for submission to the registered voters of the
City of Hamtramck, in the County of Wayne, and State of Michigan, the
following proposed ordinance:



      (Here set forth proposed ordinance in full.)



   If a special election is desired insert the following:



   Your Petitioners further pray that a special election be called for the
purpose of submitting the proposed ordinance provided no regular or special
election is to be held in the City within four months from the date the city
clerk shall certify the sufficiency of this petition. And your petitioners
will ever pray, etc.



   Name______Number_______Street_______Date of Signing



   AFFIDAVIT



   STATE OF MICHIGAN, ss:



   COUNTY OF WAYNE,



______________________being first duly sworn, deposes and say, that the names
appearing upon the foregoing petition are the genuine signatures of the
persons whose names appear thereon, and that to the best of affiant’s
knowledge and belief, such persons are registered voters of the City of
Hamtramck.



   Subscribed and sworn to before me this___________day
of________________, A.D.



   Notary Public, Wayne County, Michigan.



   My commission expires_______________



Sec. 20-05   Petition; filing; city clerk, duties



   The petition, when signed by the requisite number of registered voters,
shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall attach thereto a
certificate setting forth the name and address of the person or persons
filing the petition in his office and the date when the petition was filed. A
copy of the petition, exclusive of signatures, together with the certificate
shall be entered in a record book to be kept for that purpose in the office
of the city clerk. Any defect in the form of the petition or record as kept
by the city clerk shall not invalidate the same.



Sec. 20-06   Petitions; signatures; examination, determination; city clerk
duties



   Within ten days from the date of the filing of the petition with the
city clerk, it shall be the duty of the clerk to ascertain by comparison of
the petition with the registration books of the City of Hamtramck, whether or
not the petitions are signed by the requisite number of registered voters,
and following the examination, the clerk shall attach to the petition his
certificate showing the result of the examination.



Sec. 20-07   Petitions; insufficiency; additional signatures, procedure



   If the certificate of the clerk so attached shows the petition to be
insufficient, he shall within ten days cause notice in writing, setting forth
the fact that the petitions are found to be insufficient, to be served upon
one or more of the persons designated in the certificate attached by him to
the petition as the persons who filed the petition in his office. Additional
signatures, properly verified, may be filed with the clerk at any time within
fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of such notice. The city clerk
shall attach his certificate to such additional petitions and shall cause
them to be entered in the record book. The clerk shall within five days after
the filing of such additional petitions make like comparison of the
additional signatures with the registration books and attach his certificate
of the result. If the number of signatures are still shown to be
insufficient, or if no additional signatures are so filed, the clerk shall,
upon demand, return the petition to any of the persons designated as filing
it, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.



Sec. 20-08   Petitions; sufficiency; return to council



   When the petition shall be found by the city clerk to be sufficient, he
shall so certify and submit the same with his certificate to the council at
its next regular meeting.



Sec. 20-09   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; special election



   If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by a
number of registered voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent
(20%) of the entire vote cast for all candidates for mayor at the last
preceding general election at which a mayor was elected, and contains a
request that the proposed ordinance be submitted to a vote of the registered
voters at a special election, the council shall within twenty (20) days
thereof either:



   (a)   Pass the ordinance without alteration, subject to the
referendum provided by this charter, or



   (b)   Call a special election to be held within ninety (90) days
from the date of the certificate of the city clerk attached thereto, and at
such special election, the proposed ordinance shall be submitted without
alteration to the vote of the registered voters of the City. Provided,
however, that if any election is to be held in the city within four months
from the date of the certificate by the city clerk, then the ordinance shall
be submitted at the election, and no other special election for the purpose
of submitting the ordinance shall be called.



Sec. 20-10   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; regular election



   If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by
registered voters of the city of Hamtramck equal in number to at least ten
percent (10%) but less than twenty percent (20%) of the vote cast for all
candidates for mayor of the city at the last preceding general municipal
election at which a mayor was elected, which number shall be not less than
two hundred and fifty (250), as shown in the manner hereinafter provided, and
the ordinance be not passed without alteration by the council within twenty
(20) days as provided in the preceding section, then the ordinance, without
alteration, shall be submitted by the council to electoral vote at the next
regular election that shall occur at any time after thirty (30) days from the
date of the city clerk’s certificate of sufficiency attached to the
petition accompanying the ordinance.



Sec. 20-11   Referendum; petition, requisites; suspension of ordinance;
procedure



   Within twenty (20) days after the publication of any ordinance duly
passed by the City, a petition may be presented to the council protesting
against such ordinance continuing in effect. The petition shall contain the
text of the ordinance and shall be signed by registered voters of the city
equal in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the entire vote cast for
all candidates for mayor at the last preceding general election at which a
mayor was elected, which number shall in no case be less than two hundred and
fifty (250). The ordinance shall thereupon and thereby be suspended from
operation, and the council shall immediately reconsider the ordinance.



   If the ordinance is not entirely repealed, the council shall submit the
question of whether or not it shall become effective to a vote of the
registered voters of the city, either at the next regular election or at a
special election which may in its discretion be called for that purpose, and
such ordinance shall not be restored to operation unless a majority of the
registered voters voting at such election shall vote in favor thereof.



   The procedure in regard to such petition of protest and referendum
shall be the same as provided in this chapter for the initiative and
referendum on a proposed ordinance, with such modifications as the nature of
the case may require. Provided, however, that no such referendum shall be
ordered by the council on any ordinance required to be passed by the general
laws of this state, or when such ordinance shall be an emergency measure
which is necessary for the immediate preservation of public peace, health, or
safety.



Sec. 20-12   Referendum; submission by council; time, restriction



   The council by resolution may submit to a referendum for adoption or
rejection at any general, primary, or special election held in the City, any
proposed ordinance or measure or a proposal for the repeal or the amendment
of any ordinance in the same manner and with the same force and effect as
provided in this chapter for submission on petition. No such ordinance or
amendment shall be submitted, however, at any election to be held in less
than thirty (30) days from the date of the meeting of the council when such
ordinance or amendment is ordered submitted.



Sec. 20-13   Conflicting ordinances; adoption; construction, determination



   If the provisions of two or more proposed ordinances or measures
adopted or approved at the same election are inconsistent, then the ordinance
or measure receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.



Sec. 20-14   Ordinances; submission to registered voters; notice,
publication required



   Whenever any ordinance is submitted to the voters of the city at any
election, the council shall cause such ordinance to be published in full in
accordance with law.



Sec. 20-15   Ordinance adopted by referendum; amending, repealing;
restriction



   No ordinance adopted under this charter by referendum or initiative
shall be repealed or amended except by vote of the electorate.



Sec. 20-16   Additional regulation authorized, restriction



   The council- and mayor-elect may by ordinance or resolution make such
regulations not in conflict herewith as it may deem necessary to carry out
the provisions of this chapter.



Chapter 21 - Miscellaneous



Sec. 21-01   Definitions



   The term, “City”, whenever used in this charter, shall be construed
to mean the City of Hamtramck. The term, “council”, as used in this
charter, shall be construed to mean the city council and shall mean the same
as the term “common council” wherever the same is used in this charter or
in any law of the State as designating the legislative body of the city.



Sec. 21-02   Notice; posting, publication; requirements, evidence



   When, by the provisions of this charter or the laws of the State,
notice of any matter or proceedings is required to be published or posted, an
affidavit of the publication or posting of the same made by the printer of
the newspaper in which the same was inserted or by some person in his employ
knowing the facts, if such notice was required to be by publication, or by
the person posting the same when required to be by posting, shall be prima
facie evidence of the facts therein contained. Such affidavit of publication
or posting shall be filed with the city clerk within six months from the date
of the last publication thereof or the posting of the same.



Sec. 21-03   Process against city; service upon designated officers



   All process against this City shall run against the City in its
corporate name and may be served by leaving a certified copy with the city
manager or city clerk, at such time and manner as may be provided by law.



Sec. 21-04   “Newspaper of general circulation” defined



   A “newspaper of general circulation” selected by council from time
to time, shall be construed to mean any newspaper having a general
circulation in the City of Hamtramck or subject to the definition provided in
state law.



Sec. 21-05   Records required



   All records of the proceedings of the council and records of the City
shall be kept in the English language in the books or journal of the city.



Sec. 21-06   Records; public inspection



   All the records of this City shall be made available to the general
public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 to
15.246.



Sec. 21-07   Fiscal year



   The fiscal year of this City shall begin with the first day of July of
each year, and end with the 30th day of June next thereafter.



Sec. 21-08   Uniform system of accounts; state law



   The system of accounts of the City shall conform to any uniform system,
which may be required by state law.



Sec. 21-09   Books, records, accounts, etc.; examination, audit



   All books, papers, records, and accounts of any officer, elected or
appointed, or of any office or department of the City shall be the property
of the City, and shall at all times be subject to audit, examination, or
inspection by any members of the council or mayor, or by any person employed
or designated by the council or mayor for that purpose.



Sec. 21-10   Misdemeanors; penalty



   All offenses herein declared to be misdemeanors shall be punishable,
unless herein otherwise provided for, by a fine not exceeding the maximum
allowed by state law, or by imprisonment in the county jail, or any place of
imprisonment provided by the City or laws of the State of Michigan, for a
period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or ninety-three (93) days in cases
where state law so provides, or both such fine and imprisonment.



Sec. 21-11   Officers, employees; service in military forces; compensation
authorized



   Whenever any officer or officers, employee or employees of the City of
Hamtramck shall be called into the military or naval service of the United
States, or shall voluntarily enter such service in time of war, the council
shall have power to grant to such officer or officers, employee or employees,
an indefinite leave of absence to cover the period of such service, with full
pay or such proportion thereof as the council in its discretion may determine.



Sec. 21-12   Severability of provisions



   Should any portion of this charter be declared void, illegal, or
unconstitutional, such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this
charter.



Sec. 21-13   Charter; amending, revising; procedure; state law



   This charter may be amended or revised in the manner provided by the
general laws of this State.



Sec. 21-14   City seal; design, contents



   There shall be a city seal, which shall be of such design and with such
wording and device thereupon as shall be prescribed by the city council of
the City of Hamtramck. The year inscribed thereupon shall be the calendar
year in which the City of Hamtramck became legally incorporated.



Sec. 21-15   “He”, “masculine form” defined



   Wherever the word “he” is used in this charter, it may also be read
“she”, and wherever the name of any officer connected with the government
of the City of Hamtramck is in masculine form, it may also be held to include
the feminine form.



Sec. 21-16   Council, officers; powers construed



   Wherever, under the provisions of this charter, any powers of action or
determination are granted to the city council, the exercise of such powers
shall be deemed subject to the limitations herein set forth, unless expressly
exempted, but where any right of control management or superintendence is
herein given or conferred upon any appointive officer, the same shall be held
and construed to be not in derogation of the powers of the council, but only
in the execution thereof.



Chapter 22 - Submission and Election



Sec. 22-01   Charter; submission to registered voters, date



   This charter shall be submitted to the registered voters of the City of
Hamtramck for their approval or rejection at a special election to be held on
February 22, 2005.



Sec. 22-02   Charter; publication required; official ballot



   Prior to the submission to the voters, this charter shall be published
as required by law.



   Official Ballot



   Shall the City Charter proposed by the City of Hamtramck



   Charter Revision Commission approved by resolution on



   November 8, 2004 be adopted?  [ ] YES   [ ] NO



Sec. 22-03   Effective date of charter



   If this charter is adopted, this charter shall take effect on the
filing with the Secretary of State and the County Clerk as provided in MCLA
117.24 or July 1, 2005, whichever is later, subject to the following:



   (a)   The mayor, city council, city clerk, and city treasurer
elected at the general election, held November 4, 2003, under the old
charter, shall continue to serve the elected term of office to December 31,
2005. Any vacancies created before December 31, 2005, shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of this charter, as in 4-03 (b).



   (b)   At the November, 2005 election, three councilpersons shall be
elected for a four-year term and three councilpersons shall be elected for a
two-year term. In the November, 2007 election and each municipal election
thereafter, three councilpersons shall be elected to four-year terms.



   (c)   For the period immediately following the effective date of
this charter until the six councilmembers elected in the November 2005
general municipal election are sworn in, the number of councilmembers shall
not exceed five (5), and the city council shall consist of the councilmembers
who hold office at the effective date of this charter. From the effective
date of this charter until January 1, 2006, any vacancies on the city council
shall be filled in the manner described in section 4-03(b).



   (d)   Continuation of public and private rights



   All writs, actions, suits, proceedings, civil or criminal liabilities,
prosecutions, judgments, sentences, orders, decrees, appeals, causes of
action, contracts, claims, demands, titles, and rights existing when this
charter takes effect continue unaffected except as modified in accordance
with this charter.



   (e)   Rights of employees



   No provision of this charter may affect or impair the employment rights
or privileges of employees existing when this charter takes effect concerning
appointment, ranks, grades, promotion, removal, pension, and retirement
rights.



   (f)   Pension system



   All pension systems of the City of Hamtramck existing when this charter
takes effect continue until changed in accordance with law. No person may
receive pension benefits for service as an elected officer.



   (g)   One-year exemption for city clerk and treasurer



   The elected city clerk and city treasurer shall be granted an exemption
from the one-year non-employment provision Chapter 5 Sec. 5-05.



   (h)   Compensation for city clerk, city treasurer, council, mayor
and mayor pro tem



      (1)   The compensation for the city clerk and city treasurer
as elected officers shall remain at $12,000 per year if they remain as
part-time elected officers.



      (2)   If the city treasurer, or the city clerk, or both
elected at the November 4, 2003 election, or the person appointed to the
position of city clerk or city treasurer in the case of a vacancy meet the
qualifications of the appointed positions, it will be at the discretion of
the city manager to recommend their appointment to full time status, subject
to approval of the mayor and city council.



      (3)   The city council- and mayor-elect will set the
compensation for the full-time appointed city clerk and city treasurer
positions to be within the range of other communities for like positions.



      (4)   The council elected at the November 4, 2003 election
shall receive the compensation set forth Section 7-01, effective July 1, 2005.



      (5)   The mayor elected at the November 4, 2003 election shall
receive the compensation set forth in Section 9-03, effective July 1, 2005.



      (6)   The mayor pro tem selected by council shall receive the
compensation set forth in Section 9-03, effective July 1, 2005.



   (i)   General provision



   If any question arises concerning transition from the old charter to
this charter, for which this charter has not provided, the City may resolve
the question by ordinance.



   (j)   Conflicts of interest and ethics ordinance



   Within one year of the approval of this charter, the city manager and
city attorney shall prepare and submit to council for its consideration a
conflicts of interest and ethics ordinance which is not in conflict with MCL
15.321, et seq., and shall include, but not be limited to: acting in an
official capacity in matters in which the officer has a private financial
interest clearly separate from that of the general public; the acceptance of
gifts and other things of value; acting in a private capacity on matters
dealt with as a public official; the use of confidential information; and the
appearance of City officers before other city agencies on behalf of private
interests. This ordinance shall provide for reasonable public disclosure of
finances by elected officials.



   Resolved, that the Charter Revision Commission of the City of Hamtramck
does hereby adopt the foregoing charter for and to be the charter of the City
of Hamtramck, and the Secretary of this Commission is hereby instructed to
transmit the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan. in accordance
with the provisions of the statute for her approval.



      Carried by the following vote:



         Yeas: Lukas, Zwolak, Wiitala, Kirchner, Urbaniak and Puls.



         Nays: None.



         Absent: Woods



   I, Gregory Kirchner, Secretary of the Charter Revision Commission,
elected on November 5, 2002, to revise the charter for the City of Hamtramck,
do hereby certify that the above and foregoing charter was adopted by the
Hamtramck Charter Revision Commission at a session thereof held upon the 8th
day of November, 2004, at 7:00 P.M., and that the foregoing is a full, true,
and complete copy of the resolution by which the charter was adopted and the
vote thereupon.



______________________________________



   Gregory Kirchner



   Secretary of the Charter Revision Commission      Date: 
November 8, 2004



   The members of the Hamtramck Charter Revision Commission who have
signed below submit this charter for adoption at a special election to be
held on February 22, 2005.



__________________________               _______________________
______



   David Puls, Chairman                     Jolanta
Urbaniak, Vice-Chairman



__________________________               _______________________
______



   Gregory Kirchner, Secretary                  Dennis
Lukas



__________________________               _______________________
______



   William
Wiitala                           Beatrice Woods



__________________________               APPROVED



   Robert Zwolak



                                    _______
______________________



                                    Governo
r of the State of Michigan



                                    Date:__
_______________________



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS;  GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.001   How code designated and cited



   10.002   Definitions



   10.003   Section catchlines and other headings



   10.004   Certain ordinances not affected by code



   10.005   Continuation of ordinances



   10.006   Prior rights, offenses and the like



   10.007   Ordinances repealed not reenacted



   10.008   Amendments to code



   10.009   Supplementation of code



   10.010   Appearance tickets



   10.011   Official time



   10.012   Separability of provisions



   10.013   Annual revision of penalties, fines and fees



 



   10.999   General penalty



Cross-reference:



   General welfare; ordinances, regulations, see Charter, Chapter 7, §
7-05



   Resolutions, majority vote; Mayor’s voting rights, see Charter,
Chapter 7, § 7-06



§ 10.001  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   This code shall constitute and be designated as the “Hamtramck City
Code.”



Statutory reference:



   Codification authority, see M.C.L.A. 117.5b



§ 10.002  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless otherwise specifically
defined, have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the
same terms.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Hamtramck, adopted February
22, 2005, and shall include any amendment thereto, or any revision thereof.



      CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Michigan.



      CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of
Hamtramck.



      CODE. The Hamtramck City Code as designated in § 10.001.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done,
as provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to this code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall
be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or
a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



      COUNTY. County of Wayne, Michigan.



      JUVENILE.  Any person under 17 years of age.



      MINOR.  A person under 21 years of age.



      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.  An act or omission that is
prohibited by this code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a
crime under this code or any other ordinance of the city, and for which civil
sanctions, including without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs
may be ordered, as authorized by Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §
600.113(1)(c), as amended. A MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION is not a lesser
included offense of any criminal offense in this code.



      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD AND THE LIKE.  Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, the
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Hamtramck, Michigan.”  Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any
officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or
duty, reference to that officer shall mean and include the officer or his or
her deputy or authorized subordinate.



      ORDINANCES.  The ordinances of the City of Hamtramck and all
amendments thereto.



      PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership,
association or corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section
of this code prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or
associations, the word includes the partners, or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations the word includes officers, agents or employees
thereof who are responsible for any violations of the section. The singular
includes the plural. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders.



      STATE.  The term THE STATE or THIS STATE shall be construed to
mean the State of Michigan.



§ 10.003  SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections
and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor as any
part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of
deficiency in any catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter,
article or division.



§ 10.004  CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.



   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall
affect any ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this code:



      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of
the city’s indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city;



      (2)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City
Council;



      (3)   Granting any right or franchise;



      (4)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in
the city;



      (5)   Making any appropriation;



      (6)   Levying or imposing taxes;



      (7)   Establishing or prescribing street grades in the city;



      (8)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;



      (9)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the
city;



      (10)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;



      (11)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation
of any city officers or employees;



      (12)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking
zones; specific speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield
intersections or other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;



      (13)   Pertaining to rezoning; and



      (14)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a
general and permanent nature.



   (B)   All these ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this
code. The ordinances are on file in the City Clerk’s office.



§ 10.005  CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance
as those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a
continuation of the ordinances and not as new enactments.



§ 10.006  PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES AND THE LIKE.



   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired,
or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this code shall not be affected by the adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.



§ 10.007  ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.



   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless
specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances
shall not impair or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.



§ 10.008  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made
by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this code in the following language: “That section _____ of the Hamtramck
City Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:...” The new provisions
shall then be set out in full as desired.



   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, the following language shall be used: “That the Hamtramck City Code
is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which the
section reads as follows:...”  The new section shall then be set out in
full as desired.



§ 10.009  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City
Council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the
code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this division,”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections _____  to _____”
(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody
the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.



§ 10.010  APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   The following public servants are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets with respect to ordinances of the city, as provided by
Public Act 147 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. § 764.9c(2), as amended, when the
public servant has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an
offense in violation of a city ordinance:



   (A)   Health Officer;



   (B)   Building Inspector;



   (C)   Fire Marshal; and



   (D)   Fire Chief.



§ 10.011  OFFICIAL TIME.



   Eastern Standard Daylight Time (EDT), based on the seventy-fifth
meridian of longitude west from Greenwich, shall be the official time of the
city. Eastern Standard Daylight Time (EDT) shall be adopted, beginning at
2:00 a.m. on the second Sunday in March until the first Sunday in November
until 2:00 a.m.



(Ord. 198, passed 1-15-1946; Am. Ord. 208, passed 4-13-1948; Am. Ord. 213,
passed 9-24-1948)



Editor’s note:



   For similar provisions, see federal law amendment in 2007



§ 10.012  SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, the decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by the decision.



§ 10.013  ANNUAL REVISION OF PENALTIES, FINES AND FEES.



   All penalties, fines and fees, described in the Hamtramck Code of
Ordinances, and as provided in any special ordinances, new ordinances or
amendments, are subject to change (increase or decrease) each calendar year
by resolution of City Council, as part of the city's annual budgetary process
and as otherwise permitted under state law.  Changes to said penalties,
fines and fees may also be made in accordance with state law by resolution of
City Council at such other times as it deems appropriate.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 2-14-2012)



§ 10.999  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code for which a
penalty is not otherwise specified, either in that provision or elsewhere in
the code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in
any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $500, or to imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period of not
more than 90 days, or to both the fine and imprisonment in the discretion of
the court.



   (B)   Provisions of this code prescribing any penalty shall not
apply to the failure of any city officer or employee to perform an official
duty.



   (C)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil
infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this code or
any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as
authorized under Public Act 736 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701 et
seq., as amended and other applicable laws.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular
municipal civil infraction violation by this code or any ordinance, the civil
fine for a violation shall be not less than $50 nor more than $500, plus
costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Costs shall include all
expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection
with the municipal civil infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less
than $10 nor more than $500 be ordered.



      (2)   (a)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for
repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this code
or any ordinance. As used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or
any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement
or provision:



            1.   Committed by a person within any three-year
period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this code or any
ordinance); and



            2.   For which the person admits responsibility or
is determined to be responsible.



         (b)   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this
code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation
the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:



            1.   The fine for any violation which is a first
repeat offense shall be no less than $150 and no more than $500, plus costs.



            2.   The fine for any violation which is a second
repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500,
plus costs.



            3.   Repeat offenses are determined on the basis
of the date of the commission of the violations.



   (D)   A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense by this code or any ordinance; and any
omission or failure to act where the act is required by this code or any
ordinance.



   (E)   Each act of violation and each day on which any violation of
this code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall
be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.



   (F)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may
bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this code or any city ordinance.
The penalty or sanction shall be in addition to the abatement of the
violating condition, any injunctive relief, revocation of any permit or
license, or other process.



   (G)   The penalties and sanctions provided by this section, unless
another penalty or sanction as expressly provided, shall apply to the
amendment of any section of this code and/or any addition to this code
whether or not the penalty or sanction is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   CITY OFFICIALS



      32.   CITY COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BUREAUS



      33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      35.   ELECTIONS



      36.   PERSONNEL POLICES



      37.   TAXATION AND FINANCIAL POLICIES




      38.   COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL
LAW ENFORCEMENT




      39.   ETHICS



      40.   MEDICAL SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Meetings




   30.001   Regular meetings



   30.002   Chair



   30.003   Sergeant at arms



   30.004   Agenda



   30.005   Call to order



   30.006   Roll call; vacancy



   30.007   Rules of debate



   30.008   Addressing the City Council



   30.009   Voting on questions



   30.010   Decorum



   30.011   Special committees



   30.012   Ordinances, resolutions and contracts



   30.013   Suspension of the rules



   30.014   Mayor Pro Tem



   30.015   Motion to adjourn



   30.016   Other rules to govern




Standing Rules for Boards and Commissions




   30.030   Regular meetings



   30.031   Officers



   30.032   Agenda



   30.033   Roll call; vacancy



   30.034   Rules of debate



   30.035   Addressing boards and commissions



   30.036   Voting on questions



   30.037   Decorum



   30.038   Advisory groups



   30.039   Suspension of the rules



   30.040   Motion to adjourn



   30.041   Other rules to govern




MEETINGS




§ 30.001  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   By resolution, in accordance with Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275 and City Charter, the City
Council shall provide for the day and time of its regular meetings to be held
in the City Council chambers at City Hall, unless otherwise duly noticed, at
the first meeting of each calendar year, which shall occur on the first
Tuesday following the first Monday in January. However, when the day fixed
for any regular meeting falls on an election day or a day designated in the
state as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on a
mutually agreeable day.



(Ord. 508, passed 1-18-2005; Am. Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.002  CHAIR.



   The Mayor shall be the chair of the City Council and shall preserve
order and decorum at all its regular and special meetings. The Mayor shall
state every question coming before the City Council, announce the decision of
the City Council on all matters, and decide all questions of order; provided,
however, that upon an appeal to the City Council by any of its members, a
majority vote of the City Council shall conclusively determine the question
of order. The Mayor shall vote only where allowed by the Charter and in case
of a tie vote, with the Mayor’s name being called last.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.003  SERGEANT AT ARMS.



   The Police Chief or the Police Chief’s representative shall serve as
sergeant at arms and carry out the instructions of the City Council from time
to time and shall, under the direction of the chair, keep order in the City
Council chambers.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.004  AGENDA.



   (A)   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the City Council as part of the
agenda shall be delivered to the City Manager by 4:00 p.m. on Tuesday and
with the final agenda posted by 3:00 p.m on Wednesday preceding the City
Council meeting. Any report, communication, ordinance, resolution, contract
document or other matter presented in appropriate form by a Council member or
the Mayor for inclusion on the agenda within the time limit prescribed shall
appear on the agenda under new business. An item that does not appear on the
agenda may not be considered for approval by the City Council and shall be
referred for consideration at the next regular Council meeting. The City
Manager and Mayor shall prepare the agenda. The City Manager shall furnish
each City Council member, the Mayor, the City Clerk and the City Attorney
with a copy of the agenda before the City Council meeting and as far in
advance of the City Council meeting as time for preparation will permit. None
of the foregoing matters shall be presented to the City Council by
administrative officials except those of an urgent nature, and these, when so
presented, shall have the written approval of the City Manager before
presentation, unless the department head is requested to attend a Council
meeting for inquiry. During the City Council meeting, items may be removed
from the agenda with the consent of the person placing the item on the agenda.



   (B)   The City Manager may present urgent matters of city business
that cannot wait until the next regular meeting to the Council for its
consideration at the opening of the meeting, and the Council shall amend the
agenda to include those items.



   (C)   No resolution or ordinance that does not directly address an
agenda item may be considered.



   (D)   On a periodic basis, the City Council may, by resolution,
approve the form of the agenda for City Council meetings.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006; Am. Ord. 2008-4, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 30.005  CALL TO ORDER.



   The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall take the chair at the hour appointed
for the meeting and shall call the City Council to order. In the absence of
the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the City Clerk shall call the Council to
order, whereupon a chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Council
present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the temporary
chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the item then
before the City Council.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.006  ROLL CALL; VACANCY.



   (A)   Before proceeding with the business of the City Council, the
City Clerk shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
and those absent shall be entered in the minutes. If the absence of the
member is excused, it shall be noted in the minutes.



   (B)   In the event a vacancy on Council occurs, as defined by §
6-11 of the City Charter, the City Manager, within five business days of
becoming aware of a vacancy, shall call a special Council meeting. Council
shall meet to declare by resolution that a vacancy exists. The persons
designated by the City Charter as being eligible for filling the vacancy
shall be notified by certified mail of their eligibility, and shall have 72
hours from the Clerk’s receipt of delivery (excluding Saturday, Sunday or
national holidays) to accept or decline the appointment, in writing to the
City Clerk.



   (C)   “Good and sufficient reason” as stated in § 6-11 of the
City Charter shall mean an unanticipated event, medical illness, injury or
death. In order for the absence to be excused, the reason for the absence and
the duration of the absence shall be caused to be placed on the agenda of the
City Council, in the consent agenda portion, before the absence. If there is
good and sufficient reason for the unexcused absence the member shall state
the reasons for the absence, in writing, no later than two meetings after the
absence and that statement shall be included in the consent agenda portion of
the agenda.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.007  RULES OF DEBATE.



   (A)   The chair may not make or second motions but may debate from
the chair, subject only to the limitations of debate as are herein imposed on
all members, and the Mayor Pro Tem or Council member serving as chair shall
not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a City Council member.



   (B)   Every Council member wishing to speak shall address the chair
and, upon recognition by the chair, shall confine himself or herself to the
question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. A
Council member violating this section shall forfeit all remaining
opportunities to debate the subject at hand.



   (C)   Debate shall continue until the chair has recognized all
Council members who wish to speak. The chair shall determine the order of
speakers.



   (D)   A Council member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it is to call him or her to order, or as herein
otherwise provided. If a Council member, while speaking, is called to order,
he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined,
and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.



   (E)   The Council member moving the adoption of an ordinance or
resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate, and the chair
shall call on that member at the end of debate for closing comments. If that
member has no closing comments, the chair shall immediately call the question.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.008  ADDRESSING THE CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any person may address the City Council during a City Council
meeting without prior permission of the City Council or the chair, subject to
the following.



      (1)   Interested parties or their authorized representatives
may address the City Council by written communication with respect to any
matter by delivering to the City Manager a copy of the written communication
before the City Council meeting.



      (2)   Interested persons or their authorized representatives
may address the City Council during a City Council meeting by oral
communication.



   (B)   After a motion has been made, no person shall address the City
Council without first securing the permission of the City Council to do so.



   (C)   In accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, each person addressing the
City Council shall stand and, unless the City Council grants further time,
shall limit his or her remarks to five minutes and address the items on the
Council’s agenda at the beginning of the meeting. A person may also address
the City Council a second time for an additional five minutes at the close of
the meeting. In addition, the City Council may, by motion, grant an
individual the right to address the City Council for a longer time. All
remarks shall be addressed to the City Council as a body and not to any
member thereof. No person, other than the City Council and the person having
the floor, shall be permitted to enter any discussion, either directly or
through a Council member, without the permission of the chair. No questions
shall be asked a Council member except through the chair. Council members
shall have the opportunity to respond to comments by individual members of
the public immediately after the comments, provided that the responses shall
not exceed three minutes per Council member.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.009  VOTING ON QUESTIONS.



   All votes shall be taken by “yes,” “no,” or abstention, by a
show of hands or by a call to respond, by voice, “yes,” “no,” or
abstention and be entered in the minutes to show the names of those voting in
the affirmative and in the negative, except that if the vote is unanimous,
the record need merely so state. A roll call vote shall occur when ordinances
are under consideration, when required by state law or when requested by two
or more members of the Council. In accordance with the Charter, a majority
vote of a quorum shall be required for the passage and final adoption of any
resolution.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.010  DECORUM.



   (A)   While the City Council is in session, the members shall
preserve order and decorum. A Council member shall not, by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the City
Council, disturb any Council member while speaking or refuse to obey the
orders of the City Council or its chair.



   (B)   If any member of the public makes personal, impertinent or
slanderous remarks or becomes boisterous while addressing the City Council,
the chair may bar that person from addressing the City Council for the
remainder of the meeting.



   (C)   Cellular telephone ringers shall be turned off; cellular
telephones shall not be used in the Council chambers during City Council
meetings.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.011  SPECIAL COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The City Council may create special committees as the City
Council may determine from time to time. Each special committee shall perform
duties and investigate, have charge of and report upon the matters as may be
properly referred to it.



   (B)   The Council shall appoint the members of each special
committee.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.012  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS.



   (A)   No ordinance shall be placed on the agenda, nor shall there be
any reading of the ordinance by title or otherwise, without its first being
approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney, if the review is
deemed advisable by the City Manager, and examined and approved by the City
Manager where there are substantive matters of administration involved.



   (B)   Before inclusion on a City Council agenda, resolutions and
contract documents shall have been examined and approved by the City Manager
where there are substantive matters of administration involved.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter the
procedures established for initiative and referendum as set forth in the City
Charter.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.013  SUSPENSION OF THE RULES.



   A motion to suspend the rules shall require a two-thirds vote of
Council members, minus the Mayor, unless the motion is intended to grant
additional time to a member of the public commenting during the public
participation portion of the meeting; in this case, the motion shall require
a simple majority of members present (minus the Mayor) voting in the
affirmative to pass, provided that no speaker is allowed to speak for a time
equal to twice the normal time allotted.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.014  MAYOR PRO TEM.



   (A)   The Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected from the body of the
Council by resolution of Council at the first regular meeting after the
organization meeting held on the first Tuesday in January.



   (B)   The appointment to the Office of Mayor Pro Tem shall be for
two years.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.015  MOTION TO ADJOURN.



   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



§ 30.016  OTHER RULES TO GOVERN.



   The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in the current edition
of Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall govern all meetings of the
City Council and the city’s boards, commissions and committees, provided
they are not in conflict with the charter, this subchapter or resolutions
adopted pursuant to this subchapter. The Mayor, with a majority of Council
voting in the affirmative, may appoint from the membership of the City
Council one member to serve as parliamentarian.



(Ord. 517, passed 1-24-2006)



STANDING RULES FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



§ 30.030  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   By resolution, in accordance with Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275 and City Charter, all boards
and commissions shall provide for the day and time of its regular meetings to
be held at the first meeting of each calendar year, which shall occur on the
first Tuesday following the first Monday in January. However, when the day
fixed for any regular meeting falls on an election day or a day designated in
the state as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on a
mutually agreeable day.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.031  OFFICERS.



   All boards and commissions of the city shall elect officers for the
commission or board at the first meeting of the calendar year. No person,
duly appointed to a board or commission, may serve as chair, vice-chair,
secretary or treasurer of any commission or board for two consecutive terms,
unless a waiver is requested by two-thirds of the board or commission and
that waiver is granted by the appointing authority. Where the Mayor and the
City Council both appoint, separately, members to a board or commission, both
the Mayor and City Council, separately, must approve the waiver.  Where the
Mayor appoints with the consent of the City Council, the Mayor may approve a
waiver with the consent of the City Council. All commissions and boards shall
hold election of officers within 60 days of the adoption of this subchapter
if their chair or other officers have served longer than two terms. If the
current chair or any other officer of the board or commission has served
longer than two terms, he or she shall not be eligible for reelection without
a waiver. Thereafter, election of officers shall take place at the first
meeting of the commission in each new calendar year. For the purposes of this
section, a TERM shall mean a period of one calendar year, January 1 to
December 31.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.032  AGENDA.



   All reports, communications, resolutions or other supporting documents
shall be submitted with an agenda. The chair of the board or commission shall
furnish each board or commission member and the City Clerk with a copy of the
agenda and supporting documents five days before the meeting or as far in
advance of the City Council meeting as time for preparation will permit. The
City Clerk shall provide each member of City Council, the Mayor and City
Manager with a copy of the agenda when it is received. The Clerk shall also
make the agenda available to the public.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.033  ROLL CALL; VACANCY.



   Before proceeding with the business of the board or commission, the
secretary shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
and those absent shall be entered in the minutes. If the absence of the
member is excused, it shall be noted in the minutes.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.034  RULES OF DEBATE.



   (A)   The chair may not make or second motions but may debate from
the chair, subject only to limitations of debate as are herein imposed on all
members.



   (B)   Every member wishing to speak shall address the chair and,
upon recognition by the chair, shall confine himself or herself to the
question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. A
member violating this section shall forfeit all remaining opportunities to
debate the subject at hand.



   (C)   Debate shall continue until the chair has recognized all
members who wish to speak. The chair shall determine the order of speakers.



   (D)   A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when
speaking unless it is to call him or her to order, or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall
cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order,
he or she shall be permitted to proceed.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.035  ADDRESSING BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   (A)   Any person may address a board or commission during meeting
without prior permission subject to the following:



      (1)   Interested parties or their authorized representatives
may address the board or commission by written communication with respect to
any matter by delivering to the City Manager a copy of the written
communication before the meeting; and



      (2)   Interested persons or their authorized representatives
may address the board or commission during a meeting by oral communication. 



   (B)   After a motion has been made, no person shall address the
board or commission without first securing the permission of the commission
to do so.



   (C)   In accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, each person addressing the
board or commission shall stand and, unless the board or commission grants
further time, shall limit his or her remarks to five minutes at the beginning
of the meeting. A person may also address the board or commission a second
time for an additional five minutes at the close of the meeting.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.036  VOTING ON QUESTIONS.



   All votes shall be taken by “yes,” “no” or abstention, by a
show of hands or by a call to respond, by voice, “yes,” “no” or
abstention and be entered in the minutes to show the names of those voting in
the affirmative and in the negative, except that if the vote is unanimous,
the record need merely so state. A roll call vote shall occur when required
by state law or when requested by two or more members.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.037  DECORUM.



   (A)   While the board or commission is in session, the members shall
preserve order and decorum.  A member shall not, by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the board or
commission, disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of
the board or commission or its chair.



   (B)   If any member of the public makes personal, impertinent or
slanderous remarks or becomes boisterous while addressing the board or
commission, the chair may bar that person from addressing the board or
commission for the remainder of the meeting.



   (C)   Cellular telephone ringers shall be turned off; cellular
telephones shall not be used during meetings.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.038  ADVISORY GROUPS.



   All boards and commissions of the city shall have the authority to
appoint persons to an advisory group provided that the appointing authority
approves of formation of the advisory group and its membership.  In the case
of boards and commissions that are appointed by the Mayor and City Council,
both shall separately approve the appointment of the advisory group. In the
case of boards and commissions that are appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council, the Mayor with the consent of City Council shall
approve or deny the creation of advisory boards. Any advisory group currently
established by ordinance shall be disbanded unless and until the appointing
authority grants approval.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.039  SUSPENSION OF THE RULES.



   A motion to suspend the rules shall require a two-thirds vote of
members unless the motion is intended to grant additional time to a member of
the public commenting during the public participation portion of the meeting;
in this case, the motion shall require a simple majority of members present
voting in the affirmative to pass, provided that no speaker is allowed to
speak for a time equal to twice the normal time allotted.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.040  MOTION TO ADJOURN.



   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 30.041  OTHER RULES TO GOVERN.



   The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in the current edition
of Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall govern all meetings of the
city’s boards, commissions and committees, provided they are not in
conflict with the charter, this subchapter or resolutions adopted pursuant to
this subchapter.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-24-2009)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Generally




Administrative Departments




   31.015   Departments; supervision; City Manager



   31.016   Assessing Department; Director; power and duties



   31.017   Finance Department; Director; power and duties



   31.018   Office of the City Clerk; powers and duties



   31.019   Department of Public Services; Director; power and duties



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see Ch. 34



   Office of Community and Economic Development, see §§ 32.060 through
32.062



   Police Department, see Ch. 33




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.001  GENERALLY.



   For information concerning city officials, please see the Charter for
the city, Chapters 4 through 9.




ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS




§ 31.015  DEPARTMENTS; SUPERVISION; CITY MANAGER.



   The administrative service of the city shall consist of the following
departments and shall be under the supervision of the City Manager.



   (A)   Assessing Department;



   (B)   Community and Economic Development Department;



   (C)   Finance Department;



   (D)   Fire Department;



   (E)   Office of the City Clerk;



   (F)   Police Department; and



   (G)   Public Services Department.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 31.016  ASSESSING DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES.



   The Assessing Department shall be supervised by the City Assessor,
whose duty it shall be to perform all work in connection with the assessment
of property and preparation of all assessments, tax rolls and tax notices in
accordance with the general property taxation laws of the state.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 31.017  FINANCE DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   This Department shall be headed by the Director of Finance,
who shall, with the objective that the financial interests of the city are at
all times to be protected, be responsible for financial planning, budgeting,
reporting and control, except insofar as the duties of the Director or the
City Treasurer are regulated by the Charter, ordinance or state law.



   (B)   Division of Finance Department.



      (1)   Treasury Division.  The Treasury Division shall be
supervised by the City Treasurer, whose duty it shall be to collect all
receivables of any type—fees, licenses, service charges and taxes.  The
Treasurer shall receive all other monies due or coming to the city from
assessments, grants and intergovernmental payments.  All monies received by
the City Treasurer shall be deposited daily in the official depository to the
credit of the city and shall be recorded and accounted for on the date
received.



      (2)   Accounting and Control Division.  The Accounting and
Control Division shall be supervised by the City Controller who shall be a
competent municipal accountant and shall be responsible for the audit and
recording of all financial transactions.



   (C)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities
to the Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be
assigned to an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 31.018  OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep the corporate seal and all
documents, official bonds, papers, files and records of the city which are
not entrusted to some other officer by City Charter, the city ordinances or
state statutes.   



   (B)   The City Clerk shall:



      (1)   Be the Clerk of the Council, attend City Council
meetings and record the proceedings; 



      (2)   Sign all licenses granted after the license fee has been
paid to the City Treasurer and shall register the same;



      (3)   Make and certify, under the seal of the city, copies of
papers and records filed and kept in the office;



      (4)   Have authority to administer oaths and affirmations in
matters pertaining to the affairs of the city, and shall make no charge
therefore; and



      (5)   Perform all other duties or functions required by city
ordinance or applicable state law.



   (C)   The City Clerk may appoint deputies to perform any or all of
the duties of the City Clerk.



   (D)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities
to the Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be
assigned to an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 31.019  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES; DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Department of Public Services shall be headed by the
Director of Public Services, who shall be responsible for all matters
relating to the construction, management, maintenance and operation of the
physical properties of the city, except as otherwise provided by this code. 
The Director shall also be responsible for all planning in connection with
changes or improvements to the physical properties which are essential to the
future growth and development of the city. Duties shall include
responsibility for streets and signs, sanitation, sewer and water.



   (B)   Division of Public Services Department; code enforcement.



      (1)   The Department shall include a code enforcement division
supervised by a chief code enforcement official whose primary duties and
powers shall be set forth in the city’s Building and Property Maintenance
Codes.



      (2)   All construction permits, including those for
building,  electrical, plumbing, heating, sewer tapping, water tapping,
sidewalk or driveway approach, street cutting and any other applicable
permits required for work to be done on private property or within the
dedicated right-of-way or building setback line on major streets shall be
issued by this division.



      (3)   The chief code enforcement official shall also enforce
any other applicable ordinance code which relates to construction of new or
existing structures; regulates electrical, plumbing, heating, refrigeration
and mechanical work; and regulates the construction, repair and location of
signs or any ordinance or code which by its terms requires enforcement of
same.



   (C)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities
to the Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be
assigned to an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BUREAUS



Section



Parks Advisory Commission



   32.001   Purpose and intent



   32.002   Membership and appointments



   32.003   Officers



   32.004   Meetings



   32.005   Quorum



   32.006   Powers and duties



Youth Council



   32.020   Creation



   32.021   Purpose



   32.022   Composition; election of members; terms



   32.023   Director; appointment; duties



   32.024   Organization; meetings; rules of procedure; accounts; quorum



Arts and Culture Commission



   32.035   Definitions



   32.036   Created



   32.037   Composition and terms of members



   32.038   Vacancies



   32.039   Compensation



   32.040   Organization and election of officers



   32.041   Meetings and quorum



   32.042   Assistance



   32.043   Objectives



   32.044   Duties



   32.045   Review of public art



   32.046   Scope of authority



Office of Community and Economic Development



   32.060   Title



   32.061   Creation



   32.062   Community and Economic Development Director; appointment;
requirements; term of office; power and duties



Human Relations Commission



   32.075   Purpose



   32.076   Composition; appointments; terms; qualifications



   32.077   Officers; rules; removal; replacement; quorum



   32.078   Compensation



   32.079   Office space; supplies; clerical help



   32.080   Duties



Historical Commission



   32.095   Title



   32.096   Definitions



   32.097   Purpose



   32.098   Creation



   32.099   Appointments to Commission



   32.100   Term of office



   32.101   Residency requirement



   32.102   Compensation



   32.103   Vacancies



   32.104   Removal



   32.105   Organization and administration of Commission



   32.106   Commission publications



   32.107   Powers and duties of Commission



City Beautification Commission



   32.120   Creation



   32.121   Composition



   32.122   Chairperson; by-laws; meetings



   32.123   Function of Commission



Housing Commission



   32.135   Creation



   32.136   Appointment of members



   32.137   Powers and duties



   32.138   Composition and compensation



Recreation Commission



   32.150   Creation



   32.151   Appointment



   32.152   Compensation



   32.153   Oath



   32.154   Duties



   32.155   Officers



   32.156   Required filings



   32.157   Required reports




PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION




§ 32.001  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Parks Advisory Commission shall assist in the development,
planning, maintenance and expansion of new and existing parks in the city.



(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)



§ 32.002  MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   All Commission members shall be residents of the city for not
less than one year prior to appointment. Insofar as possible, members shall
have interest, background or education in the fields of architecture,
biology, education, environmentalism, geology, history, physical education,
preservation or other disciplines related to parks, or a demonstrated
commitment to parks and greenspace in the city.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of not less than five members,
with two appointments by the Mayor, three appointments by the City Council
and two appointments by the Hamtramck School Board. The term of office of
each Commissioner shall be three years, with terms to begin July 1. Members
of the first Commission appointed after the adoption of this subchapter shall
be appointed as follows.



      (1)   Mayoral appointments.  One for two years and one for
three years.



      (2)   Council appointments.  One for one year, one for two
years and one for three years.



      (3)   Additional appointment.  One additional appointment may
be made by any city educational institution with a student enrollment
exceeding 4% of the total enrollment of all city schools as reported the
previous year.



   (C)   All appointments may include members of the appointing body
and shall be made within 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter.



(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)



§ 32.003  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Within three weeks of appointment, Commissioners shall meet to
elect a chairperson, vice- chairperson and secretary.



   (B)   Thereafter, officers are to be elected annually in July.



(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)



§ 32.004  MEETINGS.



   All meetings are to conform to the State Open Meetings Act. During its
first meeting, the Commission will establish a meeting time and schedule,
including one regular meeting per month.



(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)



§ 32.005  QUORUM.



   The quorum shall be three appointed members. Any Commissioner shall
vacate his or her position on the Commission following two consecutive
absences, unless the absences are excused by a majority vote of those
Commissioners present when the absences are announced by the presiding
officer.



(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)



§ 32.006  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission is to assist in planning for development,
maintenance and expansion of new and existing park lands and recreation
facilities in the city which conform to the City Charter, school district
by-laws and policies and state laws.



   (B)   This shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Advising City Council, Mayor, and City Manager on
matters related to parks, park and recreation facilities and greenspaces
within the boundaries of the city, so that these lands and facilities are
preserved in a natural condition and conserved in accordance with an approved
management plan;



      (2)   Preparing and updating a master plan for park space and
greenspace, including specific plans for individual parks in the city;



      (3)   Making recommendations to the City Council, Mayor and
City Manager on the suitability or desirability of surplus real property to
be used as park land, recreation facilities and greenspaces;



      (4)   Formulating policies on the use of public parks and
greenspaces for approval by the City Council;



      (5)   Making recommendations to the City Council, Mayor and
City Manager for preparation of the annual operating and capital improvements
budgets for parks;



      (6)   Identifying grant and funding opportunities;



      (7)   Making recommendations to City Council, Mayor and City
Manager on designation of natural landmarks;



      (8)   Cooperating with other governmental agencies and civic
groups in the advancement of sound park planning and programming;



      (9)   Consulting with academic and professional organizations
in appropriate disciplines in making all recommendations;



      (10)   Delivering to the people of the city cultural, social
and physical programs presented at well maintained parks and parks and
recreation facilities; and



      (11)   Submitting to the City Council annually, on June 30, a
report of the Commission’s activities for the preceding year.



(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)




YOUTH COUNCIL




§ 32.020  CREATION.



   The City Youth Council is hereby created. The Youth Council shall serve
in an advisory capacity to the City Council, Mayor and City Manager.



(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 32.021  PURPOSE.



   The primary purpose of the Youth Council is for youth to actively
participate in matters concerning the community. The Youth Council is to
identify issues and concerns of the community’s youth and make
recommendations for projects and programs to address them for the betterment
of the community.



(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 32.022  COMPOSITION; ELECTION OF MEMBERS; TERMS.



   (A)   Students at each private, charter school, public school or any
other type of school offering enrollment in grades nine, ten and/or 11 shall
elect one representative to the Youth Council from each of the grade levels
offered.



   (B)   The first election of the Youth Council shall be conducted by
a group independent of the city or any school, and shall be completed no
later than November 30, 2006. Thereafter, the Youth Council shall conduct its
own elections provided that the elections are completed by November 30 each
year.



   (C)   Members elected by the respective student bodies shall be
appointed by the City Council for terms of one year beginning on January 1.
Members may serve no more than two terms. The Mayor shall fill any vacancies
for the remainder of the term.



(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 32.023  DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.



   The City Manager shall appoint a Director with approval of City
Council. The City Manager shall prescribe the duties of the Director and set
the rate of compensation, if any.



(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 32.024  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE; ACCOUNTS; QUORUM.



   (A)   Officers.  The Youth Council shall conduct election of a
president, vice-president and clerk from among its members. A member shall
not be eligible to serve more than two successive terms as president. The
president shall preside at all meetings and retain rights accorded to members
of Council.



   (B)   Meetings.  The Youth Council shall meet once a month in
Council chambers, City Hall and shall designate the time and date thereof.
The Youth Council may, from time to time, hold special meetings and have the
power to designate time, date and place of the meetings.



   (C)   Proceedings.  The Youth Council shall adopt by-laws and keep
record of proceedings. Proper accounts shall be kept of receipts and
expenditures in accordance with established city procedure. Meetings are open
to the public.



   (D)   Quorum.  A majority of members will constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.



   (E)   Advisory boards.  The Youth Council may appoint nine
associate members to serve on advisory committees on matters as determined by
the Council. Associate members may serve for terms not to exceed one year and
must be under the age of 18. Associate members may be removed by a majority
vote of the Council meeting in quorum.



(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006)




ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION




§ 32.035  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ART, CIVIC.  Visual art pertaining to a person, place or event
relating to, sponsored by or belonging to a city or municipality.



   ART, PUBLIC.  One or more pieces of civic, visual or performance art
designed specifically for ownership by the public or display on property
owned by the public.



   ART, VISUAL.  The conscious production or arrangement of colors, forms
or other elements in a manner that affects the human senses in a graphic or
plastic medium.



   COMPETITION.  A process established by the Arts and Culture Commission
to review specific art work(s) for a specific site, for the purposes of
making a recommendation to the Arts and Culture Commission.



   JURY.  An ad hoc committee or individual appointed by the Arts and
Culture Commission to review specific art work(s) for the purposes of making
a recommendation to the Arts and Culture Commission.



   PERFORMANCE ART.  Works of art that create a situation and are
conducted for a duration determined by the artist and/or spectator.



   RULES OF PROCEDURE.  A written description of the Arts and Culture
Commission’s mission statement, objectives, organization of meetings,
membership, terms of service, procedure for the election of officers and
procedures for the review of public art work.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.036  CREATED.



   There is hereby created an Arts and Culture Commission for the city.
The Arts and Culture Commission is a locally organized commission and is not
established by any enabling legislation of the state.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.037  COMPOSITION AND TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council and consists of the Community and Economic Development Director or
his or her designated representative(s) as nonvoting ex-officio members and
seven voting members.



   (B)   At least four members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall
be residents of the city. The remaining members and ex-officio members may or
may not be residents of the city.



   (C)   Insofar as possible, the members shall represent a major
cultural institution such as the Detroit Institute of Arts, a registered
architect of the state, an artist, an art historian and an art consultant.
Members of the Arts and Culture Commission may also be members of the
Historic District and Design Review Commission, the Beautification Commission
or the Planning Board.



   (D)   The initial members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall
be appointed for the following terms: two for one year, two for two years and
three for three years. Thereafter, all appointments, except to fill
vacancies, shall be for a term of three years.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.038  VACANCIES.



   All appointments for the purpose of filling vacancies occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term of office, shall be for the remainder of
the term of office.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.039  COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall serve without
compensation.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.040  ORGANIZATION AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall, from its appointed
members, annually elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson whose terms of
office shall be fixed by the Rules of Procedure of the Arts and Culture
Commission. The chairperson shall preside over the Arts and Culture
Commission and shall have the right to vote. The vice-chairperson shall, in
absence, or disability of the chairperson perform the duties of the
chairperson and shall have the right to vote. The City Manager or his or her
authorized representative shall act as secretary of the Arts and Culture
Commission, and maintain a record of all of its proceedings.



   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall, at its first meeting
establish the Rules of Procedure for conducting its business.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.041  MEETINGS AND QUORUM.



   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall set a time and place for
a regular meeting which will be held at least four times annually and shall
determine the manner in which special meetings may noticed and held.



   (B)   All meetings of the Arts and Culture Commission shall be open
to the public. Any person or his or her duly constituted representative shall
be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter applicable to the business
at hand before the Arts and Culture Commission makes its recommendation to
the City Council.



   (C)   At least four members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business.



   (D)   The proceedings of each meeting of the Arts and Culture
Commission shall be recorded by the City Manager or his or her authorized
representative, acting as secretary.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.042  ASSISTANCE.



   The Arts and Culture Commission may call upon the City Manager for
information and services from the various city departments as it may require.
The Arts and Culture Commission may recommend to the City Council the
securing of professional and consulting services as it may require, however,
no expenditures of funds shall be made or contracts entered into for
providing the services unless the same shall first be approved and authorized
by the City Council.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.043  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of the Arts and Culture Commission are as follows:



   (A)   To enrich the city’s civic and cultural heritage, the Arts
and Culture Commission is established to provide a level of expertise and
objectivity to recommend to the City Council works of art to become the
property of or for display upon property owned by the city;



   (B)   To promote a rich, diverse and stimulating cultural
environment in order to enrich the lives of the city’s residents, business
owners, employees and visitors and to enhance the city’s image both
nationally and internationally;



   (C)   To establish an environment where differing points of view are
fostered, expected and celebrated by providing the opportunity for the
expression through the display of public art;



   (D)   To promote, sponsor and organize festivals, events, activities
and materials that celebrate the cultural diversity and traditions of the
various peoples of the city in order to enrich the lives of the city’s
residents, business owners, employees and visitors and to enhance the
city’s image both nationally and internationally;



   (E)   To offer assistance to promoters, event organizers, business
owners engaged in the arts in the city; and



   (F)   To seek grants and funding from all available sources in order
to enrich the lives of the city’s residents, business owners, employees and
visitors and to enhance the city’s image both nationally and
internationally.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.044  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall establish rules of
procedure to describe the Board’s mission statement, objectives,
organization of meetings, membership, terms of service, procedure for the
election of officers and procedures for the review of public art work.



   (B)   With the exception of art works to be placed in museums or art
galleries, the Arts and Culture Commission shall have the responsibility to
review all works of art to become the property of or placed upon property
owned by the city.



   (C)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall have the responsibility
to review publicly owned property for the purposes of consideration for the
display of public art. The Arts and Culture Commission shall recommend to the
City Council the establishment of general guidelines for site selection,
maintenance program(s) for ensuring the structural integrity and aesthetic
quality of the site and any work of art, including the removal of any work of
art.



   (D)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall have the responsibility
to pursue sources of public funding for arts and cultural education, design
competitions, special events and the like, that may be necessary to advance
the objectives of the Arts and Culture Commission. In fulfilling these
duties, the Arts and Culture Commission may seek assistance from city staff,
and others for the completion of applications for grants, scholarships and
other sources of public funding, including the administration of the funds.
The city may also accept private donations and gifts to advance the goals,
objectives and duties of the Arts and Culture Commission. The City Manager
shall be responsible for the administration of any funds, account or
endowments created to accept gifts or donations and to administer any
honorariums or other expenses incurred for the activities of the Arts and
Culture Commission including but not limited to juries and design
competitions.



   (E)   It shall also be the responsibility of the Arts and Culture
Commission to increase public awareness and promote education of the
importance of public art as an enrichment of the quality of life for the
residents, business owners, employees and visitors to the city.



   (F)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall prepare an annual report
of its activities, accomplishments and a description of how the Arts and
Culture Commission has attempted to achieve its objectives. This report shall
be presented to the City Council.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.045  REVIEW OF PUBLIC ART.



   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission, within its rules of procedure
shall establish its vision statement and processes for the review of public
art works. The Arts and Culture Commission may also appoint a jury or hold
design competitions for the selection and review of public art works.



   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall make a recommendation
regarding the proposed public art work to the City Council. However, a
positive recommendation shall not be required to advance the proposed artwork
for review by the City Council.



   (C)   In the event that a display and/or installation of civic,
public or visual art is proposed on a site that is within the jurisdiction of
another board of this city, it shall be reviewed by and reported on by that
board before it is presented to the City Council.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.046  SCOPE OF AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission may select and appoint a jury
or hold a competition for the review of any public art project as provided
for in. The jury or competition held for any public art project shall serve
the Arts and Culture Commission as an ad hoc committee for the duration of
the project only.



   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission is a non-administrative board
serving to make recommendations to the City Council but may not assume any
legislative or administrative authority in the operation of any city
department or publicly owned property, except as specifically provided in
this subchapter.



(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)




OFFICE OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT




§ 32.060  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Community and Economic
Development Subchapter.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-14-2005)



§ 32.061  CREATION.



   The Office of Community and Economic Development shall be created to
seek and administer grants, promote the city in general, develop policies to
attract and retain businesses in the city, administer a façade improvement
program, serve as press secretary to the City Council and the city, represent
the city at conferences and programs, serve as liaison between municipal,
state and federal economic development officials, serve as liaison to the
downtown development authority, develop and maintain a city web site, and
perform any other duties as assigned by City Council by resolution. The
Office of Community and Economic Development shall serve as an advisor to
City Council on matters of community and economic development. The City
Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the Department as
necessary for the operation of the city.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-14-2005; Am. Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2006)



§ 32.062  COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT;
REQUIREMENTS; TERM OF OFFICE; POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Appointment.



      (1)   The City Council shall appoint a Community and Economic
Development Director.



      (2)   The Community and Economic Development Department shall
be under the supervision of the Director of Community and Economic
Development, who shall be responsible for the preparation of a plan and
program for the orderly development of the city.



   (B)   Requirements.  No person may be considered for the position
that does not possess at least a four-year undergraduate degree in public
administration, marketing, architecture, historic preservation, advertising,
journalism, planning, business or related field.



   (C)   Term of office.  The City Council, through either a separate
policy or employment agreement, shall establish the term of this position as
well as salary and other conditions of employment.



   (D)   Power and duties.



      (1)   The Director shall be responsible for the preparation of
needed revisions and adjustments to the community plan, as determined by the
City Planning Commission and City Council.



      (2)   The Director shall be responsible for the preparation of
basic information and data required by other departments in connection with
the preparation or execution of any planning program.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-14-2005; Am. Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2006)




HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION




§ 32.075  PURPOSE.



   The Human Relations Commission is established to promote mutual
understanding and respect for multi-culturalism and diversity, advocate for
peace and justice and encourage tolerance and constructive communication in
order to develop a functional, safe and harmonious community. The Commission
will work to safeguard equal opportunity, overcome divisiveness, violence and
all forms of discrimination against people for reasons including nationality,
religion, race, class, physical and mental disability, gender, marital status
and sexual orientation.



(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)



§ 32.076  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS; TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Composition.  There is hereby created and established a
commission to be known as the Human Relations Commission consisting of 12
members.



   (B)   Advisory groups.  The Commissioners shall have the power to
select additional volunteers to various advisory groups as needed.



   (C)   Appointments.  Initially, after gathering suggestions from
the community at large, the Mayor and City Council shall each appoint six
Commissioners; two each for a term ending July 1, 2005, two each for a term
ending July 1, 2006 and two each for a term ending July 1, 2007. Each year on
July 1, the Mayor shall appoint one Commissioner, the City Council shall
appoint one Commissioner, and the Commission shall nominate at least five
candidates with one to be chosen by the Mayor and then one to be chosen by
the City Council. No approvals are necessary.



   (D)   Terms.  Initially, four Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term ending July 1, 2005; four Commissioners shall be appointed for a term
ending July 1, 2006; and four Commissioners shall be appointed for a term
ending July 1, 2007. Each year on July 1, four Commissioners shall be
appointed for three-year terms.



   (E)   Qualifications.  The members of the Human Relations
Commission, as nearly as possible, shall be representative of the various
racial, religious, national, cultural, labor, business and ethnic groups of
the city. They should support the purpose of this subchapter. Membership
shall not be limited to residents of the city, but appointments may be made
from the entire local community.



(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)



§ 32.077  OFFICERS; RULES; REMOVAL; REPLACEMENT; QUORUM.



   (A)   Officers.  The Commission shall designate one of its members
as chairperson, secretary and other essential officers.



   (B)   Rules.  The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations
governing its meetings and procedures.



   (C)   Removal.  Upon written recommendation by the Commission, the
Mayor may remove a Commissioner for reasons consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Commission, with approval by the City Council.



   (D)   Replacement.  In the event of death, resignation or other
termination of membership, the authority who appointed that Commissioner
shall appoint a successor for the balance of the unexpired term.



   (E)   Quorum.  Shall be defined as six Commissioners.



(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004; Am. Ord. 527, passed 10-10-2006)



§ 32.078  COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Human Relations Commission shall serve without
compensation, but subject to approval of the Mayor and City Council and
within the amounts as appropriated by the city, shall be reimbursed for
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in connection with their duties as
members of the Commission.



(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)



§ 32.079  OFFICE SPACE; SUPPLIES; CLERICAL HELP.



   The City Council shall make available to the Human Relations
Commission, when possible, the necessary accommodations or office space
required for the performance of its functions, and shall provide reasonable
supplies and clerical and secretarial help for the chairperson and for the
Commission.



(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)



§ 32.080  DUTIES.



   In order to achieve the purpose set forth in § 32.075, the Human
Relations Commission shall:



   (A)   Promote mutual understanding and respect among all residents
of the community;



   (B)   Discourage and prevent by persuasion, prejudice, intolerance
and discriminatory practices against any individual or group;



   (C)   Disseminate information and educational materials consistent
with the purpose of this subchapter;



   (D)   Investigate, collect data and study complaints and problems
arising between groups or individuals which result or may result in tensions,
discrimination or prejudice in the city;



   (E)   Provide conciliation and mediation services as a means to
resolve complaints. May request the City Attorney to issue subpoenas for
information relevant to ongoing investigations;



   (F)   Formulate educational programs and campaign to assist various
groups and agencies in the community;



   (G)   Coordinate programs with schools that promote mutual
understanding and respect in the school system;



   (H)   Cooperate with city, state, federal and other governmental or
private agencies in the promotion of better human relations;



   (I)   Prepare and submit reports to the Mayor and the City Council
of its activities, making at least one complete report annually by January 1,
and any other reports and recommendations requested by Mayor or City Council;



   (J)   Review employment practices and hiring procedures and make
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on ways to ensure a diversified
work force;



   (K)   Adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable rules and
procedures to carry out the provisions of this subchapter; and



   (L)   Review the dissemination of important city information, voting
materials and other information critical to the health and welfare of the
residents of the city, in languages other than English, and make
recommendations to the city.



(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)




HISTORICAL COMMISSION




§ 32.095  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the City Historical
Commission Subchapter.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.096  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Hamtramck.



   COMMISSION.  The Historical Commission as herein created.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Hamtramck.



   SHALL.  Always mandatory and not merely directory.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.097  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is enacted for the purpose of establishing an
Historical Commission in the city to identify, assemble, collect and preserve
objects, material, writings, buildings and sites relating to the history and
culture of the city and its citizens, both past and present; and to assist
the State Historical Commission in carrying out its powers and duties under
Public Act 271 of 1913, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.1 through 399.10, as amended.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.098  CREATION.



   A City Historical Commission consisting of seven members is hereby
created and established in and for the city.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.099  APPOINTMENTS TO COMMISSION.



   Five members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Council, and
two members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor within 30 days
after the effective date of this subchapter. As far as possible, the members
of the Commission shall have interest, background or education in issues
relating to city history, historic preservation and community development. As
far as possible, the members of the Commission shall reflect the broad
ethnic, racial and religious diversity that exists in the city.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.100  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be three
years. Members of the first Commission shall be appointed for the terms of
two Council-appointed members for one year, two Mayor-appointed members for
two years, and three Council-appointed members for three years, respectively.
Annually thereafter, the number of members whose terms expire shall be
appointed for a term of three years.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.101  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.



   All members of the Commission shall be residents of the city.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.102  COMPENSATION.



   Compensation of the members of the Commission, if any, shall be
established by Council resolution in accordance with the provisions of the
relevant portions of the City Charter.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.103  VACANCIES.



   (A)   The office of any member shall become vacant upon the
occurrence of one or more of the following events before the expiration of
the term of office:



      (1)   For any reason specified by state law creating a vacancy
in public office;



      (2)   When a member shall miss two consecutive regular
meetings of the Commission, unless the absence, shall be excused by the
Commission and the reason therefore entered in the proceedings of the
Commission; or



      (3)   Upon written resignation being filed with the secretary
of the Commission.



   (B)   The Council may fill any vacancy occurring on the Commission
for any reason cited above. Any vacancy shall be filed by the Council for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.104  REMOVAL.



   The Council may remove members of the Commission for misfeasance,
malfeasance or nonfeasance in office.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.105  ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   Organization.  Within 30 days after their appointment, the
members of the Commission shall meet in a regular session at the City Hall
and elect from their members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a
secretary. Officers shall be elected annually thereafter. The Commission
shall adopt its own rules of procedure subject to provisions of the City
Charter. The Commission shall conform to all the rules and regulations
provided by the City Charter that are applicable to all other boards and
commissions.



   (B)   Meetings.  The Commission shall hold at least six regular
public meetings each year, every other month beginning in January, on a date
and at a time and place as may be established by resolution of the
Commission. The Commission shall meet in a public building within the city
limits, unless authorized by the Council to meet at another location.



   (C)   Special meetings.  Special meetings may be called by the
secretary on the written request of the chairperson or any three members of
the Commission on at least two days notice.



   (D)   Quorum.  Four members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.



   (E)   Voting.  A simple majority vote of the members of the body
present shall be sufficient to pass any resolution at a meeting at which a
quorum is present.



   (F)   Offices.  The City Council shall provide for the offices of
the Commission at a suitable location in City Hall or another public building
in the city.



   (G)   Records.  The Commission shall keep a written or printed
record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which
record shall be public and property of the city.



   (H)   Expenditures.  All expenditures of the Commission, exclusive
of the expenditure of gifts as described in § 32.107(J), shall be within the
amount appropriated by the City Council.



   (I)   Employees.  Any personnel employed by the Commission shall be
subject to civil service and part of the classified civil service, except for
any personnel that have supervisory power over other classified civil service
personnel.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.106  COMMISSION PUBLICATIONS.



   The secretary of the Commission shall be the custodian of the
publications of the Commission, and shall distribute and/or exchange
publications with other municipalities, governments and institutions under
the rules and regulations as shall be established by the Commission. Copies
of any of the above items or other materials of the Commission may be sold by
the secretary at prices to be fixed by the Commission to the public at large.
The money arising from the sales and from certified copies of documents shall
be placed in the Historical Fund.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)



§ 32.107  POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties to be
exercised and performed in conformity with the City Charter and state
statutes.



   (A)   In general, it shall be the duty of the Commission to collect,
arrange, catalogue and preserve historical material including books,
pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts, papers, records and archives,
paintings, statuary and other objects and materials relating to the history
of the city; to procure and preserve narratives and oral histories of the
early residents of the city; to collect, prepare and display objects
indicative of the life, customs, dress and resources of the early residents
of this area; and to make available from time to time publications, source
materials and historical studies relative to and illustrative of the history
of the area.



   (B)   The Commission shall have power, and it is hereby made the
duty of all public officials to assist in the performance of this power, to
collect from the public offices in the city reproductions of any records,
files, documents, books and papers as are not in current use and which are,
in the opinion of the Commission, of historical value. The Commission shall
provide for the classification, arranging and indexing of the reproductions
so that they may be made available for the use of the public.



   (C)   The Commission shall cooperate with and assist the State
Historical Commission in carrying out its powers and duties as established by
of the Public Act 271 of 1913, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.1 through 399.10, as
amended, and Public Act 10 of 1955, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.151 et seq., as
amended.



   (D)   The Commission may recommend to the Council purchases of
historical material including books, pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts,
papers, copies of domestic and foreign records and archives, paintings,
statuary and other objects and material illustrative of and relating to the
history of the city; provided, however, that all purchases shall be
accomplished in accordance with the City Charter and applicable ordinances of
the city.



   (E)   The Commission may recommend to the Council the establishment
of Historical Districts throughout the city, in conformity with all relevant
local, state and federal laws.



   (F)   The Commission may receive any money appropriated to it by the
state and shall deposit same with the City Treasurer as provided in the City
Charter.



   (G)   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Commission,
in the name of the city, may acquire and hold by purchase, lease, gift,
devise, bequest or otherwise any historical sites, buildings, landmarks or
properties which it may deem suitable or appropriate for carrying out the
objects, functions or purposes of the Commission. Furthermore, with approval
of the Council, the Commission may use any building or property for the
purpose of housing or displaying any part of its collection of objects or
documents therein. The Commission may locate and erect plaques or markers at
historic sites, buildings or properties in the city with the consent of the
owner or owners of any property and subject to approval of the Council. The
disposal of any real property or building shall be subject to approval of the
Council.



   (H)   (1)   The Commission shall make and submit to the Council
and to the Mayor an annual report of the general activities, operation and
condition of the Commission for the preceding year. This report shall
include, but not be limited to, an accounting of all accounts, funds, monies
and other property under the control of the Commission, the number and nature
of historical materials on hand, the number added by gift, purchase and
otherwise during the year and other statistical information and suggestions
as may be required by the City Council. This report shall be verified by
affidavit. This report shall be submitted by the first day of May of every
year.



      (2)   The Commission shall, from time to time, as the occasion
requires, either in the annual report, or at any time deemed necessary by the
Commission, advise the city in writing on all matters necessary and proper
for the operation of the Commission and any of its activities or properties.



   (I)   The Commission shall present to the Budget Board according to
provisions of the City Charter, a complete itemized budget for the ensuing
fiscal year.



   (J)   (1)   The Commission shall have the right to accept
donations of money or personal property or real estate for carrying out the
historical purposes as provided in this subchapter.



      (2)   Gifts of money shall be deposited in a special account
to be established by the Treasurer, upon resolution of the City Council
authorizing the establishment, from which disbursements shall be made as
provided in the Charter, in accordance with the terms of the instruments
making the gifts.



(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)




CITY BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION




§ 32.120  CREATION.



   There is hereby created and established a City Beautification
Commission for the city.



(Ord. 353, passed 3-28-1974)



§ 32.121  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The City Beautification Commission shall consist of seven
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor in the same manner as other
appointed officials as hereinbefore set forth in the City Charter.



   (B)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms as
follows: all terms of office shall commence May 1 and shall be for a period
of five years, except that initially, two Commissioners shall be appointed
for a term of five years; two for a term of four years; one for a term of
three years; one for a term of two years; and one for a term of one year and
thereafter as their respective terms expire.



   (C)   Vacancies on the Commission occurring before the expiration of
any term shall be reported by the Commission to the Mayor and filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.



   (D)   All members shall serve without compensation.



   (E)   No person shall be eligible for appointment who is the holder
of any city public office, elective or appointive.



   (F)   All members shall be qualified electors residing in the city.



   (G)   The Community and Economic Development Director shall serve as
a member ex-officio and shall have all the voting rights and other rights as
a member appointed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 353, passed 3-28-1974; Am. Ord. 514, passed 6-13-2005)



§ 32.122  CHAIRPERSON; BY-LAWS; MEETINGS.



   The City Beautification Commission shall immediately after appointment
meet and organize by the election of one of their members a chairperson and
by election of other officers as they deem necessary. They will adopt by-laws
for the orderly conduct of their meetings, and for proper process of their
functions. Meetings of the Commission will be held as often as may be deemed
necessary by a majority of the members of the Commission.



(Ord. 353, passed 3-28-1974)



§ 32.123  FUNCTION OF COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall have the following function: it shall be the duty
of the Commission to study, conceive, formulate, promulgate and develop plans
for the beautification of streets, highways, alleys, utility installations,
parks, streams, playgrounds, yards, lots and buildings; to study, investigate
and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety and
cleanliness of the city; to foster the prevention of fires, diseases and
other public hazards; to encourage and recommend the placing, planting and
preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of
ornamentation in the city; to collect, study and evaluate information on
community improvements and to make recommendations thereon; to sponsor, plan,
promote, coordinate and carry out the annual spring Clean-Up Paint-Up Fix-Up
campaign activities and to otherwise promote public interest in the general
improvement of the appearance of the city; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers
or duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the
city.



(Ord. 353, passed 3-28-1974)




HOUSING COMMISSION




§ 32.135  CREATION.



   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through
125.709e, as amended by Public Act 80 of 1935, being M.C.L.A. § 125.655,
Public Act 265 of 1937, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through 125.709e and
Public Act 5 of 1938, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through 125.709e, a
commission is hereby created in and for the city, to be known as the Housing
Commission.



(Ord. 173, passed 7-20-1939)



§ 32.136  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The Mayor of the city is hereby directed to appoint the members of the
Housing Commission as soon as possible after this subchapter shall take
effect.



(Ord. 173, passed 7-20-1939)



§ 32.137  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or
permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act 18 of 1933, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through 125.709e, as heretofore or hereafter amended,
and any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto,
it being the intention of this subchapter to vest in the Housing Commission
all powers and duties permitted by law.



(Ord. 173, passed 7-20-1939)



§ 32.138  COMPOSITION AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Housing Commission shall select and appoint employees as
it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise of its powers, functions and
duties.



   (B)   The Housing Commission shall pay the employees compensation as
it shall, with the approval of the Mayor, fix and determine.



(Ord. 173, passed 7-20-1939)



RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 32.150  CREATION.



   In accordance with the authority conferred by the provisions of Public
Act 156 of 1947, being M.C.L.A. §§ 2389 through 2392, inclusively, and with
the cooperation and consent of the Board of Education of the city, a
Recreation Commission is hereby created, which shall consist of seven
members. The City Council shall appoint three members, the Board of Education
of the school district of the city shall appoint three members and the
majority of the members so appointed shall appoint shall appoint one member
of the Recreation Commission of the city. At least one member appointed by
the City Council and one member appointed by the Board of Education shall be
citizens not holding public office or public employment in the city or in the
public school system in the city. A person to be appointed member of the
Commission by the other members in accordance with the foregoing provisions
of this subchapter shall be likewise a citizen not holding any public office
or employment in the city or in the public school system in the city and in
addition thereto shall be a member of the Chamber of Commerce, but shall not
be an officer or employee receiving salary or wages for services rendered for
the Chamber of Commerce.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



§ 32.151  APPOINTMENT.



   The initial appointment of the members of the Commission shall be for
the following terms in the manner hereinafter mentioned:  two members for a
term of one year, one of whom shall be appointed by the City Council and the
other by the Board of Education of the city; two members for a term of two
years, one of whom shall be appointed by the City Council and the other by
the Board of Education of the city; one member for a term of three years to
be appointed by the City Council; one member for a term of four years to be
appointed by the Board of Education; and one member for a term of five years
to be appointed by the member of the Recreation Commission. Thereafter all
subsequent appointments of any member of the Commission shall be for a term
of five years, providing further, that each member of the Commission shall
continue to hold his or her office or appointment until a successor has been
duly appointed. All appointments for the purpose of filling vacancies
occurring before the expiration of the term shall only be for the remainder
of the unexpired term and shall be filled by the appointing authority who
under the provision of this section was authorized and empowered to make the
appointment to the office or position in which the vacancy occurred.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



§ 32.152  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



§ 32.153  OATH.



   Every member of the Commission shall before entering upon the discharge
of the duties of his or her office and within ten days after receiving notice
of his or her appointment take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by
the State Constitution and file the same duly certified by the officers
administering it in the office of the City Clerk and a copy thereof in the
office of the secretary of the Board of Education of the school district of
the city.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



§ 32.154  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Recreation Commission to operate a system
of public recreation suitable to the needs of the city by coordinating and/or
combining the separate departments of recreation maintained and conducted by
the city and the school district and to assume and exercise control and
supervision over all persons employed therein or any person connected with
any recreation work and heretofore employed by the city or the school
district, including to the extent deemed necessary the supervision and
maintenance of playgrounds, playfields, gymnasiums, bathing beaches, swimming
pools, indoor recreation centers, winter sports and any other place of public
recreation hereinbefore not specifically mentioned, and the Commission shall
have power to expend for this purpose any funds appropriated for recreation
by the City Council and the Board of Education, and any funds donated or
bequeathed for recreational purposes by private individuals or organization
or received from other legitimate sources. The Commission shall adopt and
maintain a system of bookkeeping and accounting of receipts and
disbursements. The Commission shall likewise keep a full, complete and
accurate record of all its proceedings.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



§ 32.155  OFFICERS.



   (A)   The members of the Recreation Commission shall elect their own
chairperson and select other necessary officers and shall appoint a Director
of Recreation and all other persons as it may deem necessary.  The Director
of Recreation shall be deemed to be in the unclassified service and shall be
under the sole jurisdiction of the Recreation Commission, who shall determine
his or her duties, compensation and tenure of office and who shall have the
right to enter into a written contract for his or her service. All other
employees of the Recreation Commission, except the members of the Commission,
shall be required to take a competitive examination to be conducted under the
supervision of the Hamtramck Civil Service Commission.



   (B)   Subject to the powers herein conferred upon the Recreation
Commission, all persons appointed by the Recreation Commission, except the
members of the Commission and the Director of Recreation, shall be governed
with respect to their appointment, classification of position, promotions,
transfers and removal in like manner as other municipal employees in the
classified service in accordance with the provisions of  9-19 of the City
Charter, and all the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, unless
hereinafter otherwise determined by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council and the Board of Education, and no person so appointed by the
Recreation Commission, except persons appointed for seasonal employment, and
the Recreation Director, shall be subject to removal except upon cause and
proper charges to be determined at a public hearing before the Hamtramck
Civil Service Commission and in compliance in all other respects with the
procedure outlined in  9-19 of the City Charter.



   (C)   The Recreation Commission shall have the power to adopt rules
and regulations for the conduct of its own meetings and the operation of
recreation facilities not in conflict with the provisions of this subchapter,
and to adopt further rules and regulations governing their employees with
respect thereto, as the Recreation Commission may deem necessary.



   (D)   All employees of the Recreation Commission who at the time of
this subchapter shall take effect shall have been in the employ of the
Recreation Department whether maintained by the city or the school district
for more than one year, including also employees, who were on leave of
absence by reason of military service duly granted by proper authority, shall
hold their positions without examination until discharged, reduced, promoted
or transferred in accordance with the provisions of division (B) above. All
other employees of the Recreation Department who shall have been employed for
less than one year prior to the effective date of this subchapter shall be
required to the competitive examination.



   (E)   All persons permanently employed by the Recreation Commission
shall be included in and become a part of the pension plan and system
governing the permanent employees of the municipal government of the city,
and the cost of contributing to the city pension fund shall be borne equally
by the city and the school district, but that those permanent employees of
the Commission who shall qualify under the State Teachers’ Retirement
Pension Act, may elect to retain their rights under the Teachers’ Pension
System and may continue to contribute to the State Teachers’ Retirement
Fund and shall not be included in or become a part of the pension plan
governing the permanent employees of the city.



   (F)   The provisions of the foregoing divisions shall not be deemed
applicable to the tennis director or tennis recreation program, it being the
legislative intent of the City Council that the tennis director act and the
tennis recreation program be conducted independently from the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947; Am. Ord. 207, passed 7- -1949; Am. Ord. 227,
passed 9-23-1952)



§ 32.156  REQUIRED FILINGS.



   (A)   On or before the first Monday in May of each year, the
Recreation Commission shall prepare and file with the City Controller and the
Board of the school district, or any officer authorized by the Board of
Education to prepare and tabulate its requirements of the budget, estimates
in detail of the expenses of operation and maintenance of recreational
facilities for the next fiscal year beginning in the first day of July
following and the City Budget Board together with the City Council and the
Board of Education of the school district shall appropriate in equal shares
the sums of money in the respective budgets of the city and school district
as they shall deem necessary. The Recreation Commission, however, shall not
commit the city and the school district, by contract or otherwise, to the
expenditure of any funds not officially authorized for recreation, nor shall
the Commission expend money or incur liability in excess of its budget
allowance or the amount of grant, gift, bequest or endowment received from
other sources, for recreational facilities, and any member violating the
forgoing provisions of this section shall be personally liable in an action
of law for the overdraft or overexpenditure brought by the city, or the
school district or by any taxpayer of the city, in addition thereto shall be
liable to removal by his or her appointing authority.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall be custodian of all funds
appropriated or allocated for the use of the Recreation Commission and no
money shall be paid from the fund or funds by the City Treasurer, except in
pursuance of a resolution of the Recreation Commission and upon warrants
signed by the secretary of the Commission and countersigned by the City
Controller, City Clerk and City Treasurer.



   (C)   The city and the school district of the city shall conduct a
joint biennial audit of all the financial books of the Recreation Commission
through the City Controller and the Finance Director of the school district
of the city, or its deputies or duly delegated representatives from their
offices which the audit shall cover a period ending with the second fiscal
year in every two-year period.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



§ 32.157  REQUIRED REPORTS.



   On or before June 30, in each year the Recreation Commission shall
submit to the Mayor, City Council and the Board of Education a full and
complete report of its recreational activities, amounts received and
allocated for its purposes, amounts spent in connection therewith the
balance, if any, remaining at the end of the fiscal year.



(Ord. 207, passed 12-23-1947)



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   33.001   Qualifications; powers and duties



   33.002   Work week



   33.003   Police Department; Police Chief; power and duties



Disposition of Property in Possession of Police Department



   33.015   Custody of stolen, lost or abandoned property; property
defined



   33.016   Record of stolen, lost or abandoned property to be kept



   33.017   Return of property by Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent; two or more claimants; liability of Chief of Police or his
or her duly designated agent; property required as evidence



   33.018   Return of property to accused upon acquittal



   33.019   Claims of third person



   33.020   Property coming into possession of police to be transmitted
to Chief of Police or his or her duly appointed agent; disposition of
property of deceased persons



   33.021   Sale at auction; balance to City Treasurer



   33.022   Sale of perishable property



   33.023   Delivery of property to owner pending trial



   33.024   Perishable property may be delivered to owner; security



   33.025   Quantities of goods held for sale; delivery to owner



   33.026   Use of property as evidence



   33.027   Property not called for within one year to be treated as
abandoned



   33.028   Unclaimed property may be assigned to city departments;
method of effectuating assignment



Civilian Crossing Guards



   33.040   Appointment



   33.041   Dress



   33.042   Qualifications



   33.043   Rights and benefits



   33.044   Unlawful to wear uniform when off duty



   33.045   Unlawful to neglect or refuse to respond to assignment



   33.046   Unlawful to impersonate civilian crossing guard



 



   33.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 33.001  QUALIFICATIONS; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   For information concerning police officers, please see the
Charter for the city, Chapter 10, § 10-04.



   (B)   For information concerning the Chief of Police, please see the
Charter for the city, Chapter 9, § 9-16 and Chapter 10, § 10-03.



§ 33.002  WORK WEEK.



   Except as provided for herein or in any collective bargaining
agreement, the work week of all police officers shall be for each police
officer five days in every seven days, with two days off duty in each
seven-day period and two days leave of absence shall be in addition to a
furlough of 20 days in each year, of which at least ten days shall be
consecutive. Provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the Chief of
Police from suspending the leave of absence or furlough temporarily as a
matter of discipline for misconduct or dereliction of any police officer.
Provided, further, that this section shall not apply in case of an emergency
and the existence of an emergency shall be within the sole determination of
the Mayor.



(Ord. 257, passed 5-31-1960)



§ 33.003  POLICE DEPARTMENT; POLICE CHIEF; POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Police Department shall be headed by a Police Chief, who
shall be the commanding officer of the police force and be responsible for
the enforcement of law and order. All police officers shall have the right
and duty to arrest persons for any and all violations of the ordinances of
the city. The divisions of the Police Department and the responsibilities
thereof shall be set forth in departmental regulations.



   (B)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities
to the Police Department as necessary for the operation of the city; other
duties and responsibilities may be assigned to an existing division or
additional division as deemed necessary.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)




DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.015  CUSTODY OF STOLEN, LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY; PROPERTY DEFINED.



   (A)   All property or money alleged or supposed to have been
feloniously or wrongfully obtained or which shall be lost or abandoned, and
which shall be thereafter taken into the custody of any member of the police
force or the police or District Court of the city, or which shall come into
custody shall be, by the member or lay order of the court, given into the
custody of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent.



   (B)   The word PROPERTY as used in this subchapter shall not include
animals.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.016  RECORD OF STOLEN, LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY TO BE KEPT.



   All property and money shall be particularly registered by the Chief of
Police or his or her  duly designated agent in a book kept for that purpose,
which shall contain also a record of the names of the persons from whom the
property or money was taken, the names of all claimants thereto, the place
where found, the time of the seizure, the date of the receipt, the general
circumstances connected therewith, and any final disposal of the property and
money.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.017  RETURN OF PROPERTY BY CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DULY
DESIGNATED AGENT; TWO OR MORE CLAIMANTS; LIABILITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS
OR HER DULY DESIGNATED AGENT; PROPERTY REQUIRED AS EVIDENCE.



   (A)   Upon satisfactory evidence of the ownership of property or
money described in § 33.015, the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent shall deliver the same to the owner, his or her next of kin,
or legal representative, and to him, her, or them only. If in any case, it is
proven impracticable for the owner, next of kin,  or legal representative to
appear, the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent may deliver
the property or money to any person having a duly executed power of attorney
from the owner or his or her next of kin, or legal representative, upon the
filing of the power of attorney in the office of the Chief of Police or his
or her duly designated agent and the signing of a receipt for the property or
money.



   (B)   In the event two or more persons claim ownership of any
property or money, the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent
may give notice by registered mail to all claimants of whom he or she shall
have knowledge of the time and place of a hearing to determine the person to
whom the property or money shall be  delivered. At the time and place so
designated, the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent shall
hear and receive evidence of ownership of the property or money  concerned,
and shall determine the identity of the owner. After the hearing, the Chief
of Police or his or her duly designated agent shall deliver the property or
money to the person whom the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent determines is the owner, his or her next of kin, or legal
representative, and to him, her, or them only. If, in any case, it is proven
impracticable for the owner, next of kin, or legal representative to appear,
the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent may deliver the
property or money to any person having a duly executed power of attorney from
the owner, his or her next of kin, or legal representative, upon the filing
of the power of attorney in the office of the Chief of Police or his or her
duly designated agent and the signing of a receipt for the property or money.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent shall
not be liable in any official action performed hereunder in good faith.



   (D)   Except as provided in §§ 33.023, 33.024 and 33.025 hereof,
no property or money in the  possession of the Chief of Police or his or her
duly designated agent alleged to have been feloniously obtained or to be the
proceeds of crime shall be delivered under this section if it is required to
be held under the provisions of § 33.019 hereof; nor shall it be delivered
within one year after the date of receipt of the property or money by the
Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent unless the property or
money is not needed as evidence in the prosecution of a crime.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.018  RETURN OF PROPERTY TO ACCUSED UPON ACQUITTAL.



   Whenever property or money shall be taken from persons arrested, and
shall be alleged to have been feloniously obtained, or to be the proceeds of
crime, and whenever so brought with the claimant and the person arrested
before any court for trial, and the court shall be satisfied from evidence
that the person arrested is innocent of the offense alleged, and that the
property rightfully belongs to him or her, the court may, in writing, order
the property or money to be returned, and the Chief of Police or his or her
duly designated agent, if he or she have it, to deliver the property or money
to the accused person himself or herself, and not to any attorney, agent or
clerk of the accused person.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.019  CLAIMS OF THIRD PERSON.



   If any claim to the ownership of the property or money shall be made on
oath before the court, by or in behalf of any other persons than the person
arrested, and the accused person shall be held for trial or examination, the
property or money shall remain in the custody of the Chief of Police or his
or her duly designated agent until the discharge or conviction of the person
accused.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.020  PROPERTY COMING INTO POSSESSION OF POLICE TO BE TRANSMITTED TO
CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DULY APPOINTED AGENT; DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY
OF DECEASED PERSONS.



   All property or money taken on suspicion of having been feloniously
obtained, or of being the proceeds of crime, and for which there is no other
claimant than the person from whom the property was taken, and all lost
property coming into possession of any member of the police force, and all
property and money taken from pawnbrokers as the proceeds of crime or from
persons supposed to be insane, intoxicated or otherwise incapable of taking
care of themselves, shall be transmitted as soon as practicable to the Chief
of Police or his or her duly designated agent, to be fully registered and
advertised for the benefit of all parties interested, and for the information
of the public as to the amount and disposition of the property so taken into
custody by the police. Whenever any money or property of deceased persons
coming into the custody of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent of the Police Department shall remain in his or her hands for the
period of one year without being claimed by the legal representatives of the
deceased person, the money or property, when not exceeding $100 in value,
shall be disposed of as lost or abandoned property as provided in this
subchapter.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.021  SALE AT AUCTION; BALANCE TO CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   All property, except perishable property, that shall remain in
the custody of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent for
the period of six months, with the exception of motor vehicles which shall be
held for a period of three months, without any lawful claimant thereto after
having been advertised in some daily newspaper of general circulation
published in the city, shall be sold at public auction, and the proceeds of
the sale, having been retained by the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent for a period of three months without a lawful claimant,
shall then be paid to the City Treasurer and all money that shall remain in
his or her hands for the period of six months shall be so advertised, and if
no lawful claimant appear, shall be likewise paid to the City Treasurer.



   (B)   All funds received by the City Treasurer shall be credited to
the General Fund. The Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent
shall designate the time and place for holding the auction.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.022  SALE OF PERISHABLE PROPERTY.



   All perishable property so taken and unclaimed shall be sold at once.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.023  DELIVERY OF PROPERTY TO OWNER PENDING TRIAL.



   Whenever any article of property (except perishable property) other
than money, returned to the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent as the proceeds of crime, are shown by sufficient evidence to be
necessary for the current use of the owner and not for sale, the Council has
power, in its discretion, to authorize the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent to place the same in the custody of the owner, upon
sufficient bonds being given by the owner in the sum of twice the value of
the property, conditioned for the production of the same at any time within
one year when required for use in court as evidence in any proceedings
thereon.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.024  PERISHABLE PROPERTY MAY BE DELIVERED TO OWNER; SECURITY.



   Perishable property, returned to the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent as the proceeds of crime, may be delivered to the owner on
ample security being taken by the court for his or her appearance to
prosecute the case.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.025  QUANTITIES OF GOODS HELD FOR SALE; DELIVERY TO OWNER.



   (A)   When large quantities of goods held for sale by the owner come
into the possession of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent as the proceeds of crime, the same may be delivered to the owner, his
or her heirs or representatives, as provided in § 33.017, upon ample
security to prosecute the case.



   (B)   However, goods with an estimated value of $50 or less shall be
retained by the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent until the
discharge or conviction of the accused.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.026  USE OF PROPERTY AS EVIDENCE.



   If any property or money placed in the custody of the Chief of Police
or his or her duly designated agent shall be desired as evidence in any
criminal court, the property shall be delivered to any officer who shall
present an order to that effect from the court; but the property shall not be
retained in the court but shall be returned to the Chief of Police or his or
her duly designated agent to be disposed of according to the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.027  PROPERTY NOT CALLED FOR WITHIN ONE YEAR TO BE TREATED AS
ABANDONED.



   Any property or money returned to the Chief of Police or his or her
duly designated agent as the proceeds of crime, and which shall not be called
for as evidence by any proceeding in the municipal court within one year from
the date of the return may, unless specially claimed by the owner within that
time, be thereafter treated as other unclaimed abandoned or lost property or
money, as provided this subchapter.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)



§ 33.028  UNCLAIMED PROPERTY MAY BE ASSIGNED TO CITY DEPARTMENTS; METHOD OF
EFFECTUATING ASSIGNMENT.



   (A)   After expiration of the time period within which property
subject to the provisions of this subchapter maybe, reclaimed as herein
provided and no claim, has been made, the property may upon the request, of a
city department head or other city official be assigned by resolution of the
City Council to a city department for use by the department.



   (B)   All property thus assigned shall be appraised, identified and
enumerated by the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent and
accountable therefor assumed on the records of the department receiving the
property and a record of all transfers of property shall be kept by the
Police Department, the City Controller and any other departments as the City
Council may designate.



(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)




CIVILIAN CROSSING GUARDS




§ 33.040  APPOINTMENT.



   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and authorized and directed to
appoint special officers as he or she may deem necessary to perform police
duties under the direction of and in compliance with rules and regulations as
the Chief of Police shall promulgate.



(Ord. 253, passed 12-15-1959)



§ 33.041  DRESS.



   Civilian crossing guards shall wear badges, dress and insignia as the
Chief of Police shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner which he or
she deems necessary for the proper discharge of their duties.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



§ 33.042  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Chief of Police shall promulgate rules relating to the
qualifications, appointment, and removal of the civilian crossing guards.
Persons shall serve with compensation as may be provided for by the City
Council.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



§ 33.043  RIGHTS AND BENEFITS.



    Civilian crossing guards shall be entitled to all rights and benefits
provided under the provisions of Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§
418.101 through 418.941 and the amendments thereto; the same being known as
the worker’s compensation law of state.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



§ 33.044  UNLAWFUL TO WEAR UNIFORM WHEN OFF DUTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any civilian crossing guard to exercise his or
her authority as a guard or to wear the uniform or insignia, or to display
his or her badge in an attempt to exercise his or her authority, except
during the performance of actual authorized police duty.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



§ 33.045  UNLAWFUL TO NEGLECT OR REFUSE TO RESPOND TO ASSIGNMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any civilian crossing guard to knowingly and
willfully neglect or refuse to respond for assignment or duty when called
under rules and regulations as promulgated by the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



§ 33.046  UNLAWFUL TO IMPERSONATE CIVILIAN CROSSING GUARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as
a civilian crossing guard to impersonate the officer, or to wear, carry or
display the badge, designated dress or insignia, of the civilian crossing
guards.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



§ 33.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Civilian crossing guards.  Any person or persons violating
any of the provisions of §§ 33.040 through 33.046 shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period of
not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of
the court.



(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)



CHAPTER 34:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   34.001   Qualifications; powers and duties



   34.002   Work week



   34.003   Fire Department; Fire Chief; power and duties



Authority of Fire Marshal to Inspect Premises, Buildings,
Structures, Installations, Equipment, Devices and Materials



   34.015   Definitions



   34.016   Purpose; application; modification and appeal



   34.017   General



   34.018   Powers and duties



   34.019   Smoke detector devices; hotels, motels, boarding and
lodging houses, dormitories, single- or multiple-family dwelling units



Emergency Response Cost Recovery



   34.030   Short title



   34.031   Purpose and intent



   34.032   Definitions



   34.033   Liability for costs of the emergency response



   34.034   Payment of costs



 



   34.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.001  QUALIFICATIONS; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   For information concerning the Fire Department and its
members, please see the Charter for the city, Chapter 11.



   (B)   For information concerning the Chief of the Fire Department,
please see the Charter for the city, Chapter 9, § 9-17.



§ 34.002  WORK WEEK.



   Except as otherwise provided for in a collective bargaining agreement
between the city and the union(s) representing fire personnel, the leave of
absence of uniformed members of the Fire Department shall be for each member,
at least one day of 24 consecutive hours off duty in every 48 hours, the
leave days to be sufficient in number so as to provide an average 56 hour
work week and a furlough of 20 days in each year, of which at least ten days
shall be consecutive. Provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the
Fire Chief from suspending any leave of absence or furlough temporarily as a
matter of discipline for misconduct or dereliction of any firefighter.
Provided further, that this subchapter shall not apply in case of  emergency
and the existence of the emergency shall be within the sole determination of
the Mayor in consultation with.



(Ord. 258, passed 5-31-1960)



§ 34.003  FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE CHIEF; POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall be headed by a Fire Chief, who shall
be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of
life and property against fire, and the removal of fire hazards.  The Fire
Chief shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used
by the Fire Department.



   (B)   Divisions of Fire Department; Extinguishment Division.



      (1)   The Extinguishment Division shall be responsible for the
extinguishment of fires, the saving of life and property from fire, and the
performance of various miscellaneous public services of an emergency nature.



      (2)   The divisions of the Fire Department and the
responsibilities thereof shall be set forth in departmental regulations.



   (C)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities
to the Fire Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may
be assigned to an existing division or additional division as deemed
necessary.



(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)




AUTHORITY OF FIRE MARSHAL TO INSPECT PREMISES, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES,
INSTALLATIONS, EQUIPMENT, DEVICES AND MATERIALS




§ 34.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED.  That which the Fire Marshal, by rule or regulation, and as
a result of demonstration or test, designates as acceptable for its intended
use.



   BUILDING.  As defined in the official Building Code of the city.



   DEPARTMENT or FIRE DEPARTMENT.  The Fire Department of the city
established in accordance with the requirements of the Charter of the city.



   DWELLING.  As defined in the official Building Code of the city.



   FIRE CHIEF.  The person duly appointed and acting according to the
provisions of the Charter of the city.



   FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION.  The Fire Prevention Division of the City
Fire Department.



   FIRE MARSHAL.  The Fire Marshal of the city, or his or her duly
authorized representative, acting by authority of, and under the direction of
the Fire Chief.



   ORDINANCE.  As defined in the Charter of the city.



   OWNER, OCCUPANT, PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION, COMPANY, ASSOCIATION or
PARTNERSHIP.  Shall have its ordinary meaning and shall include the plural
as well as the singular.



   PREMISES.  Includes all buildings and structures as well as the ground
on which an occupancy is located.



   STRUCTURE.  As defined in the official Building Code of the city.



(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)



§ 34.016  PURPOSE; APPLICATION; MODIFICATION AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this subchapter to prescribe
regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the
safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards
of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the use or occupancy of buildings, structures or premises.
Compliance with all existing regulations of the city and laws or regulations
of the state or compliance with approved nationally recognized safety
standards shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of compliance with this
intent and purpose.



   (B)   Application.  The provisions of this subchapter shall apply
equally to new and existing conditions except that existing conditions not in
strict compliance with the terms of this subchapter shall be permitted to
continue where, in the judgment of the Fire Marshal, the exceptions do not
constitute a distinct hazard to life or property.



   (C)   Appeal.  Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or
order of the Fire Marshal may appeal to the Fire Chief. The appeals shall be
made within ten days of the decision, ruling or order complained of by filing
with the Fire Chief a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the
relief requested. The Fire Marshal shall forthwith transmit to the Fire Chief
all papers constituting the record upon which the decision, ruling or order
appealed from has been made. The Fire Chief shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof by mail to the principal
party of interest. The Fire Chief shall decide the question within a
reasonable time.



      (1)   Except in case of emergency, the appeal shall act as a
stay of any decision, ruling or order until either approved, modified or set
aside by the Fire Chief. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or be
represented by his or her duly authorized agent.



      (2)   The Fire Chief, upon hearing the appeal, shall either
affirm, modify or set aside any decision, ruling or order. The particulars of
any modification and the decision of the Fire Chief shall be entered upon the
records of the Fire Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the
appellant.



(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)



§ 34.017  GENERAL.



   (A)   Dangerous business.  No person, firm, partnership,
association, company or corporation shall carry on a business in the city, or
maintain any building, structure or premises in a manner as to endanger the
building, structure or premises from fire or explosion, or to endanger life
or other property.



   (B)   Liability for damages.



      (1)   This subchapter shall not be construed to hold the city
responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection
or investigation authorized herein or failure to inspect or investigate, or
in the issuance of permits as authorized by other ordinances, or by reason of
approval or disapproval of any material, equipment, device or installation.



      (2)   The Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, his or her duly
authorized representative or any employee charged with the enforcement of
this subchapter, while acting for the city, shall not thereby render himself
or herself liable personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the lawful discharge of his or her
official duties. Any suit, instituted against any officer or employee because
of an act performed by him or her in the lawful discharge of his or her
duties and under the provisions of this subchapter shall be defended by the
Legal Department of the city until the final termination of the proceedings.
In no case shall the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, his or her duly appointed
assistants or any employee charged with the enforcement of this subchapter be
liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this subchapter; and any officer of the Fire
Department, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of his or her official duties in
connection therewith.



(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)



§ 34.018  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Police powers.  The Fire Marshal, by virtue of his or her
office, shall be vested with full police powers in the city.



   (B)   Authority to enter premises.  The Fire Marshal or any
inspector of the Fire Prevention Division may at all reasonable hours, enter
any building, structure or premises, without hindrance, for the purpose of
making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this
subchapter, he, she or they may deem necessary to be made. The management or
the person in control of the premises shall provide assistance as is required
in making the inspection or investigation.



   (C)   Inspections of buildings and premises.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to cause to be
inspected by the Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized representatives,
all buildings, structures and premises, except the interiors of dwellings, as
often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, endanger life or property from
fire or explosion, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this
subchapter and of any other regulation affecting the fire or explosion hazard.



      (2)   The Fire Marshal or any inspector of the Fire Prevention
Division, may upon complaint of any person or whenever he, she or they shall
deem it necessary, shall inspect any building, structures or premises within
their jurisdiction.



   (D)   Orders to eliminate dangerous or hazardous conditions.



      (1)   Upon inspection or investigation, and when in the
judgment of the Fire Marshal any building, structure, premises, installation,
equipment, container, device or material is found to be unsafe or in a
condition dangerous to life or property, or in violation of any of the laws
of the state or the ordinances of the city, the Fire Marshal, any inspector
of the Fire Prevention Division and any authorized member of the Fire
Department is hereby empowered to order in writing the violations or
dangerous conditions be remedied or removed in a manner as may be specified
by the Fire Marshal.



      (2)   In instances as he or she may deem necessary, the Fire
Marshal may order to close, evacuate or condemn for use, any building,
structure, premises, installation, equipment, device or material in a manner
prescribed in division (F) below.



   (E)   Issuance and service of orders.



      (1)   The issuance of orders for the correction of violations
or abatement of a hazardous or dangerous condition shall be directed to the
person, firm, partnership, association, company or corporation in control of
the premises or installation, or the person responsible for the condition, as
the circumstances may require. It is hereby made the duty of the person,
firm, partnership, association, company or corporation to comply with orders
with all due diligence and dispatch, and within the time limit as specified.



      (2)   The service of the orders may be made to any one or all,
the owner, occupant, person in control of, or person responsible for the
condition, either by personal service, by leaving with any person in charge
of the premises, or by sending a copy of the orders through the mail to the
last known address of the person to whom the orders are directed. Service of
orders should meet legal service requirements if failure to obey is a
misdemeanor offense, i.e. certified mail.



   (F)   Authority to close or condemn for use.  The Fire Marshal,
acting by authority of the Fire Chief, shall have the power and it shall be
his or her duty to order closed and/or evacuated any premises, building or
structure, or condemn for use any installation, machinery, equipment,
vehicle, device, container or material which, in his or her judgment,
constitutes an immediate distinct hazard to life or property. In these cases,
the Fire Marshal shall properly placard or affix a red tag, stating the cause
for closing and/or evacuating the premises, structure or building, or
condemning for use the installation, machinery, equipment, vehicle, device,
container or material until the cause for the closing and/or evacuating, or
for the condemnation has been corrected and the removal or the placard or red
tag has been approved by the Fire Marshal in writing.



   (G)   Special assignments.  Whenever, in the judgment of the Fire
Marshal, acting under the direction of the Fire Chief, in the interest of the
safety of the people of the city it shall be necessary to have the Fire
Department or other agencies or departments of the city assign for duty
members and/or equipment in any building, structure or premises, the members
and/or equipment shall be assigned to that duty. The cost thereof may be
charged by the agency or department to the owner or occupant creating the
condition necessitating the assignment. Upon failure of the owner or occupant
to reimburse the city for costs, the charge thereof shall be referred to the
Legal Department for collection.



   (H)   Authority to seize and dispose.  The Fire Marshal is hereby
empowered and shall have the authority to seize, take, properly dispose of,
remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner any material or
device creating an immediate distinct hazard by fire or explosion to life or
property.



   (I)   Revocation of permit.  The Fire Marshal may revoke a permit
or approval issued if any violation of this subchapter or any ordinance of
the city is found upon inspection, or in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or
plans on which the permit or approval was based.



   (J)   Authority to promulgate rules and regulations and adopt
standards.



      (1)   A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
Office of the City Clerk of the City of Hamtramck, being marked and
designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, and Appendices A, B,
C, D, E, and F of the International Fire Code (together "International Fire
Code"), be adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Hamtramck for
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Hamtramck
and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, published by the
International Code Council, on file in the Office of the City Clerk are
referred to, adopted and made a part of the City of Hamtramck City
Ordinances, as if laid out here in full.



      (2)   In addition to enforcing all the laws of the state and
the ordinances of the city, where he or she is designated as an enforcing
officer, the Fire Marshal is hereby given authority to promulgate and enforce
rules and regulations based upon the official Fire Prevention Code.



   (K)   Duty to abate and control certain hazards.  It is made the
duty of the Fire Marshal and he or she is hereby empowered to abate and
control the fire and explosion hazard or hazardous conditions arising from:



      (1)   Defective, unapproved, improperly installed or used
equipment, devices, containers, machinery, vehicles or installation, or
using, storing or handling combustible, flammable, explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials;



      (2)   Unlawful amounts of combustible, flammable, explosive or
otherwise hazardous materials;



      (3)   Accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or
other highly combustible or flammable materials;



      (4)   Accumulations of dust or waste material in air
conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust
ducts;



      (5)   Obstructions to or on private roads or walkways, fire
escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the
operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire;



      (6)   Any building, structure or premises which for want of
repairs, improper use, lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other
fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or from any cause, creates a hazardous condition; and



      (7)   Prohibited acts. It is prohibited to barbeque on
porches, balconies or decks of dwelling units, multiple- or multiple-single
dwelling units or any unit within ten feet of any combustible building,
roofs, ceilings, extensions, overhangs or any other common combustible.



         (a)   To facilitate compliance with provisions of this
division the management or owner of the units shall notify each tenant in
writing of the regulations pertaining to this subchapter, at the time the
tenant initially occupies the unit and from time to time thereafter as
requested by the Fire Prevention Bureau;



         (b)   In multiple-family dwellings or multiple
single-family dwellings which are under individual ownership, (such as
condominium or cooperative share ownership), the owners shall be responsible
for giving the notice to the occupant;



         (c)   A building or portion thereof containing more than
two dwelling units which are not classified as a multiple-single family
dwelling unit; and



         (d)   Multiple-single family dwelling units are to mean
a building containing more than one dwelling unit where each unit has a
separation between living areas and had an independent means of egress from
the unit.



   (L)   Assistance of other departments.



      (1)   The Chief of Police and his or her assistants are hereby
empowered and it is made their duty to assist the Fire Marshal in the
enforcement of any order for the closing and/or evacuating of any building,
structure or premises.



      (2)   Whenever it shall be necessary in the judgment of the
Fire Marshal or his or her authorized representative to call upon any other
department or agency in the city for aid or assistance in carrying out or
enforcing any law of the state or ordinance of the city, they shall have the
authority to do so, and it shall be the duty of the members of the various
departments, authorities or agencies when called upon by the Fire Marshal or
his or her duly authorized representative to perform the duty as may be
required of them in order to enforce the provisions of any law of the state
or ordinance of the city and to make prompt reports in writing of the
investigation, inspection and/or action. These reports shall be kept on file
by the Fire Marshal.



   (M)   Authority of other departments.  Nothing in this subchapter
shall be construed as limiting the authority of other city departments in
making inspections under their respective regulations. All applicable
ordinances and regulations of the city shall be adhered to.



(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967; Am. Ord. 319, passed 10-14-1969; Am. Ord. 443,
passed 7-22-1993; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 12-9-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-3, passed
6-14-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 34.019  SMOKE DETECTOR DEVICES; HOTELS, MOTELS, BOARDING AND LODGING
HOUSES, DORMITORIES, SINGLE- OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   Each apartment, suite or sleeping area or every single- or
multiple-dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of one smoke detector
capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion. The detector
shall be approved or listed by a recognized independent testing laboratory
and, when actuated, shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants
within the individual dwelling unit. A minimum of one smoke detector shall be
located in the immediate area of all sleeping quarters.



   (B)   (1)   All multiple-dwellings (three-family or more) shall
comply with this section within six months of the effective date of this
section.



      (2)   All single-dwellings shall comply with this section
within one year of the effective date of this section or before any major
alteration, addition or re-occupancy, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 391, passed 4-1-1980)  Penalty, see § 34.999



EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY



§ 34.030  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Emergency
Response Cost Recovery Ordinance.



(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 34.031  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This subchapter is for the purpose of ensuring that the city shall, to
the extent permitted by law, recover the costs of an emergency response from
the responsible party.



(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 34.032  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   COSTS OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE.  The actual costs incurred by the
city, and by any other governmental or intergovernmental entity providing
services at the request or direction of the City's Fire or Police Department,
as the result of an emergency response, except as may be limited by a policy
adopted by the governing body. Such costs shall include, without limitation:



      (1)   All labor costs (including wages, salaries, fringe
benefits, and reimbursable expenses) of all personnel responding to the
incident and all personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and
report preparation relating to the incident;



      (2)   All costs for materials, supplies, and equipment
utilized or damaged in connection with an emergency incident and emergency
response;



      (3)   All costs for the repair or replacement of
publicly-owned property (real and personal property), buildings, facilities
and infrastructure (such as utilities, roads, sidewalks, safety paths and
other infrastructure and public improvements) damaged or destroyed in
connection with or as a direct or indirect result of an emergency incident
and emergency response;



      (4)   Investigation of an emergency incident and fire
fighting, emergency services, cleaning up, boarding-up, inspecting, testing,
abating, mitigating, restoring and crowd control at the site of an emergency
response;



      (5)   All costs for labor and services for which the city had
to contract in connection with or as a direct or indirect result of an
emergency incident and emergency response; and



      (6)   Any other expenses incurred by the city, and by any
other governmental or intergovernmental entity providing services at the
request or direction of the City's Fire or Police Department, in connection
with or as a direct or indirect result of an emergency incident and emergency
response.



   EMERGENCY INCIDENT.  A fire, accident, utility emergency, hazardous
material incident, arson, technical rescue, or other emergency situation.



   EMERGENCY RESPONSE.  The dispatch, provision, response, and/or
utilization of police, fire, emergency medical, rescue services and/or other
emergency services by the city, or by any other governmental or
intergovernmental entity providing any such services at the request or
direction of the City's Fire or Police Department, to an emergency incident
or any call for assistance from any person, property owner, government
agency, emergency service provider, or other entity.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES INCIDENT.  An incident involving any chemical,
substance, compound, mixture, or other material defined as, designated as,
listed as, or having the same characteristics as any substance, compound,
mixture or material listed as hazardous under the fire code adopted under
Chapter 34 of this code, any other code adopted or enforced by the city, or
any federal or state law or regulation.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, consortium, governmental entity, public utility
company, or any other legal entity.



   UTILITY EMERGENCY.  Downed power lines, pipeline breaks, or other
mishaps occurring in connection with the activities of public utilities or
their suppliers which necessitates an emergency response or monitoring by the
city's police, fire fighting and/or emergency medical/rescue services, or
causes damage to public property.



(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 34.033  LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE.



   The following persons or entities shall be jointly and severally liable
for the cost of an emergency response:



   (A)   The owner, lessor, and/or operator of any commercial,
business, office, retail, manufacturing, or other non-residential property,
or any property within or outside of the city, to which there is an emergency
response, or any residential property within the city to which there is an
emergency response necessitated by unlawful activity caused by or within the
control of the owner, lessor, and/or occupant of the property.



   (B)   Any person or vehicle owner/lessee who owns, leases and/or
operates a motor vehicle, other transporter, or equipment of any kind, the
operation of which results in an emergency response, shall be presumed liable
for the costs of the emergency response.



   (C)   Any person owning, maintaining, or operating a railroad shall
be presumed liable for the cost of the emergency response in the event of an
emergency incident involving the railroad.



   (D)   In the event of a utility emergency, the public utility whose
activities or facilities (including but not limited to, electric lines,
telephone lines, cable lines and pipelines) necessitated the emergency
response shall be liable for the costs of the emergency response.



   (E)   If more than one person is liable for the expense of an
emergency response under the foregoing provisions, all such persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for the cost of the emergency response.



   (F)   In the event of an emergency incident that involves a
hazardous substances incident, to the extent the Michigan Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act (being M.C.L. § 324.20101, et seq.) or any
other law preempts the cost recovery provisions of this section, the
liability for and recovery of costs of the emergency response shall be
governed by the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act
or such other law, and the city may pursue collection of such costs of the
emergency response in a civil action, pursuant to said laws.



   (G)   Any other person who is found responsible for costs under this
section whose actions are a cause of an emergency incident giving rise to a
need for any emergency response, shall be liable for the costs of the
emergency response for which costs are imposed under this section.



   (H)   This section shall not apply to residents of the city, unless
the resident or residents are convicted of a misdemeanor in connection with
any actions or inactions which are determined to be the proximate cause of
the emergency response situation. Residency shall be determined by the
address on the individual's valid driver's license or state identification
card at the time of the incident.



(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 34.034  PAYMENT OF COSTS.



   (A)   The cost of an emergency response shall be a charge against
the person or persons deemed liable for the expenses of an emergency
response. Such charge constitutes a debt of that person or persons and is
collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation
under an express or implied contract. The city may, within 30 days of
receiving all or part of the itemized costs incurred by the city (or other
jurisdiction providing mutual aid to the city) for an emergency response,
submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the
person or persons liable for the expenses as enumerated under this subchapter.



   (B)   Any person receiving such a bill shall have the opportunity to
appeal all or any portion of the amount shown on such statement by filing a
written request for same with the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt of an
invoice from the city. The following individuals shall sit as the review
board for purposes of this section: the City Manager, Director of Public
Services, Fire Chief, a member of City Council, and a member of the general
public nominated by the Mayor and approved by City Council. The request must
be accompanied by a written explanation as to why the amount appealed should
not be charged to the appellant. The review board shall hear such appeals. If
the review board fails to determine by a preponderance of the evidence that
the appellant was properly charged for any item, the review board may waive
the charge for such item against the appellant. The findings and decisions of
the review board shall be in writing and filed with the City Clerk and
Finance Department. If no written request for appeal is received within the
specified time, the city may proceed in accordance with applicable laws and
ordinances to collect any monies remaining unpaid at the expiration of 30
days from billing.



   (C)   Any failure by any person or entity to either pay the bill
within 30 days of service, or file an appeal as set forth in division (B),
above, shall be considered to be a civil default, and the city may commence a
civil suit against such person or entity to recover the billed expenses of an
emergency response, plus the city's attorney fees, court costs, litigation
expenses and all other costs allowed by law. The recovery of costs of an
emergency response under this subchapter is a separate civil liability of any
person liable for the emergency response, and is separate from and in
addition to any criminal proceedings that may be brought against the person
or persons.



   (D)   In addition, the city shall have any other remedy available to
the city by law, including but not limited to requesting the City Attorney to
file a civil action for the recovery of costs.



(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 34.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Authority of Fire Marshal to inspect.  Any person, firm,
partnership, association, company or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 34.015 through 34.018 or any of the rules, regulations or
orders lawfully promulgated or adopted herein, or failing to comply with any
lawfully written corrective orders issued by the Fire Marshal, any inspector
of the Fire Prevention Division, or any authorized representative shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period of not more than 90 days,
or to both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each day
that a violation of §§ 34.015 though 34.018, or of any rule, regulation or
order is continued or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense
punishable upon conviction in the manner prescribed in this section.



(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)



CHAPTER 35:  ELECTIONS



Section



   35.001   Creation of precincts



§ 35.001  CREATION OF PRECINCTS.



   The city shall be divided into seven election precincts, the boundaries
and numbers of which shall be as follows.



   (A)   Precinct No. 1.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by the center line of Evaline Street; upon the west by the westerly
city limits of the city; upon the north by the northerly city limits of the
city; and upon the east by the center line of Lumpkin Avenue.



   (B)   Precinct No. 2.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by the center line of Evaline Street; upon the west by the center
line of Lumpkin Avenue; upon the north by the northerly city limits of the
city; and upon the east by the center line of Joseph Campau Avenue.



   (C)   Precinct No. 3.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by the center line of Caniff Street; upon the west by the center
line of Joseph Campau Avenue; upon the north by the northerly city limits of
the city; and upon the east by the easterly city limits of the city.



   (D)   Precinct No. 4.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by the center line of Holbrook Street; upon the west by the center
line of the Joseph Campau Avenue; upon the north by the center line of Caniff
Street; and upon the east by the easterly city limits of the city.



   (E)   Precinct No. 5.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by Holbrook Street; upon the west by the westerly city limits of
the city; upon the north by the center line of Evaline Street; and upon the
east by the center line of Joseph Campau Avenue.



   (F)   Precinct No. 6.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by the southerly city limits of the city; upon the west by the
westerly city limits of the city; upon the north by Geimer Street; and upon
the east by the center line of Joseph Campau Avenue.



   (G)   Precinct No. 7.  All that portion of the city bounded upon
the south by the southerly city limits of the city; upon the west by the
center line of Joseph Campau Avenue; upon the north by the center line of
Holbrook Street; and upon the east by the easterly city limits of the city.



(Ord. 491, passed 4-15-2003)



CHAPTER 36:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



   36.001   Adopted by reference



§ 36.001  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The revised and amended ordinances and policies regulating personnel,
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.



(Am. Ord. 241, passed 12-6-1955; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-12-1958; Am. Ord.
247, passed 3-31-1959; Am. Ord. 260, passed 6-31-1960; Am. Ord. 261, passed
11-15-1960; Am. Ord. 304, passed 12-21-1965; Am. Ord. 361, passed 2-4-1975;
Am. Ord. 364, passed 3-11-1975; Am. Ord. 368, passed 9-26-1975; Am. Ord. 479,
passed 2-4-2002)  Penalty, see  36.999



CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION AND FINANCIAL POLICIES



Section




Income Taxation




   37.001   Adopted by reference




City Tax Exemption




   37.015   36 Unit city tax exemption; adopted by reference



   37.016   Grand Haven Village Homes city tax exemption; adopted by
reference



   37.017   Hamtramck Square III city tax exemption; adopted by
reference



   37.018   Service charge in lieu of taxes for dwelling units for low
income elderly persons




Purchasing Procedures




   37.030   Purpose and intent



   37.031   Organization and authority



   37.032   General purchasing policies



   37.033   Disposal of personal property



   37.034   Standards of conduct




Investment and Wire Transfers




   37.045   Policy



   37.046   Definitions



   37.047   Scope



   37.048   Prudence



   37.049   Objective



   37.050   Delegation of authority



   37.051   Ethics and conflict of interest



   37.052   Authorized financial dealers and institutions



   37.053   Authorized and suitable investments



   37.054   Investment bidding procedure



   37.055   Collateralization



   37.056   Safekeeping and custody



   37.057   Diversification



   37.058   Maximum maturities



   37.059   Internal control



   37.060   Performance standards



   37.061   Market yield (benchmark)



   37.062   Reporting




INCOME TAXATION




§ 37.001  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The revised and amended ordinances regulating income taxation and the
office of the Director of Income Taxation, copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this Code
of Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 278, passed 11-13-1962; Am. Ord. 292, passed 10-13-1964; Am. Ord. 320,
passed 10-21-1969; Am. Ord. 331, passed 8-25-1970; Am. Ord. 344, passed
3-14-1972; Am. Ord. 430, passed 9-22-1988)




CITY TAX EXEMPTION




§ 37.015  36 UNIT CITY TAX EXEMPTION; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The revised and amended ordinances regulating 36 unit city tax
exemptions, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are
adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if
set out at length herein.



(Ord. 511, passed 4-12-2005; Am. Ord. 518, passed 3-14-2006; Am. Ord. 529,
passed 10-24-2006)



§ 37.016  GRAND HAVEN VILLAGE HOMES CITY TAX EXEMPTION; ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.



   The revised and amended ordinances regulating the Grand Haven Village
Homes city tax exemption, copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 2008-7, passed 5-27-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 11-12-2008)



§ 37.017  HAMTRAMCK SQUARE III CITY TAX EXEMPTION; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The ordinance regulating the Hamtramck Square III city tax exemption,
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.



(Ord. 2008-8, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 37.018  SERVICE CHARGE IN LIEU OF TAXES FOR DWELLING UNITS FOR LOW INCOME
ELDERLY PERSONS.



   (A)   Title.  This section shall be known and cited as the city tax
exemption section.



   (B)   Preamble.  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public
purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for
its elderly citizens of low income and to encourage the development of the
housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in
accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public
Act 346 of 1966 being  M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended).  The
city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to
be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from
taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that
would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that the housing
for elderly persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will
be benefitted and improved by the housing, the encouragement of the same by
providing certain real estate tax exemption for the housing is a valid public
purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this section for
tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods
contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic
feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in
reliance on the section and service charge.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACT.  The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public
Act 346 of 1966, being  M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq. of the state, as
amended.



      ANNUAL SHELTER RENTS.  The total collections during an agreed
annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rents
or occupancy charges exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other
utilities furnished to the occupants.



      AUTHORITY.  The State Housing Development Authority.



      CONTRACT RENTS.  Are as defined by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to § 8
of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended.



      ELDERLY PERSONS.  A family where the head of household is 62
years of age or older or a single person who is 62 years of age or older. 



      ELDERLY PERSONS OF LOW INCOME.  Elderly persons who meet the
eligibility criteria set by the authority and/or federal government.



      HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.  A development which contains a significant
element of housing for elderly persons of low income and such elements of
other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational
facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development
as it relates to housing for persons of low income.



      HUD.  The Department of Housing and Urban Development of the
United States government.



      MORTGAGE LOAN.  A loan to be made by the authority or Farmers
Home Administration or the Department of Housing and Urban Development to the
sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the Housing
Development or a mortgage loan insured by HUD.



      PERSONS OF LOW INCOME.  Persons and families eligible to move
into a Housing Development.



      SPONSOR.  Persons or entities which have applied to either the
authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development or to another
governmental entity for a federally-aided loan, as defined by the Act.



      UTILITIES.  Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or
electrical service which are paid by the housing development.



   (D)   Class of housing developments.  It is determined that the
class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for
which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of the taxes shall be
multiple-dwellings for elderly persons of low income which are financed or
assisted by the authority or  which are federally aided, as defined in the
Act.



   (E)   Establishment of annual service charge.  Housing developments
for elderly persons of low income and the property on which they shall be
constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the
commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and
the authority, in the case of a sponsor receiving a mortgage loan from the
authority, have established the economic feasibility of the housing
development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this
section and the qualification of the housing developments for exemption from
all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this
section, will accept payment of an annual service charge for public services
in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to 7%
of the difference between the annual shelter rent for authority-aided housing
developments actually collected and utilities. 



   (F)   Resolution; contractual effect.  A resolution of the City
Council granting tax exempt status, as provided in this section, shall be
adopted for each housing development qualified under the terms and provisions
of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of  15(a)(5) of the Act, to
the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority
as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and
accept payments in lieu of taxes as previously described will be effectuated
by enactment of a resolution by the City Council.



   (G)   Payment of service charge.  The service charge in lieu of
taxes as determined under this section shall be payable in the same manner as
general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment
shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year.



   (H)   Duration.  The tax exempt status of a housing development
approved for the status by resolution of the City Council shall remain in
effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan for the housing
development remains outstanding and unpaid, or for the period as the
authority or other governmental entity has any interest in the property;
provided, the construction of the housing development commences within one
year from the effective date of the resolution of the City Council 
approving the housing development for tax exempt status as provided in this
section.



(Ord. 2008-10, passed 7-30-2008)




PURCHASING PROCEDURES




§ 37.030  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   These procedures have been developed within the guidelines specified in
the City Charter. They shall be implemented to clarify and expand general
Charter procurement regulations and shall therefore be in strict conformity
to all rules specified therein. This subchapter is intended to maximize the
purchasing power and value of public funds through a procurement procedure
that maintains a system of quality and integrity and promotes efficiency,
effectiveness and equity in public purchasing. It is the goal of this
subchapter to recognize the obligation to the taxpayers to maximize the
purchasing power of public funds to gain the best value. The city will comply
with all applicable federal and state laws concerning public purchasing.



(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.031  ORGANIZATION AND AUTHORITY.



   The individual appointed as purchasing manager shall be responsible for
the administration of the procurement system of the city. The purchasing
manager shall be the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.
Procurement authority and responsibility shall be delegated as follows.



   (A)   City Council.



      (1)   Shall establish purchasing procedures through this
subchapter; and



2015 S-3




72   Hamtramck - Administration



      (2)   Shall award all contracts for goods and services of
$10,000 or more in value, except those contracts that may be purchased
through cooperatives such as MiDEAL (Michigan Department of Technology,
Management and Budget Extended Purchasing Program).



   (B)   City Manager.



      (1)   Shall recommend purchasing procedures;



      (2)   Shall establish purchasing procedures; and



      (3)   Shall review and be the final authority on all
procurement action taken by the city, consistent with the Charter and this
chapter.



   (C)   Department head - City Manager designee (each department head
is the City Manager’s designee for their department).



      (1)   Shall procure or supervise the procurement of all goods,
wares, equipment, merchandise, materials, supplies, commodities, public
improvements and services as required to maintain city operations according
to the policies and procedures established herein;



      (2)   Shall provide for the maintenance of efficiency, economy
and accountability in the city’s procurement of materials and services;



      (3)   Shall obtain formal bids for all goods and services of
$10,000 or more;



      (4)   Shall obtain competitive informal quotations according
to purchasing procedures;



      (5)   Shall establish and maintain lists of qualified bidders;



      (6)   Shall establish purchasing forms, maintain records,
issue and execute purchase orders;



      (7)   Shall provide for the gainful disposition of surplus and
scrap;



      (8)   Shall ensure the availability of budgeted funds for all
purchases; and



      (9)   Shall coordinate the purchasing of all departments, and
shall, to the extent practicable and possible, combine specifications for
purchases of equipment and supplies under single purchases where the
consolidation is economically advantageous to the city.



   (D)   Operating departments.



      (1)   Shall requisition goods and services through the
purchasing manager;



      (2)   Shall assist the purchasing manager in the development
of standard specifications;



      (3)   Shall maintain adequate inventories of materials and
supplies;



      (4)   Shall receive and inspect all materials and supplies
ordered and provide receiving verification to the Finance Department in a
timely manner; and



      (5)   Shall establish procedures within their established
departments to ensure adherence to purchasing policies and procedures.



(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2014-46, passed 6-24-2014)



§ 37.032  GENERAL PURCHASING POLICIES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Definition and scope of procurement.  Procurement
activity, as herein used, shall mean any action taken by the city acting as
buyer for obtaining materials, supplies, services and public improvements
(hereafter goods and services) from a vendor acting as seller, whether by
purchase, rent, lease, lease-purchase or other similar methods of acquisition
as may be used by the city.



      (2)   Rule against subdivision.  No purchase shall be
subdivided to circumvent the dollar value limitations imposed by this
subchapter, policy or any guidelines established by the City Manager.



      (3)   Purchases or contracts less than $100.



         (a)   Purchases under $100 shall be made from vendors
appearing on an approved vendor list for copy services, office supplies,
maintenance supplies, small parts, and the like, which are not normally
purchased in large enough quantities to achieve low prices.



         (b)   Factors including, but not limited to, product
quality, serviceability, delivery, emergencies, vendor history, vendor
performance, existing contracts and other considerations of a similar kind
normally relevant to the exercise of good business judgment shall constitute
sufficient and good cause on which to base the decisions.



      (4)   Purchases or contracts of $100 or more, but less than
$5,000.



         (a)   Purchases of $100  or more, but less than $5,000
shall be based upon the solicitation of no less than three verbal, telephonic
or internet price quotations when practical and feasible to do so, and shall
be made from the lowest priced vendor unless good cause exists not to do so.



         (b)   Factors including, but not limited to, product
quality, serviceability, delivery, emergencies, vendor history, vendor
performance, existing contracts and other considerations of a similar kind
normally relevant to the exercise of good business judgment shall constitute
sufficient and good cause on which to base the decisions.



      (5)   Purchasing or contracts of $5,000 or more, but less than
$10,000.  Any expenditure for goods and services, the cost of which is
$5,000 or more, but less than $10,000 shall be, based whenever practical or
feasible, upon the solicitation of no less than three written price
quotations.



      (6)   Purchases or contracts of $10,000 or more.  Any
expenditure for goods and services, the cost of which is $10,000 or more
shall be made only after the approval of the City Council has first been
secured.



   (B)   Formal bids.  Formal bids shall be required subject to the
following regulations.



      (1)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         FORMAL BID.  The submission of a written, sealed price
quotation by a vendor to the city pursuant to the issue of public notice
thereof by the city, and based on written specifications and standard
conditions stipulated by the city for procuring goods and/or services for the
city. Bids received by facsimile and/or over the internet shall be deemed
written, sealed price quotations provided they are forthwith transferred to
the City Clerk and kept confidential until the public bid opening.



      (2)   Scope.



         (a)   The $10,000 bid requirement shall apply to all
goods and services that can be procured through this process.



         (b)   This limit shall apply to one-time purchases.



      (3)   Invitation to bid.



         (a)   An invitation to bid shall be issued and shall
include a purchase description and/or specifications and all material
contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement.



         (b)   The invitation to bid shall be mailed or otherwise
distributed by the purchasing manager to a sufficient number of known
reliable vendors to ensure and maintain the integrity and competitiveness of
the bid process.



      (4)   Public notice and advertising.  Adequate public notice
of the invitation to bid shall be given a reasonable time before the date set
forth therein for the opening of the bids. A minimum of ten days’ notice
must be given before bid opening with the advertisement for bids having been
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or
within an appropriate trade publication.



      (5)   Addendums/clarifications.  Bid addendums and
clarifications may be issued by the purchasing manager.



      (6)   Bid opening.  Bids shall be opened publicly in the
presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the
invitation to bid. The amount of each bid and other relevant information with
the name of each bidder shall be recorded by the City Clerk’s office. Bid
tabulations shall be open to public inspection. A bid opening may be
postponed if fewer than three bids are received.



      (7)   Bid acceptance and evaluation.  Bids shall be accepted
(except late bids, which shall not be accepted) without alteration or
correction, except as otherwise authorized by the purchasing procedures
adopted by the City Manager, or the factors stipulated in the invitation to
bid. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirement set forth in the
invitation to bid, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such
as, quality, references, recommendations by city consultants, workmanship,
delivery, inspection, testing and suitability for a particular purpose.



      (8)   Correction or withdrawal of bids.  Correction or
withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be permitted
according to the purchasing procedures established by the City Manager. After
bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial
to the interests of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. Except
as otherwise provided by regulation, all decisions to permit the correction
or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid
mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the
department head and approved by the City Manager.



      (9)   Award.  The City Manager, after approval by City
Council, shall approve the award of public contracts. The City Manager and
City Council shall retain the right to take any of the following actions:



         (a)   Award a contract to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder who has submitted a bid most advantageous to the city;



            1.   Definition of responsible bidder.  A
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER is herein defined as a person or firm which has the
capability in all respects to perform the contract requirements fully, and
which has the integrity and reliability which will assure good faith
performance.



            2.   Definition of responsive bidder.  A
RESPONSIVE BIDDER is herein defined as a person or firm which has submitted a
bid which conforms in all material respects to the descriptions,
specifications, terms, conditions and other factors called for in the
invitation to bid.



         (b)   Accept or reject in part or in whole any or all
bids;



         (c)   Waive any inconsequential informality or defect in
the bids;



         (d)   Negotiate any viable modifications in price,
terms, conditions or specifications with the low bidder that would be
advantageous to the city;



         (e)   Award a contract to other than the low bidder
should the action be in the best public interest; and



         (f)   Award a contract by division among two or more
vendors if the alternatives are duly indicated in the original invitation to
bid.



      (10)   Waiver of bid requirement.  The City Council, after
review by the department head, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall
retain the right to waive bid requirements subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   The action is found to be to the advantage and in
the best interests of the city;



         (b)   Sole source procurement.  A contract may be
awarded by the City Council for a supply, service, equipment or construction
item without competition when the department head has advised the City
Manager in writing and certified that there is only one source vendor
available;



         (c)   Lower prices can be obtained without soliciting
competitive bids;



         (d)   The department head has been engaged in
cooperative procurement bids of goods and/or services in conjunction with
another governmental agency where joint bids have been taken and are
advantageous to the city; and



         (e)   Annually, the department head will provide a list
of negotiated purchases for City Council approval, with justification
provided for each purchase and the date of the last formal bid.



      (11)   Change orders.  Change orders to contracts authorized
by City Council, including construction contract, shall be authorized without
further City Council approval if there are funds budgeted to cover the change
order, and provided that the change order does not alter the scope of the
original contract and the amount of the change order does not exceed 10% of
the original contract amount.



   (C)   Specifications.



      (1)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         SPECIFICATION.  Any description of the physical or
functional characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, equipment
or construction items. It may include a description of any requirement for
inspecting, testing or preparing a supply, service, equipment or construction
item for delivery.



      (2)   Responsibility of department head.  The department head
shall prepare, issue, revise and monitor the use of specifications for
supplies, services, equipment and construction as required by the city and
shall maintain a standard specifications file.



      (3)   Maximum practicable competition.  All specifications
shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage
competition in satisfying the city’s needs and shall not be unduly
restrictive.



      (4)   Specifications prepared by architects and engineers. 
The requirements of this section regarding the purposes and
non-restrictiveness of specifications shall apply to all specifications,
including, but not limited to, those prepared by architects, engineers and
consultants.



   (D)   Cooperative procurement.  The department head shall endeavor
to participate with other governmental agencies in cooperative bids for the
procurement of goods or supplies subject to City Council approval of contract
and waiver of local bids. It shall be the policy of this city to engage in
those joint procurement efforts whenever the activity is feasible and
economically advantageous to the city.



   (E)   Procurement of professional services.



      (1)   The procurement of certain services where technical
expertise or knowledge of a specialized field are critical to the performance
of that service, including but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planning
consultants, architects, accountants and other similar professionals, shall
not require bidding.



      (2)   The following regulations shall apply:



         (a)   Pursuant to City Charter, the City Council shall
be empowered to appoint the city attorney and other professional consultants;
and



         (b)   While competitive bids shall not be required, the
following shall be applicable for non- legal services:



            1.   When the cost of procuring professional
services is $10,000 or more, City Council shall make the appointment;



            2.   When the cost of procuring professional
services is less than $10,000, the City Manager shall have the authority to
procure the services of a professional or consultant known to be competent,
reliable and capable of performing in the best interests of the city the task
that he or she has been employed to do.



      (3)   The procurement of legal services (other than City
Manager’s appointment of the City Attorney) shall be directed by the City
Manager after consultation with the City Attorney.



   (F)   Procurement in cases of emergency.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this procedure,
the City Manager or purchasing manager, or a designee of either, may make or
authorize others to make emergency procurements when there exists a threat to
public health, welfare or safety conditions as defined in regulations or
procedures promulgated by the City Manager, provided the emergency
procurements shall be made with the competition as is practicable under the
circumstances.



      (2)   An after-the-fact written determination of the basis for
the emergency and for the selection of the particular vendor shall be
included in the purchase file and disclosed to the City Council.



(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.033  DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The disposal of property function of the city shall be administered by
the department head subject to final approval by the City Manager. Items
deemed to be surplus or scrap shall be disposed of by methods, including but
not limited to, transfer, trade-in, sale or auction. It shall be the policy
of the city to ensure that maximum value is obtained in conformity with
procedures adopted by the City Manager.



(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.034  STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.



   Recognizing that city purchases involve the use of public funds, the
following standards shall apply to all purchases made by the city.



   (A)   All vendors, current and prospective, shall be treated
equitably. Procurement decisions shall be based upon price, quality,
delivery, references and recommendation by city consultants, written
standards, previous service and other relevant factors promoting the best
interest of the city.



   (B)   Employees shall be prohibited from furnishing to any
prospective bidder information that would give any vendor an unfair advantage
over other prospective vendors.



   (C)   Procurement records shall be retained by the department head
and the procuring department for public review for five years.



   (D)   The standards of employee conduct and behavior in purchasing
policies and procedures shall be regulated by the city’s code of ethics and
state law.



   (E)   Unless approved by the City Council, individual members of the
City Council shall be prohibited from doing business with the city while
serving as a member of City Council.



(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)




INVESTMENT AND WIRE TRANSFERS




§ 37.045  POLICY.



   The city’s investment policy is to invest public funds to provide the
average or higher market return while maintaining maximum security, meeting
daily cash flow demands and conforming to state law governing the investment
of public funds.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.046  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BANK.  Any federally or state-chartered bank, savings and loan or
credit union which meets the criteria spelled out in this subchapter.



   BANKING SERVICE AGREEMENT.  An agreement between the city and a bank
detailing the services to be provided by the bank.



   BROKER.  A person who brings buyers and sellers together for a
commission paid by the initiator of the transaction or by both sides. A
BROKER does not favor either the buyer or seller. BROKERS are active in money
markets where banks buy and sell money and in interdealer markets.



   COLLATERAL.  Securities, evidence of deposits or other properties that
are pledged to secure repayment of a loan also refers to securities pledged
by a bank to secure deposits of public money.



   COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR).  The city’s official
annual financial report prepared by external auditors. It includes five
combined statements and basic financial statements each individual fund and
account group in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP). The CAFR includes supporting schedules necessary to show compliance
with finance-related legal and contractual provisions, extensive introductory
material and a detailed statistical section.



   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD).  A time deposit with a specific maturity
evidenced by a certificate. Large denomination CDs are typically negotiable.



   DEALER.  A person who acts as a principal in all transactions, buying
and selling for the dealer’s own account.



   DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT.  There are two forms of delivery of
securities: delivery versus payment and delivery versus receipt (also called
free). DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT is delivery of securities with an exchange of
money for the securities. DELIVERY VERSUS RECEIPT is delivery of securities
with an exchange of a signed receipt for the securities.



   DEPOSITORY AGREEMENT.  An agreement between the city and a bank to act
as a depository for the monetary assets of the city.



   DIVERSIFICATION.  The division of investment funds among a variety of
securities offering independent returns.



   LIQUIDITY.  The ability to convert an asset easily and rapidly into
cash without substantial loss of value.



   MARKET VALUE.  The price at which a security is trading and at which
it could presumably be purchased or sold.



   MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT.  A written contract covering all future
transactions regarding repurchase or reverse repurchase agreements which
establishes each party’s rights in the transactions. A MASTER AGREEMENT
will often specify the right of the buyer/lender to liquidate the underlying
securities in case of the default by the seller/borrower.



   MONEY MARKET.  The venue in which short-term debt instruments are
issued and traded.



   PORTFOLIO.  Collection of securities held by an investor.



   PRIMARY DEALER.  A government securities dealer which submits daily
reports of market activity and positions and monthly financial statements to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and is subject to informal oversight.



   PRUDENT PERSON RULE.  An investment standard where the Treasurer may
invest only in a security if it is one that would be bought by a prudent
person of discretion and intelligence who is seeking a reasonable income and
preservation of capital.



   QUALIFIED PUBLIC DEPOSITORY.  A financial institution that does not
claim exemption from the payment of any sales, compensating or ad valorem
taxes under state law, which has segregated for the benefit of the commission
eligible collateral having a value of not less than its maximum liability and
has been approved by the Public Deposit Protection Commission to hold public
deposits.



   RATE OF RETURN.  The quoted rate on the face of the security, based on
its purchase price or its current market price. The RATE OF RETURN may be the
amortized yield to maturity on a bond or the current income return.



   REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP or REPO).  An agreement to sell these
securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed
price on a fixed date.



   RETIREMENT/PENSION FUNDS.  Funds set aside for accepting and paying
out pension benefits.



   SAFEKEEPING.  Services to customers rendered by banks for a fee under
which securities and valuables of all types and description are held in the
bank’s vaults for protection.



   SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.  An agency created by Congress to
protect investors in securities transactions by administering securities
legislation.



   TREASURY NOTE.  An intermediate-term coupon bearing United States
Treasury securities having an initial maturity of from one to ten years.



   TRUST AND AGENCY FUNDS.  Funds held for a group of agencies.



   WIRE TRANSFER AGREEMENT.  Agreement between the city and a depository
that allows depositories to transfer funds between depositories via
electronic means.



   YIELD.



      (1)   The rate of the annual income return on an investment,
expressed as a percentage:



         (a)   Income yield is obtained by dividing the current
dollar income by the current market price for the security; and



         (b)   Net yield or yield to maturity is the current
income yield minus any premium above par or plus any discount from par in the
purchase price.



      (2)   The adjustment is spread from the purchase date to the
date of the bond’s maturity.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.047  SCOPE.



   This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the city
under the control of the city. These funds are accounted for in the city’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR).



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.048  PRUDENCE.



   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital and the probable income to be derived.



   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials
shall be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in managing
an overall portfolio. Investment officers, acting following written
procedures, the investment policy and applicable law and exercising due
diligence, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual
security’s credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from
expectations are reported quickly and appropriate action is taken to control
adverse developments.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.049  OBJECTIVE.



   The primary objectives, in priority order, of the city investment
activities shall be:



   (A)   Safety.  Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a way that
seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To
attain this objective, diversification is required so potential losses on
individual securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder
of the portfolio;



   (B)   Liquidity.  The city’s investment portfolio shall remain
sufficiently liquid to enable the city to meet all operating requirements
that might be reasonably anticipated; and



   (C)   Return on investment.  The city’s investment portfolio
shall designed with the objective of obtaining a market rate of return
throughout budgetary and economic cycles considering the city’s investment
risk constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.050  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   Authority to manage the city’s investment program is derived from
state law. Management responsibility for the investment program is delegated
to the Treasurer, who may establish written procedures for the operation of
the investment program consistent with this subchapter. Procedures should
include reference to safekeeping, repurchase agreements, wire transfer
agreements, collateral/depositor agreements and banking service agreements.
The procedures shall include explicit deletion of authority to persons
responsible for investment transactions. No person may engage in an
investment except as provided under the terms of this policy and the
procedures established by the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be responsible
for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to
regulate the activities of subordinate officials.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.051  ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain
from personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of
the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial
investment decisions. Investment officials shall disclose to the Treasurer
any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct
business within this jurisdiction and they shall further disclose any large
personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the
performance of the city’s portfolio. Officers and investment officials
shall subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the
city’s treasury, particularly concerning the time of purchases and sales.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.052  AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.



   (A)   The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services. In addition, the Treasurer will
also maintain a list of approved security brokers/dealers selected by
creditworthiness who maintain an office in the state. These may include
primary dealers or regional dealers which qualify under the Securities and
Exchange Commission Rule 15C3_1. No public deposit shall be made except in a
qualified public depository as established by state law.



   (B)   All financial institutions and brokers/dealers who want to
become qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the
Treasurer with the following:



      (1)   Audited financial statements;



      (2)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers
certification; and



      (3)   Proof of state registration.



   (C)   The Treasurer will conduct an annual review of the financial
condition and registrations of qualified bidders.



   (D)   A current audited financial statement is required to be on
file for each bank and broker/dealer in which the city invests.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.053  AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.



   The city is empowered by state law to invest in certain types of
securities, and make only those approved investments permitted by state law,
(Public Act 7 of 1967, being M.L.C.A. §§ 124.501 through 124.512, Public
Act 367 of 1982, being M.C.L.A. §§ 129.111 through 129.118 and Public Act
121 of 1985, being M.C.L.A. §§ 129.141 through 129.150).



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.054  INVESTMENT BIDDING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Investments will be made with banks located in or within close
proximity to the city.



   (B)   Investments, whenever possible, will be competitively bid with
all participating banks.



   (C)   Offering reports will be issued to each eligible bank from the
Treasurer’s office. The reports will include the amount of investment,
desired date of maturity, and the time and date that bids are due.



   (D)   Banks may place their bid either by fax to a specified member
or in writing, up to the cutoff time and date for bids. Both the interest
rate and the net amount of interest to be paid must be submitted.



   (E)   Deposits exceeding $100,000 per bank shall be collateralized
with securities pledged at 105% of the amount exceeding $100,000. United
States government securities or repurchase agreements tied to securities of
the United States government are considered an appropriate pledge.



   (F)   Banks which wish to be eligible to receive investments must
submit copies of their quarterly consolidated reports of condition and income
to the City Treasurer on a regular and timely basis.



   (G)   Investments will be awarded to the highest eligible bidder.



   (H)   Funds will be wire transferred to the receiving financial
institution before 2:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time,
or as soon as possible after the bidding has been closed.



   (I)   Wire transfer charges will not be a billable item and should
be part of the net bid amount.



   (J)   Banks which participate in the bidding process for a
particular investment may receive, upon request, a copy of the worksheet
showing all bids received.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.055  COLLATERALIZATION.



   (A)   Collateralization will be required on two types of
investments: certificates of deposit and repurchase (and reverse) agreements.
To anticipate market changes and provide a level of security for all funds,
the collateralization level will be no less than 105% of market value of
principal and accrued interest.



   (B)   The city chooses to limit collateral to the approved
collateral list provided in the Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated.



   (C)   Collateral will always be held by an independent third party
with which the entity has a current custodial agreement. A clearly marked
evidence of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the city and
retained.



   (D)   The right of collateral substitution is permitted.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.056  SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.



   (A)   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase
agreements, entered into by the city shall be conducted on the deliver versus
payment (DVP) basis.



   (B)   Securities will be held by a third party custodian by the
Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.057  DIVERSIFICATION.



   The city will diversify its investments by security type and
institution. Except for United States Treasury securities and authorized
pools, no more than 50% of the city’s total investment portfolio will be
invested in a single security type or with a single financial institution.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.058  MAXIMUM MATURITIES.



   (A)   To the extent possible, the city will attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than one year from the date of purchase. However, the city may
collateralize repurchase agreements using longer dated investments not to
exceed seven years to maturity.



   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding five
years if the maturities of the investments are made to coincide as nearly as
practicable with the expected use of the funds.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.059  INTERNAL CONTROL.



   The Treasurer shall establish an annual process of independent review
by an external auditor. This review will provide internal control by assuring
compliance with policies and procedures



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.060  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The investment portfolio will be designed to obtain a market average
rate of return during budgetary and economic cycles, considering the city’s
investment risk constraints and cash flow needs.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.061  MARKET YIELD (BENCHMARK).



   (A)   The city’s investment strategy is active.



   (B)   Given this strategy, the basis used by the Treasurer to decide
whether market yields are being achieved shall be the 90-day national average
CD as published in newspapers of national circulation.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 37.062  REPORTING.



   The Treasurer is charged with the responsibility of including a market
report on the investment activity and returns in the city’s Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report.



(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)



CHAPTER 38:  COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT



Section



   38.001   Short title



   38.002   Purpose and intent



   38.003   Definitions



   38.004   Bias-based provision of police and other city services, on
the basis of appearance, ethnicity, gender, immigration status, manner of
dress, national origin, physical characteristics, race, religious beliefs or
sexual orientation prohibited; exception



   38.005   Solicitation of immigration status by public servants and
police officers prohibited; exceptions



   38.006   Solicitation of immigration status by public servants
prohibited; exceptions



   38.007   Implementation of chapter



 



   38.999   Penalty



§ 38.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be cited as the Community Participation In Local
Government and Local Law Enforcement Chapter.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 38.002  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the policy of the city to respect the rights of and provide equal
services to all persons regardless of appearance, ethnicity, gender,
immigration status, manner of dress, national origin, physical
characteristic, race, religious beliefs or sexual orientation; to ensure the
enforcement of rights under the United States Constitution, including due
process and equal protection; to promote community safety; to encourage
victims of crime and witnesses of crime to cooperate with law enforcement
authority without regard to immigration status or sexual orientation; to
prevent bias-based policing; and to promote the cooperation of all
individuals, regardless of their immutable characteristics, with our City
Police Department and city government. In order to permit members of
immigrant communities to access services, including, but not limited to law
enforcement services, that are provided by the city to which they are
entitled; and to ensure that city public servants are acting consistently
with federal law regarding local governments cooperating with federal
immigration authorities, the city enacts this chapter as an effective way to
guide city public servants and police officers in adhering to rights under
the United States Constitution, including, but not limited to, due process
and equal protection and under federal law, while protecting the safety and
health of all members of the community.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 38.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLIGHT VIOLATION.  Any unlawful act, or omission or failure to act,
which is designated by this code as a blight violation pursuant to § 41(2)
of the State Home Rule Cities Act, being M.C.L.A. § 117.4(2).



   CITY.  The City of Hamtramck.



   CIVIL INFRACTION.  An act or omission that is prohibited by the code
enacted by the city, which is not a crime as defined in §  5 of the State
Penal Code, being M.C.L.A. § 750.5, and for which civil sanctions may be
ordered.



   CRIMINAL OFFENSE.  A felony or misdemeanor as set forth in federal or
state law of city ordinance, but does not mean a blight violation or civil
infraction.



   PERSON.  Any individual including, but not limited to, victims and
witnesses of crimes.



   POLICE OFFICER.  A sworn member or reserve member of the Police
Department or any person acting upon the direction or any of these members of
the Police Department.



   PUBLIC SERVANT.  The City Manager, Mayor, members of the City Council,
the City Clerk, any member of a city agency, board, commission or other
voting body that is established by the City Charter and any appointee, any
employee or any individual who provides services to the city within or
outside of its offices or facilities pursuant to a personal services contract;



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 38.004  BIAS-BASED PROVISION OF POLICE AND OTHER CITY SERVICES, ON THE
BASIS OF APPEARANCE, ETHNICITY, GENDER, IMMIGRATION STATUS, MANNER OF DRESS,
NATIONAL ORIGIN, PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS, RACE, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS OR SEXUAL
ORIENTATION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   Public servants and police officers shall not exercise differential
treatment of individuals in rendering police and other city services based on
a person’s appearance, ethnicity, gender, immigration status, manner of
dress, national origin, physical characteristics, race, religious beliefs or
sexual orientation. A public servant, who is a police officer, shall not base
reasonable suspicion for an investigative detention, probable cause for an
arrest or any other police action, solely on a person’s appearance,
ethnicity, gender, immigration status, manner of dress, national origin,
physical characteristic, race, religious beliefs or sexual orientation. A
public servant, who is a police officer, may take into account the reported
appearance, gender, ethnicity and immigration status, manner of dress,
national origin, physical characteristics, race, religious beliefs or sexual
orientation for the purpose of identifying a described individual.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)  Penalty, see § 38.999



§ 38.005  SOLICITATION OF IMMIGRATION STATUS BY PUBLIC SERVANTS AND POLICE
OFFICERS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   Public servants and police officers:



   (A)   Shall not solicit information concerning immigration status
for the purpose of ascertaining a person’s compliance with federal
immigration law;



   (B)   Shall not solicit information concerning immigration status
from a person who is  seeking police and other city services, or is a victim
or is a witness; and/or



   (C)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) above  of this section, public servants, who are police officers,
are expressly permitted to engage in the following activities, which shall
not constitute a violation of this chapter:



      (1)   Solicit information concerning immigration status when
performing public safety functions while assisting federal law enforcement in
the investigation of a criminal offence under the United States Code or other
federal law; and/or



      (2)   Solicit information concerning immigration status from
the subject of a criminal offense or when processing an arrested person.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)  Penalty, see § 38.999



§ 38.006  SOLICITATION OF IMMIGRATION STATUS BY PUBLIC SERVANTS PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A public servant is prohibited from inquiring into the
immigration status of any person or engaging in activities designed to
ascertain the immigration status of any person, while acting within the scope
of his or her authority or employment, as a public servant.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in division (A)
above of this section, public servants are expressly permitted to engage in
the following activities, which shall not constitute a violation of this
chapter:



      (1)   Solicit information concerning immigration status where
specifically required by a federal, state or city law or program as a
condition of eligibility for the service sought;



      (2)   Solicit information concerning immigration status for
the purpose of completing I-9 Forms, and when relevant, in making hiring and
payroll withholding decisions, including, but not limited to, completing I-9
Forms, questioning a person to complete the I-9 Form, obtaining documents
that support the I-9 Form, and allowing federal authorities to audit an I-9
Form in accordance with law;



      (3)   Solicit information concerning immigration status for a
subpoena issued in a criminal proceeding, civil litigation or an
administrative proceeding for the production of city documents or for
testimony of a public servant, including where related to immigration issues
or other security issues; or



      (4)   Solicitation of information concerning immigration
status by a public servant, who is a police officer, as set forth in §
38.005.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)  Penalty, see § 38.999



§ 38.007  IMPLEMENTATION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall be implemented by the City Manager or his or her
designee though ongoing training and educational programs to inform public
servants regarding its prohibitions and requirements.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 38.999  PENALTY.



   People may file a formal complaint with the city if they have
information that they believe, in good faith, establishes a violation of this
chapter. Any complaint must be in writing, and filed with the City Manager or
his or her designee. The complaint may be filed by mail or electronic mail,
hand delivered, through an elected official or by a third party. The
complaint statement need not be in English, and in the case of complaints not
filed in English, the city shall cause the complaint to be translated into
English at no expense to the complainant. The City Manager shall investigate
all complaints and either affirm or deny the complaint within ten working
days of the receipt of the complaint, in writing and report the disposition
to City Council by or before the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting. If the complaint is denied, the City Manager shall explain, in
detail, how the investigation was conducted and why the complaint was
denied.  If the complaint is affirmed, appropriate disciplinary action shall
be taken against the employee or official for violation of city policy. Any
disciplinary action shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of
the City Charter and other laws, city personnel rules, civil service rules,
union contracts or other departmental agency rules and regulations and may
include discipline up to and including discharge from public service. A copy
of the denial or affirmation shall be mailed to the complainant at the
address provided by the complainant in their written complaint. In addition,
all employees shall receive a copy of this chapter and shall sign a statement
acknowledging the receipt of the copy with in 30 days of the effective date
of this chapter or at the time of hire. The city shall, on an on going and
annual basis, provide diversity training for all employees and officials. No
employee and official shall be exempt, and the City Manager shall maintain a
record of all training including the list of attendees at the training
sessions.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)



CHAPTER 39:  ETHICS



Section



   39.001   Title



   39.002   Intent and purpose



   39.003   Definitions



   39.004   Fair and equal treatment



   39.005   Prohibited conduct



   39.006   Matter regarding disclosure of conflicts of interest,
actual and potential



   39.007   Public disclosure, contents



   39.008   Disclosure of campaign contributions



   39.009   Duties of Clerk



   39.010   Request for opinion from the City Attorney



   39.011   Delivery of copies of Ethics Code to public servants



   39.012   Complaint procedure



   39.013   Where to seek review



 



   39.999   Penalty



§ 39.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Ethics Chapter of the city.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.002  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to uphold, promote and demand the
highest standards of ethics from all its employees and officials, whether
elected, appointed or hired. City officers and employees (public servants)
shall maintain the highest standards of personal integrity, truthfulness,
honesty and fairness in carrying out their public duties; avoid any
improprieties in their roles as public servants including the appearance of
impropriety; and never use their city position or powers for improper
personal gain.



   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that a public
servant, regardless of whether specifically prohibited by this chapter, shall
avoid any action, which might result in or create the appearance of:



      (1)   Using public office or employment for private gain
personal or monetary;



      (2)   Giving improper preferential treatment to any person or
organization;



      (3)   Impeding government efficiency or economy;



      (4)   A lack of independence or impartiality of action;



      (5)   Making a government decision outside of official
channels; or



      (6)   Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the
integrity of the city.



   (C)   It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way limit the
right or ability of any public servant to exercise his or her discretion in
making legitimate policy decisions which are within their discretion so long
as the action does not provide a special benefit to that person, relieve the
public servant of a particular duty, or treat that person differently than
other similarly situated city residents.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  A business entity includes any corporation, partnership,
sole proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization,
self-employed individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership,
trust or any legal entity organized for profit.



   CITY.  The City of Hamtramck, a Michigan municipal corporation.



   COMPENSATION.  Payment in any form for real or personal property or
services of any kind.



   ELECTED OFFICER.  Any person who is elected at a general or special
election to any public office of the city and any person appointed to fill a
vacancy in any office. 



   INTEREST.  Any right, title or share in something, either personal,
financial, legal or equitable, which is owned, held or controlled, in whole
or in part, directly or indirectly, by a public servant.



   PUBLIC SERVANT.  Every individual appointed, hired or otherwise
selected to an office, position, committee, board, task force or similar
multi-member body with the city, or any subdivision thereof, whether the
individual is paid or unpaid and any person elected or appointed to any
public body of the city. PUBLIC SERVANT includes elected officer.



   PUBLIC BODY.  The City Council, and any board, authority, commission,
committee, department, office or other agency of the city, and including the
city.



   QUESTION THE EMPLOYMENT STATUS.  Imply, infer, suggest or otherwise
state that an employee should be dismissed from employment with the city.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.004  FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT.



   No public servant shall request, use or permit the use of any
consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is the general
practice to grant or make available to the public at large. All public
servants shall treat all citizens of the city with courtesy, impartiality,
fairness and equality under the law. In addition, no elected official may
question the employment status of any employee under the control of the City
Manager unless that employee’s contract or appointment is before the City
Council and a resolution approving the action has been moved and seconded.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.005  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   The following shall constitute violations of this chapter.



   (A)   General prohibition against conflict of interest.  In order
to avoid impropriety, or an appearance of conflict of interest, no current
public servant should be involved in any activity that might be seen as
conflicting with the conduct of official city business or as adverse to the
interests of the city. Even the appearance of the following prohibited
conduct alone may be sufficient to constitute a violation of this ethics
chapter. 



   (B)   Disclosure of confidential information and/or benefitting from
confidential information.  No public servant shall disclose or use any
confidential, privileged or proprietary information gained by reason of his
or her position for a purpose which is for other than a city purpose;
provided, that nothing shall prohibit the disclosure or use of information
which is a matter of public knowledge, or which is available to the public on
request. For purposes of this division, the term CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
shall mean any information, oral or written, which comes to the attention of,
or is available to, the public servants only because of his or her position
with the city, and is not a matter of public record. 



   (C)   Improper use of city personnel and property.  No public
servant shall employ or use any person under his or her official control or
direction for the personal benefit, gain or profit of the public servant or
other. No public servant shall use city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials,
money or property for personal or private convenience or personal gain.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of city equipment or motor vehicles by
public servants in accordance with written policies established by the City
Council, City Manager or city department head concerned, nor shall this
chapter be deemed to prohibit private use of surplus city property legally
disposed of by the city or its departments in compliance with established
procedures.



   (D)   Beneficial interest in business transaction or participation
in a contract.  No public servant shall participate or benefit from
(monetarily or personally) in his or her capacity as a public servant in the
making of a contract in which he or she has a financial interest, direct or
indirect, or perform in regard to a contract some function which requires the
exercise of discretion on behalf of the city. No public servant shall
participate in contracts, loans, grants, rate-fixing or issuing permits
involving a business in which he or she has a substantial interest; however
this provision shall not apply in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Contracting with the city where:



         (a)   The contract is awarded pursuant to sealed bids;



         (b)   The public servant is not involved directly or
indirectly or otherwise refrains from participation in the decision on the
award of the contract; and



         (c)   The City Council, after reviewing the
circumstances, determines the award of the contract would be in the best
interest of the city.



      (2)   Where the interest of the public servant in the business
involves the holding of less than 1% of the securities in a publicly traded
business or less than 5% of privately or closely held business and where the
public servant will not have any involvement in the transaction on behalf of
the contracting business.



   (E)   Engaging in certain private employment.  No city employee or
public servant shall engage in or accept private employment or render
services for, any private interest when the employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to
impair independence or judgment or action in the performance of official
duties. 



   (F)   Acceptance or solicitation of compensation, gifts, favors,
rewards or gratuity.  No public servant may, directly or indirectly, give or
receive, or agree to give or receive, any compensation, gift, favor, reward,
or gratuity for a matter connected with or related to the public servant’s
services with the city which would tend to influence the manner in which the
public servant performs his or her official duties, except this prohibition
shall not apply to:



      (1)   Attendance of a public servant at a hosted meal when
provided in conjunction with a meeting directly related to the conduct of
city business or where official attendance by the city official as a city
representative is required or in the best interest of the city;



      (2)   An award publicly presented in recognition of public
service presented to the public servant; and



      (3)   Any gift valued at $100 or less, which cannot reasonably
be presumed to influence the judgment of the public servant. 



   (G)   Improper use of position.  No public servant shall knowingly
use his or her office or position to secure personal benefit, gain or profit,
or use his or her position to secure special privileges or exceptions for
himself, herself, or for the benefit, gain or profits of any other persons.
No public servant shall represent his or her individual opinions as those of
the city.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.006  MATTER REGARDING DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, ACTUAL AND
POTENTIAL.



   The following disclosure requirements are established to avoid both
actual and potential conflict between the private self-interests and the
public interest of public servants.



   (A)   Self interest.  No public servant, either on his or her
behalf or on behalf of any other person, shall have an interest in any
business transaction with any public body of the city, unless the person
shall first make full public disclosure of the nature of the interest.



   (B)   Disclosure and disqualification.  Whenever the performance of
official duties shall require a public servant to deliberate and vote on any
matter involving his or her financial or personal interest, that person shall
publicly disclose the nature and extent of the interest and is disqualified
from participating in the deliberations and voting on the matter.



   (C)   Dual employment.  No public servant shall engage in
employment with, or render services for, any person or entity, which has
business transactions with any public body of the city, without first making
full public disclosure of the nature and extent of the employment or services.



   (D)   Dual representation.  A public servant shall make full public
disclosure of business involving the city when attempting to use his or her
official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for self or
others.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.007  PUBLIC DISCLOSURE, CONTENTS.



   Whenever a public disclosure is required by this chapter, it may be
made orally on the record at a meeting of the public body involved, or in a
writing filed with the Clerk, in both of which cases it shall be made a part
of the record of a regular City Council meeting, and in either event shall
include:



   (A)   The identity of all persons involved in the interest; and



   (B)   The source and amount of income derived from the interest that
may be considered as resulting from employment, investment or gift. The
person required to file a disclosure statement in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter must verify, in writing, under penalty of perjury,
the information in the statement is true and complete as far as he or she
knows.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.008  DISCLOSURE OF CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Within 15 days after each municipal election, every elected
officer, and candidate for elected office, shall file a completed disclosure
form with the City Clerk. All elected officers of the city shall file,
annually within ten days of the filing deadline established by the state, a
report with the City Clerk listing all contributions, other receipts or
in-kind contributions received in any calendar year by the officer’s
candidate committee.  If the candidate or elected officers or candidate for
office has not received any contributions, other receipts or in-kind
contribution for the period covered under any period in which a report is
required by this chapter, the candidate or elected officer shall file a
sworn, notarized statement within ten days of the filing deadline established
by the state, in a form determined by the Clerk, reflecting this fact. The
Clerk shall make all candidates for elected office in the city aware of this
provision at the time they file for candidacy. All elected officers of the
city shall be made aware of this provision within five days of assuming their
respective office. The form for reporting contributions shall consist of the
forms developed by the State Secretary of State for reporting campaign
contributions or their successors. At the time of adoption of this chapter,
those forms are:



      (1)   Candidate Itemized Contributions Schedule 1A;



      (2)   Candidate Other Receipts Schedule 1A-1; and



      (3)   Candidate In-Kind Contributions Schedule 1-IK.



   (B)   Failure to comply with this section of the chapter may result
in a penalty established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-1, passed 3-24-2009) 
Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.009  DUTIES OF CLERK.



   The Clerk shall examine all disclosure statements filed pursuant to
this chapter and report irregularities immediately to the person filing the
statement to the City Manager and the City Attorney. Acceptance of a
statement by the Clerk shall not constitute approval of the statement. The
Clerk shall maintain a current list of all disclosure statements required to
be available for public disclosure. The Clerk shall preserve all disclosure
statements for a period of at least three years after the date on which they
are filed. The Clerk shall make available to the public all statements that
are required to be available for inspection during regular business hours.
The Clerk shall also accept all complaint alleging violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.010  REQUEST FOR OPINION FROM THE CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Any elected official may request the City Attorney provide an
advisory opinion interpreting the effect or application of this chapter
generally, or on questions directly relating to the propriety of their
conduct in a particular situation.



   (B)   Any other public servant may request, with the approval of the
City Manager, that the City Attorney provide an advisory opinion interpreting
the effect or application of this chapter generally, or on questions directly
relating to the propriety of their conduct in a particular situation.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.011  DELIVERY OF COPIES OF ETHICS CODE TO PUBLIC SERVANTS.



   The Clerk shall deliver a copy of this chapter to each public servant
as soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, and to each new
public servant at the time of employment or taking office. The Clerk shall
also request that each person sign and return an acknowledgment of receipt of
a copy of this chapter.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.012  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any citizen of the city may submit a compliant in writing and
under oath, alleging that one or more public servants have violated or may
have violated any provision of this chapter within one month of the alleged
violation.



   (B)   The complaint must be signed by the complainant and notarized,
and must contain the following:



      (1)   The complainant’s legal name and current mailing
address;



      (2)   The name or names of any public servants who committed
or may have committed the alleged violation;



      (3)   A summary of the facts giving rise to the complaint;



      (4)   Some explanation of why those facts constitute or may
constitute a violation of the ethics chapter; and



      (5)   Any one filing a false complaint will be subject to the
penalty(s) for perjury.



   (C)   The complaints must be filed with the City Clerk. Upon
receipt, the Clerk shall promptly provide a copy of the complaint to the
public servant named therein and to the City Attorney.



   (D)   The City Attorney will evaluate the complaint, applying the
law of the standards of conduct to the facts alleged in the complaint.



   (E)   Within 14 days from receipt of the complaint, the City
Attorney shall:



      (1)   Issue a report including a copy of the complaint,
concluding whether facts alleged in the complaint, if true, would rise to a
violation of this chapter, and require the public servant named in the
complaint issue a formal statement, in writing and addressed to the City
Attorney, outlining his or her position.



      (2)   The City Attorney shall determine whether the public
servant named in the complaint did commit a violation of the ethics chapter
and file a formal complaint with the Thirty-First District Court; or



      (3)   Dismiss the complaint.



   (F)   The City Attorney shall promptly provide a formal complaint or
a dismissal of the complaint to the appropriate city department. 



   (G)   If a complaint is filed against the City Attorney and any of
his or her designees, the City Council shall designate a neutral body to
investigate the complaint and if necessary prosecute the violation.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.013  WHERE TO SEEK REVIEW.



   (A)   Civil penalty.  If ordered to pay a civil penalty, an appeal
may be taken in the form of a trial de novo in the District Court, which
shall hear the case in accordance with the Civil Rules for Courts of Limited
Jurisdiction (CRLJ) and applicable local rules of the District Court.  This
appeal may be taken by filing in the District Court, a notice of appeal
within 14 days of the date of the final written order. The person filing the
appeal shall also, within 14 days, serve a copy of the notice of appeal on
the person who issued the final written order and/or the City Attorney, or
his or her designee, and file acknowledgment or affidavit of service in the
District Court. 



   (B)   Discipline or removal.  If a public servant is disciplined or
removed from office, then the person disciplined or removed from office may
seek whatever remedies exist at law or equity.



   (C)   Termination of contracts.  If termination of contract(s) is
ordered, the person whose contract(s) was/were terminated may seek whatever
remedies exist at law or in equity.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



§ 39.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this
chapter, the City Attorney is empowered to take any one or more of the
following actions:



      (1)   Discipline up to and including termination or removal
from any position whether paid or unpaid, excluding elected positions, only
after notice and hearing as provided by law; and/or



      (2)   Termination or invalidation of contract(s) entered into
in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Upon a finding of a violation of the applicable provisions of
this chapter, the District Court is empowered to assess the following
penalties:



      (1)   Any public servant who violated a provision of this
chapter may be subject to fine of up to $500 for each violation;



      (2)   Any public servant who fails to make any disclosure
required by § 39.008 may be fined $10 per day, up to a maximum of $500, from
the first day the disclosure is due until the disclosure is filed; and



      (3)   Any public servant who is found to have violated a
provision(s) of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of misconduct.



   (C)   The various penalties provided under this division are
cumulative to other remedies provided under state law or under the Charter
and ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)



CHAPTER 40: MEDICAL SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT



Section



   40.01   Fees



   40.02   Responsibility for payment



§ 40.01  FEES.



   (A)   The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any person
utilizing the services of an emergency vehicle owned, operated or requested
by the city and any of its departments for purposes of transporting that
person to a facility for emergency medical treatment:



      (1)   Basic ambulance service: $425;



      (2)   Advance life support system (1): $600;



      (3)   Advance life support system (2): $725;



      (4)   Reimbursement for mileage: $10.50/mile;



      (5)   Reimbursement to city for extrication equipment: $500;



      (6)   Reimbursement to city for oxygen treatment: $50.



   (B)   City Council shall review these fees as part of the city's
annual budget process set forth in the Uniform Budget and Accounting Act and
may make such changes to the above charges by resolution in instances where
the federal or state government increases Medicare/Medicaid reimbursement
rates for the above services.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 10-25-2011)



§ 40.02  RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.



   Any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city,
including but not limited to: individuals who are i) under arrest, ii)
incarcerated, iii) imprisoned, iv) escaped from confinement, v) under
supervised release, vi) on medical furlough, vii) residing in a mental health
facility or halfway house, viii) living under home detention, ix) or confined
completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or rule; shall be
solely responsible for the payment of any medical services rendered to, and
received by, that person during the course of his or her confinement with the
city, or at the city's or the court's direction, including without
limitation, transportation to and from a medical treatment facility, and any
treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not
requested by the prisoner; and shall be required to reimburse the city, in
full for any fees or charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly
to medical facility or practitioner by the prisoner or his or her insurance
carrier.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 10-25-2011)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER



      51.   WATER



      52.   WASTEWATER



      53.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      54.   TREES AND SHRUBS



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER



Section



Garbage, Refuse and Litter



   50.001   Short title



   50.002   Purpose and intent



   50.003   Definitions



   50.004   Responsibility of owner



   50.005   Responsibilities of city



   50.006   Collection charges



   50.007   Collection rules



   50.008   Preparation for collection



   50.009   Mechanical container



   50.010   Disposal of extraordinary refuse



   50.011   Prohibitions



   50.012   Rejection of waste



   50.013   Litter



   50.014   Nuisance declaration



   50.015   Enforcement



Bulk Refuse Containers on Public Rights-of-Way



   50.030   Generally



   50.031   Definitions



   50.032   Permit required



   50.033   Application



   50.034   Fees



   50.035   Regulations



 



   50.999   Penalty



GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER



§ 50.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter may be cited as the Refuse and Litter Subchapter.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.002  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The City Council intends that this subchapter be liberally
construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of
storing, collecting and disposing of waste generated or transported within
the city in an effort to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   All persons shall dispose of their residential and commercial
refuse, segregate those items as required and prepare the items for proper
collection and disposal as required by this subchapter or the rules.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.003  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Generally.SHALL is always mandatory. Masculine forms shall
include the feminine. Singular forms shall include the plural.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   BULK REFUSE CONTAINER. Includes containers, roll-off dumpsters, boxes,
shipping containers and other containers used to hold things for transport or
storage holding over eight cubic yards, including licensed vehicles or
trailers parked in the right-of-way overnight.



   CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan.



   CODE OFFICIAL. Any person authorized to enforce this subchapter or his
or her designee.



   COMMERCIAL REFUSE. A solid waste material resulting from the rejected,
unwanted, discarded or abandoned material generated by commercial
establishments and industrial establishments and uses, such as office
buildings, personal service establishments, technical and scientific research
facilities, professional service offices, clinics, schools and churches. The
definition includes REFUSE.



   CONSTRUCTION REFUSE. All unwanted, rejected, discarded, abandoned or
surplus materials resulting from the alteration, repair, demolition or
construction of buildings or structures.



   GARBAGE. Decomposable animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance defined as a hazardous substance or
hazardous waste under any federal or state law or regulation.



   LITTER. All waste, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or
other foreign substance of every kind and description.



   MECHANICAL CONTAINER. Any dumpster or other refuse container with a
capacity of two cubic yards or greater used to store refuse which is capable
of being emptied by mechanical means; this includes gondola-type containers.



   PERSON. Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations;
or any officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of person
representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself,
herself or for any other person under either personal appointment or pursuant
to law.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways, gutters, sewers and any and all public parks, squares,
spaces, grounds, buildings and city-owned real property.



   REFUSE. All decomposable and non-decomposable solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish and ashes.



   RUBBISH. Non-decomposable solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.



   RULES. The policies and procedures established by the city in
accordance with this subchapter.



   SPECIAL COLLECTION. Any collection of waste at a time other than the
regularly scheduled once per week collection, or of a volume or quantity of
waste exceeding the limitations of this subchapter whether requested by an
owner or occupant or done by the city to eliminate a violation of a city
ordinance.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WASTE. Refuse or yard waste.



   YARD WASTE. Residential grass clippings, leaves, weeds, twigs,
prunings, shrub clippings, garden waste, old potting soil and dirt incidental
to minor yard work, Halloween pumpkins, brush, branches, tree trimmings,
Christmas trees and small shrubs and bushes with dirt removed from root
systems. Christmas trees shall not be considered yard waste during the months
of December and January.



   YARD WASTE COLLECTION SEASON. A period each year scheduled by the city
during which a separate yard waste collection service is provided throughout
the city.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.004  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   (A)   If the city has not provided a refuse container for a
semi-automated system, the property owner shall be responsible for providing
the proper amount of suitable watertight containers placed and maintained in
the manner that meets the rules.



   (B)   Stationary receptacles, large steel drums, paint pails,
cardboard barrels, cardboard boxes, paper bags and other containers of a like
nature are not approved receptacles and collection may not be made by the
city when the receptacles are used.



   (C)   A receptacle that is broken or otherwise fails to meet the
requirements of this subchapter may be deemed to be rubbish and may be
collected as that by the city without notice to the users.



   (D)   All containers shall be kept clean and disinfected to minimize
any offensive odor.



   (E)   The property owner, through the city, may purchase additional
refuse containers that exceed the amount permitted by the city. The owner
shall then be responsible for paying the monthly fee for the additional
collection. The city shall place the additional collection charge on the
water bill or tax bill.



   (F)   The property owner, through the city, shall purchase
additional refuse containers to replace damaged or stolen containers. The
city shall issue replacement containers and shall place the charge on the
water bill or tax bill if the container was not paid in advance of delivery
of the container.



   (G)   The property owner shall be responsible for the disposal of
all waste generated from his or her property or any waste on his or her
property that is in violation of this subchapter.



   (H)   The owner or occupant of property abutting public property
shall be presumed to have generated any waste placed for collection on public
property. For purposes of determining ownership of property, the city shall
presume that the person whose name appears on the most recent tax assessment
roll of the city is the owner of the property. The property owner shall be
responsible for advising the City Assessor of any changes in ownership of
property.



   (I)   A property owner may create or permit the creation of a
compost pile. Compost piles may include a combination of yard and garden
waste, such as weeds, branches, bark, grass clippings, leaves, stalks, stems,
brush, vines, wood ashes, woods chips, coffee grounds, tea leaves, shredded
raw fruit, vegetable waste, eggshells and nutshells. Any other items in a
compost pile shall be prohibited. Compost piles shall not exceed 36 square
feet. Compost piles shall be maintained in a manner that does not emit
offensive odors, impair the health, comfort or welfare of the people, or
create a animal or rodent harborage.



   (J)   The property owner shall be responsible for all additional
charges that may be incurred for collecting refuse or abating nuisances
related to his or her property.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.005  RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY.



   (A)   The city shall provide for each dwelling unit and commercial
establishment one refuse container to be used for a semi-automated collection
system, provided that the amount of refuse generated does not exceed the
rules and that the number of containers does not exceed three for a
multi-family dwelling.



   (B)   All waste accumulated in the city shall be collected by and
disposed of by the city or a city-designated or licensed contractor, provided
that the waste is properly prepared and stored in accordance with the rules.
Waste that is not properly prepared and stored in accordance with the rules
shall be collected only at additional expense to the property owner. This
subchapter shall not prohibit or deny the actual producers of waste, or the
owners of premises upon which waste has accumulated, from personally or
contracting for the collecting, conveying and disposing of the waste,
provided the producers or owners comply with the provisions of this
subchapter and the rules.



   (C)   The city shall permit the transportation of waste through the
city provided the vehicles or the containers used to transport the waste do
not permit the escape of the waste, give off offensive or unwholesome smells,
or shall not otherwise constitute a nuisance. Transportation of garbage or
other decomposable refuse shall be in watertight containers.



   (D)   Any company transporting waste through the city shall obtain a
general business license from the City Clerk. Vehicles used for collection
and transportation of waste within or through the city shall be plainly
marked, watertight, covered and conform to all laws regulating axle and load
limitations. The city may designate the route to be taken by trucks or
haulers of waste through the city and to a disposal site.



   (E)   The city shall establish a limit of the amount of refuse
regularly collected from nonresidential sources and may require the property
owner to contract for private disposal if the limit is regularly exceeded.
The property owner shall provide evidence, as determined by the city, of
compliance with this order.



   (F)   The city may not collect waste placed in receptacles that
exceeds the weight limitations, is placed outside of the receptacles unless
the refuse is considered a bulky item or otherwise does not conform to the
provisions of this subchapter or the rules.



   (G)   The city shall not be responsible for collection of frozen
waste adhering to the receptacle or for any resulting damage to receptacles.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.006  COLLECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   The City Council shall establish a fee schedule to provide for
services that are extraordinary or special by passing along the cost of the
services that are provided by a contractor with a 20% administrative fee.



   (B)   All statements for charges authorized by this subchapter shall
be rendered monthly or may be included in the water billing, if that is the
responsibility of the property owner, at the discretion of the City Treasurer.



   (C)   All charges for services rendered pursuant to this subchapter
are hereby made a lien on all premises served thereby. Whenever any charge
shall be delinquent for three months, the City Treasurer shall certify the
delinquency to the City Assessor and the charges shall be entered upon the
next tax roll as a charge against the premises, and shall be collected and
the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as special assessments against
the premises.



   (D)   When, in the opinion of the code official a prohibited
accumulation of refuse is of the gravity as to constitute a menace to public
health, safety or welfare, the official may, with at least 24 hours' notice
to the owner of the property on which the accumulation exists, order the
removal of the accumulation at the expense of the property owner. The city
shall collect the expense in accordance with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.007  COLLECTION RULES.



   (A)   All yards, alleys, streets, vacant lots or other places in the
city shall be kept free from garbage, bulky waste and rubbish. Garbage, bulky
waste and rubbish shall be deposited in an appropriate container or placed
for collection as set out in this chapter.



   (B)   The owner or occupants of any dwelling, house, building or
structure of any kind or description whatsoever shall provide a covered,
watertight container with handles, not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, for
receipt of garbage and rubbish, but not compostables, or shall have approved
containers compatible with the city-authorized mechanical handling equipment.
The property street number shall be placed on each container.



   (C)   For composting purposes, compostables will not be collected by
the city from any premises unless it is placed in a container approved by the
Director of the Department of Public Services or his designee. Compostables
will be collected according to the schedule established by the Department of
Public Services.



   (D) The city will not collect bulky waste or containers holding
garbage, bulky waste, rubbish or compostables which weigh over 50 pounds.



   (E)   All containers shall be placed in the approved pick-up
location for collection at the proper time. No containers, rubbish, bulky
waste or other materials to be disposed of shall be placed in any public
street, alley or other public place, or in front or side yard, earlier than
6:00 p.m. the day before the regular collection day, and said containers
shall be removed from said places not later than 9:00 p.m. on the collection
day.  At no time will the use of paper or plastic bags be permitted as trash
containers, except to hold newspapers as set out in division (G). Except at
the collection times noted above no container shall be placed or stored on
public property.



   (F)   Containers and bulky waste on collection day shall be placed
between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the alley, unless otherwise
authorized. If the city provides recycling services, except for compostables,
the use of plastic containers will be permitted, provided, that tops of same
are secured to prevent garbage, paper or debris from spilling or otherwise
escaping the confines of such containers.



   (G)   Stacks of newspapers or boxes may be placed at the curb
without being in a container if said newspapers or boxes are placed in paper
bags.



   (H)   Small tree limbs, two inches and less in diameter, shall be
collected only if they have been cut into lengths not to exceed three feet in
length and tied securely into bundles not to exceed three feet in girth.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.008  PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   Regulation of the time, manner and place of collection and the
time for which receptacles must be placed out for collections and returned to
storage after collections shall be subject to the rules. The code official
shall be authorized to grant certain exemptions from this section in
accordance with the rules.



   (B)   During the week while waste is being stored and accumulated
for ultimate disposal, all waste shall be stored inside of a building.
However, waste may be stored outside of a building in an approved receptacle
under the rules. Outside storage of waste in any front or side yard as
defined by the zoning code is prohibited.



   (C)   All refuse stored in an approved receptacle shall be placed in
a plastic garbage bag meeting the criteria established by the rules.



   (D)   All yard waste shall be stored in an approved receptacle. Yard
waste shall be prepared and placed for collection in accordance with the
schedule adopted by the city.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.009  MECHANICAL CONTAINER.



   (A)   Commercial or industrial establishments and churches that
generally generate more than 150 pounds or 93 gallons of commercial refuse
per week shall be responsible for arranging for private disposal. Mechanical
containers shall be used to contain refuse generated by the establishments.



   (B)   All establishments and churches shall notify the Department of
Public Services within two weeks after the effective date of this subchapter
or within two weeks after receiving a mechanical container or effect changes
to their collection that they have arranged for private disposal, the name of
the disposal company, the size of the container, the frequency of collection,
the location of the container and any other information the city may require.



   (C)   The property owner or person responsible for contracting for a
mechanical container shall be required to register the mechanical container
in accordance with the rules.



   (D)   The city shall require a permit for any mechanical container
placed on public property and the conditions of the permit shall be
identified in the rules.



   (E)   The city shall require an annual registration fee for each
mechanical container placed on public property and may tag the mechanical
container. Each mechanical container shall have its own tag. The fee shall be
established by annual resolution of the City Council upon adoption of the
budget.



   (F)   The Department of Public Services shall be authorized to
promulgate any rules that designate the location, placement, size, frequency
of collection, registration and placement of mechanical containers.
Mechanical containers placed on public property shall adhere to the rules.
Mechanical containers placed on private property shall be screened in
accordance with the zoning regulations.



   (G)   The code official shall be authorized to order relocation or
removal of any mechanical container placed on public property that endangers
the public health, safety or welfare. The cost of the relocation or removal
shall be placed solely on the person who ordered the mechanical container.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any establishment for which a
mechanical container is required under this subchapter to permit storage of
refuse upon any portion of the premises outside of buildings that is not
confined in a mechanical container.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to empty or deliver any mechanical
container within 1,000 feet of any property used or zoned for residential
purposes on between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily  except in
special cases authorized by the city.



   (J)   All mechanical containers shall be maintained in good repair,
waterproof, rodent-proof, remain free from graffiti and equipped with lids.
Lids shall be closed except when the container is being filled or emptied.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.010  DISPOSAL OF EXTRAORDINARY REFUSE.



   (A)   The owner, contractor, occupant or other person responsible
for construction work shall remove from the premises all construction refuse.
The materials shall be removed outside the city limits or disposed of in
accordance with the directions of the code official.



   (B)   Hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of the producer or
owner thereof and shall not be mixed with refuse to be collected by the city,
disposed of, or allowed to be stored or transported without the written
approval of the city and then only under the supervision of a person
appointed by the Department who has knowledge of the safety measures
necessary to protect the public health and safety during the storing,
transporting or disposing of hazardous waste.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.011  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person may cast, place, sweep, deposit, dump, bury, scatter
or cause to be cast, placed, swept, deposited, dumped, buried or scattered
any waste of any kind on any public or private property, whether the waste is
owned by the person or not, except as permitted by this subchapter.



   (B)   No person, except when lawfully employed or contracted for
that purpose, may carry, convey or transport any waste through the public
property of the city.



   (C)   No person may interfere in any manner with the properly
authorized collection and disposal of any waste. The interference may include
blocking access to public property, parking or standing in front of a place
of collection, or hindering the efficient operation of persons properly
engaging in the collection and disposal of any waste.



   (D)   No person or persons other than the owner, occupant or
occupants of the premises and the authorized collector of garbage may
interfere with the use of the receptacle or disturb, remove or attempt to
remove refuse receptacles, their covers or their contents and no person may
use the receptacle of another unless permission has been granted, whether
same is on public or private property.



   (E)   No person may deposit or cause to be deposited any waste in a
mechanical container which is not owned, leased or authorized to be used by
the person.



   (F)   No person may place for collection any waste that could ignite
waste in a receptacle, mechanical container or waste collection vehicle.



   (G)   No person may bury or burn refuse unless in accordance any
applicable ordinance or law.



   (H)   No person may bury any dead animal except in accordance with
federal and state law.



   (I)   No person may dispose of yard waste along with regular refuse
and garbage. Yard waste shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed under the
rules.



   (J)   No person shall dump sand, gravel, dirt or similar material
upon public property without first obtaining a permit from the city. The
permit shall provide for the removal of the materials and related equipment
within a reasonable time.



   (K)   No person shall dump sand, gravel, dirt or similar material
upon private property without the property owner's express permission.



   (L)   No person shall place a bulk refuse container on public
property without first obtaining a permit from the city. The code official
has authority to relocate or remove any bulk refuse container placed on
public property that endangers the public health, safety or welfare. The cost
of the relocation or removal shall be placed solely on the person who ordered
the bulk refuse container.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.012  REJECTION OF WASTE.



   (A)   If any owner or occupant of any property places any waste
which is rejected by the city waste collector because it does not conform to
the requirements of this subchapter, the city waste collector shall give
notice to the owner or occupant of the premises by tagging the rejected
waste. The tag shall advise the owner or occupant of the reason the waste was
not collected and shall direct the owner or occupant to correct the violation
within 24 hours, and it shall warn the owner or occupant that if the
violation is not corrected, the city may make a special collection for which
the owner or occupant shall be charged.



   (B)   If the code official determines the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which rejected waste is located has failed to correct the
violation within the time period specified on the notice, the city may have
the city waste collector make a special collection of the rejected waste.



   (C)   If the city waste collector makes a special collection of
rejected waste, the owner or occupant shall be charged a fee equal to the
special collection charge incurred by the city, plus an administrative fee of
20%. The owner or occupant of the premises shall be sent an invoice for the
costs of special collection, including the administrative fee, which shall be
payable within 30 days of the date of the invoice. If the invoice is not paid
by the due date on the invoice, then any outstanding balance owed the city
shall be placed immediately on the next water bill or tax bill for the
property in accordance with § 50.006.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.013  LITTER.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any public
property, except in public waste receptacles. No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any public property the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public property or private property. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the public sidewalk and alley bordering their
property free of litter.



   (B)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep
into or deposit in any public property the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public property or private property. Persons
owning or occupying places of business shall keep the public sidewalk and
alley bordering their business free of litter.



   (C)   No person shall discharge any commercial refuse, industrial
water or any polluted or contaminated waste upon any public property with the
city.



   (D)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied
private property, whether owned by the person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in a manner that litter shall be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public property or upon
any private property.



   (E)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant
private property, whether owned by the person or not.



   (F)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in
public receptacles and in a manner that the litter shall be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon
any public property. Where public receptacles are not provided, all litter
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



   (G)   No person, while a driver or passenger in any vehicle, shall
throw or deposit litter upon any public property.



   (H)   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or
contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any public property,
nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires
of which carry onto or deposit mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter
of any kind in any public property.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.014  NUISANCE DECLARATION.



   (A)   Any accumulation of refuse on any premises not in proper
containers, not properly prepared for collection, or in violation of any part
of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The
code official is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private
property, or the agent of the owner, to properly dispose of any nuisance
located on the owner's property that is dangerous to public health, safety or
welfare. The notice shall be by first class mail, addressed to the owner at
his or her last known address as determined from the tax assessment roll.
Failure of the owner to remove any existing accumulation of refuse or litter
within 48 hours upon the date that notice was served upon the property owner
shall authorize the city's waste collector to make a special collection of
the refuse or litter pursuant to § 50.006 of this subchapter. When the city
waste collector abates the nuisance, the owner or occupant shall be charged a
fee equal to the special collection charge incurred by the city plus an
administrative fee of 20%. The owner or occupant of the premises shall be
sent an invoice for the costs of the special collection which shall be
collectible in the same manner and subject to the same interest and penalties
as special collection charges in § 50.006. The failure to remove any
existing nuisance shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter subject to a
violation and penalty in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Prohibited accumulations shall be disposed of in a manner
prescribed by this subchapter.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty, see
§ 50.999



§ 50.015  ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager shall designate the code official who shall be
responsible for enforcing the provision of this subchapter. The code official
shall be authorized to designate any other city employee or group of city
employees to enforce all other provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



BULK REFUSE CONTAINERS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 50.030  GENERALLY.



   All bulk refuse containers placed upon the public rights-of-way shall
be governed by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.031  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BULK REFUSE CONTAINER. Includes containers, dumpsters, boxes, shipping
containers and other containers used to hold things for transport or storage
holding over eight cubic yards, including licensed vehicles or trailers
parked in the right-of-way overnight.



   PROVIDER. The person or entity leasing or otherwise providing a bulk
refuse container for use.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.032  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any provider to place or maintain a bulk
refuse container on, or within, any public right-of-way unless the provider
obtains a bulk refuse container permit from the city and pays the appropriate
fees.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) 
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.033  APPLICATION.



   An application for a bulk refuse container permit shall be made by the
applicant to the city. The applicant shall provide required information,
including the provider's name, address and telephone number; street address
adjacent to where bulk refuse container will be located; intended use of the
bulk refuse container; and the intended period of occupancy of the bulk
refuse container.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.034  FEES.



   The fee for a permit shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 50.035  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Bulk refuse container identification. The provider shall paint
or otherwise permanently affix on each bulk refuse container:



      (1)   The name and telephone number of the provider according
to the following standards: the letters and numerals shall be a minimum of
three inches in height, shall be clearly legible from a distance of 30 feet
and shall be painted or otherwise affixed on both long sides of the bulk
refuse container, 12 inches down from the top or lip and 12 inches from the
corner; and



      (2)   A unique identification number for the bulk refuse
container.



   (B)   Location. A bulk refuse container shall not be placed in any
of the following locations:



      (1)   Within 40 feet of any bus stop;



      (2)   Within ten feet of any parking space designated for
persons with disabilities;



      (3)   Within 20 feet of any pedestrian crosswalk;



      (4)   Within ten feet of any intersection;



      (5)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant; and



      (6)   In any public alley;



      (7)   On any parkway or sidewalk, unless the bulk refuse
container provider demonstrates that an alternative location is not feasible
and that placement of the bulk refuse container on the parkway or sidewalk
would not create a safety hazard, disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
damage public or private property;



      (8)   On any right-of-way, including alleys, where the bulk
refuse container blocks the flow of traffic, refuse trucks and emergency
vehicles;



      (9)   Within 30 feet of a stop sign or traffic-control signal;
and



      (10)   Any location in violation of  the prohibited parking
section of the State Vehicle Code, Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §
257.674, as amended.



   (C)   Placement, appearance and maintenance of bulk refuse
container. The provider shall upon delivery, place the bulk refuse container
immediately adjacent to the property identified by the street address stated
on the permit application. Upon delivery, have the bulk refuse container free
of graffiti. Graffiti must be removed within three business days of receiving
notification from the city to remove graffiti from the bulk refuse container.
The bulk refuse container shall be free of gaps or holes to prevent the
spillage of materials onto the public way.



   (D)   Safety markings. Bulk refuse containers shall be marked with
high-intensity retro-reflective sheeting or other retro-reflective or
prismatic material a minimum of three feet in length and two inches in width
along each side of each corner both vertically and horizontally.



   (E)   Covering. The provider and/or user shall use a tarpaulin or
other appropriate cover to secure the top of a bulk refuse container when not
in use or while in transit.  When transporting or otherwise moving a bulk
refuse container, the provider shall ensure that no portion of the load
falls, blows, drops or in any way escapes.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) 
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Garbage, refuse and litter.



      (1)   Each day that a violation of §§ 50.001 through 50.015
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



      (2)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any provision of §§ 50.001 through 50.015 is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction for the first and second offense
of the same provision of §§ 50.001 through 50.015 within a period of 365
days. The City Council, by resolution during the adoption of the annual
budget, shall establish a fine structure for a first and second offense.



      (3)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any provision of §§ 50.001 through 50.015 is
responsible for a misdemeanor for the third and any subsequent offense of the
same provision of this subchapter within a period of 365 days. Upon
conviction, the person may be fined up to $500, sentenced to 90 days in jail,
sentenced to community service for a time determined by the judge or any
combination of the above.



      (4)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in
§§ 50.001 through 50.015, the court may require the defendant to pay the
cost of removing all litter or accumulated refuse which is the subject of the
violation and the cost of damages to any land, wildlife, vegetation or other
natural resource or to any facility damaged by violation of this subchapter.
Money collected under this division shall be distributed to the city.



(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005)



   (B)   Roll-off containers on public rights-of-way.



      (1)   Any person violating §§ 50.030 through 50.035 shall be
subject to a misdemeanor ticket that may result in 90 days in jail, a $500
fine, or any combination thereof upon conviction. Each day that a violation
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   Any roll-off container in the public way not bearing the
roll-off container identification, not validly permitted, or not located
immediately adjacent to the street address specified in the permit may be
removed by the city, and all costs associated with removal shall be borne by
the provider of the roll-off container. The owner of a roll-off container, if
different from a provider, shall be jointly and severally liable with the
provider for any violation of §§ 50.030 through 50.035.



(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section



Public Water Service



   51.001   Scope; duty to enforce



   51.002   Definitions



   51.003   Application for service; authorization; permission



   51.004   Service pipe specifications



   51.005   Prohibited connections; non-approved water supply



   51.006   Certified water operator to make connections



   51.007   Inspection of work



   51.008   Responsibility for breaking pavement



   51.009   Cost of service connections



   51.010   Repairs to be at expense of person receiving service;
notice of shut-off



   51.011   Meters; all water to pass through



   51.012   Meters; have single connection



   51.013   Meters; purchased from city; installation



   51.014   Meters; removal of; prohibition



   51.015   Meters; owners of premise responsible for



   51.016   Taking of water without permission



   51.017   Supplying water to other premises prohibited



   51.018   Water shut-off; not to be turned on without permit;
violation; severance of connection



   51.019   Right of entry; refusal; shut-off; power to require repairs



   51.020   Obstruction to premises being serviced



   51.021   One-inch meters



   51.022   Deductions and rebates prohibited



   51.023   Water rates



   51.024   Meter districts



   51.025   Delinquent bills; shut-off



   51.026   Lien; assessment



   51.027   Service shut-off; labor cost; turn-on charge



   51.028   Meter reading



   51.029   Use and operation of water system



Collection of Water Deposit



   51.040   Intent



   51.041   Collection



   51.042   Deposit; if not paid



Drinking Water Wells



   51.050   Prohibition



   51.051   Filing of copy



   51.052   Notice to be given



Water Conservation



   51.060   Determination



   51.061   Prohibition



   51.062   Rules; effective period



Cross-Connections



   51.110   Definitions



   51.111   Cross-connections prohibited; rules adopted by reference



   51.112   Inspections



   51.113   Right of entry; information



   51.114   Discontinuing cross-connection service



   51.115   Testing of devices



   51.116   Protection of potable water supply



   51.117   Supplemental to State Plumbing Code



 



   51.999   Penalty



PUBLIC WATER SERVICE



§ 51.001  SCOPE; DUTY TO ENFORCE.



   Every consumer of water, every owner, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any building, structure or premises having water service
from or through the city water supply system shall be governed and be subject
to the provisions of this subchapter and such rules and regulations governing
or concerning the use of water as may, from time to time, be adopted.  It is
hereby made the duty of the Hamtramck Water Department, under the direction
of the Director of Public Services, to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter and any rules and regulations that may be adopted, as aforesaid.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.  The feeder and supply mains, service pipes,
hydrants, meters and all their appurtenances, through which the city supplies
water to its consumers.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Services.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Services.



   PREMISES.  Wherever used in this subchapter, shall be held to include
a lot or part of a lot, a building or a part of a building, a structure, a
project or any parcel or tract of land whatsoever, to which water is being,
or is to be, supplied.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.003  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; AUTHORIZATION; PERMISSION.



   (A)   When the introduction of water service is desired from the
city water supply system for any building, structure or premises and before
any service pipe is laid or any connection made with any service or supply
pipes of the city water supply system, an application in writing shall first
be made to the Department.



   (B)   No water main shall be tapped or service laid within the
street boundaries by anyone other than the duly authorized employees of the
Department or their agents and only under the authority of the Department.



   (C)   The application shall set forth a true legal description of
the premises it is proposed to serve, the name and address of the person,
firm or corporation about to perform the work, and the size of the service
desired. It shall also set forth fully the kind of building for which the
service is intended and the applicant shall be required to answer truthfully
all questions regarding the application which may be put to him or her by any
officer or employee of the water supply system.



   (D)   The person, firm or corporation to whom permission is granted
to connect to any service or supply pipe under the provisions of this
section, shall see to it that the service or supply pipe shall be turned off
at the curb stop and the service shall not be turned on, until permission is
granted by the Department.



(Ord. 215, passed 1-30-1948; Am. Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.004  SERVICE PIPE SPECIFICATIONS.



   All service pipes laid in the city shall be of not less than one-inch
internal diameter and all pipes of one-inch and two-inch diameter shall be of
copper tubing and of quality to conform to the standards recommended by the
American Water Works Association for water service. All service pipes over
two- inch internal diameter shall be of ductile iron and shall conform to the
specifications of the American Water Works Association.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.005  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS; NON-APPROVED WATER SUPPLY.



   In no case shall there be any connection between water pipes receiving
their supply from the city mains and pipes and pumps or tanks receiving their
supply from any other source. The use of such connection is prohibited
whether or not it is provided with one or more cross-connection control
devices.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.006  CERTIFIED WATER OPERATOR TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall make any attachment or connection with the pipes of the
city water supply system nor make any repairs, additions to, or alterations
of any fixtures connected with the service pipes, unless licensed by the
State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.007  INSPECTION OF WORK.



   All work performed under this subchapter, by certified water operators,
shall be subject to inspection by the Director of Public Services or his or
her representatives who have authority hereby granted and to order any part
of the work to be discontinued or changed in order that the same shall comply
with the regulations and requirements of the Department.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.008  RESPONSIBILITY FOR BREAKING PAVEMENT.



   In cases where making of taps involves breaking the pavement, the
contractor shall be responsible to restore all right-of-ways and public
property to Department standards.  If the contractor is unable or unwilling,
the Department will have the work done and the total charges will be borne by
contractor or property owner.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.009  COST OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   The cost of installing service pipes and private supply pipes,
including shut-offs and shut-off boxes, shall be borne by the person making
application, and shall consist of a charge for labor and material.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.010  REPAIRS TO BE AT EXPENSE OF PERSON RECEIVING SERVICE; NOTICE OF
SHUT-OFF.



   Every person having service from the city water supply system shall, at
his or her own cost and expense, keep in repair all service pipes, including
private pipes leading from the shut-off stop to the building or premises, and
prevent all waste of water from such pipes. If any such pipes be permitted to
remain out of repair, the Department may shut off the water from the
premises, and whenever the water is so shut off, it shall not be permitted to
be again turned on until the pipe or pipes have been placed in proper repair.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.011  METERS; ALL WATER TO PASS THROUGH.



   All connections with the water mains must be prepared for the use of
water through a meter. A suitable place shall be provided for the
installation of meters that will be agreeable to comply with the rules and
regulations of the Department.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.012  METERS; HAVE SINGLE CONNECTION.



   Meters for terraces and apartment houses will have a single connection
with the water system for metering of all connecting houses.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.013  METERS; PURCHASED FROM CITY; INSTALLATION.



   Meters shall be furnished and installed by the city and all costs,
charges and fees for the meter, attachments and installation shall be
established by resolution of the City Council, and shall be borne by the
property owner and shall be paid at the time the meter is installed or the
property owner will subject to a lien on the property.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the control and ownership of all meters shall remain with the city
at all times.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.014  METERS; REMOVAL OF; PROHIBITION.



   All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a water meter
from any service any connection without first receiving permission from the
Department. Whenever a meter is removed by permission, it must be immediately
returned to the Department under penalty of having the water shut off.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.015  METERS; OWNERS OF PREMISES RESPONSIBLE FOR.



   The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held
responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water
and from injury or interference by any person or persons.  The owner of any
premises where a meter is installed shall be liable for the full replacement
costs of any meter and appurtenances that have been damaged or lost.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.016  TAKING OF WATER WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person shall take water from any fire hydrant, valve, faucet, pipe
or any other opening connected with the city water supply system, nor shall
any person open any fire hydrant, valve or faucet for the purpose of taking
water or for any other purpose, unless the person shall first have made
application for use of water for such purpose and received permission from
the Department or unless the person is an employee of the city and is acting
in the discharge of his or her duties.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.017  SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHER PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   No person, whether owner or occupant or in possession, charge, or
control of any building, structure or premises, into which water service is
introduced, or to which water is supplied through the city water supply
system, shall be allowed to supply other persons or families or to supply any
water from the building or premises to a building, structure or premises
other than the one from which such water service is introduced, unless
permitted to do so by the Department.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.018  WATER SHUT-OFF; NOT TO BE TURNED ON WITHOUT PERMIT; VIOLATION;
SEVERANCE OF CONNECTION.



   (A)   Where the water supply to any building, structure or premises
shall have been shut off or stopped by or under the direction of the
Department, or in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, the
water shall not again be supplied to the building, structure or premises, or
permitted to be turned on therein, or thereto, unless a permit is first
issued for that purpose by the Department.



   (B)   If it shall be found that the water supply has been turned on,
or into any such building, structure or premises in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter, the Department shall, have the authority to
order the severing of the service or supply pipes by and through which the
water is supplied to the building, structure or premises.



   (C)   Where service or supply pipes are severed in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter, the severing or cutting off shall be done
at the water mains or as near thereto as practicable and no water shall again
be supplied to the building, structure or premises, or be permitted to be
turned on therein, or thereto, until the cost and expense of the severing and
also any other unpaid rates that may be still outstanding have been paid.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.019  RIGHT OF ENTRY; REFUSAL; SHUT-OFF; POWER TO REQUIRE REPAIRS.



   (A)   The officers of the city water supply system and any and every
person delegated or authorized by the Department, shall have free entry and
access to every part of any building, structure or premises, whenever the
entry or access is deemed necessary or advisable. In case any person in
possession, charge or control of any building, structure or premises, into
which any officer or person shall desire entry or access, shall refuse to
permit the entry or access, or shall do or cause to be done any act or thing
for the purpose of preventing the entry or access, the Department may turn
off the service from such building, structure or premises, until notice shall
have been given that entry or access will be permitted or provided, and until
the entry or access has been accomplished.



   (B)   The Department shall have the power and authority to inspect,
and make an examination of all pipes and fixtures connected with the city
water supply system and he or she shall have the power and authority to
require any pipes or fixtures to be repaired, removed, replaced or changed,
where the same are defective or not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or the rules and regulations of the Department.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.020  OBSTRUCTION TO PREMISES BEING SERVICED.



   No person shall in any manner obstruct, cause or permit to be
obstructed, access to any stop-cock, water meter, proportional, indicating or
recording device, Buffalo or shut-off box, or connection with any water main
or service pipe, by any means, shift or device whatsoever, and in the event
the owner or person in possession, charge or control of the premises, after
proper notifications shall fail to remove the obstruction, the Department may
withhold water service to the building, structure or premises until the
obstruction shall be removed.  The Department shall have the power to
require that an outside reading device, if necessary, be installed at the
owner's expense if access to the meter is deemed hazardous to the
representative of the Department.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.021  ONE-INCH METERS.



   (A)   All meters, including one-inch meters, shall be furnished
and  installed by the city.



   (B)   The cost, charges and fees of the meter, attachments and
installation shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   The cost, charges and fees of the meter, attachments and
installation shall be borne by the property owner and shall be paid at the
time the meter is installed or the property owner will be subject to a lien
on the property.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.022  DEDUCTIONS AND REBATES PROHIBITED.



   No deduction shall be made or rebates allowed to any consumer of water
by or on account of any leakage or alleged leakage in any water pipe, tank or
other apparatus or device. The amount of water registered by any meter
controlling the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall be
charged and paid for in full, irrespective of whether the water, after having
been registered, was lost by leakage accident or otherwise.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.023  WATER RATES.



   The City Council shall by resolution set all water rates.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.024  METER DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The city is divided into three districts as follows.



      (1)   District No. 1 covers the area starting at the south
boundary line, including the east and west sides of Joseph Campau up to and
including Holbrook, Lumpkin and Conant, Joseph Campau.



      (2)   District No. 2 covers the area North of Holbrook, east
and west of Joseph Campau up to and including Caniff.



      (3)   District No. 3 covers the area North of Caniff, east and
west sides of Joseph Campau, up to and including Carpenter Avenue.



   (B)   All meter districts, commercial and industrial accounts, to be
read and billed monthly.



   (C)   For the purpose of collecting water rates, the City Council
may, by resolution, create as many water districts as it may deem necessary.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. , passed 12-4-2013)



§ 51.025 DELINQUENT BILLS; SHUT-OFF.



   (A)   All bills under this subchapter which have not been paid on or
before the due date set forth on the bill shall be declared delinquent. If
payments are not received on or before the due date, a late fee shall be
assessed. If the water charges against any premises remain delinquent for a
period of one month, the water supply to the premises may be shut off and
withheld until the payment of the delinquent charges is made.



   (B)   Notice of shut-off shall be mailed to the property address and
provide that the water will be shut off if the bill is not paid within ten
days of the date of the notice. The notice shall provide that the owner or
tenant of the property may appeal to the Water Department within ten days of
the date of the notice if they believe the water bill is not delinquent.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. , passed 12-4-2013)



§ 51.026  LIEN; ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   As provided for in the Revenue Bond Act 94 of 1933, chapter
141.12 sec. 21 (3), “[a]ll those charges delinquent for 6 months or more,
may be certified annual to the proper tax assessing officer or agency who
shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises to which the
services shall have been rendered, and the charges shall be collected and the
lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection
of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for the
taxes.”



   (B)   The assessing officer shall enter the amount of each such
delinquent water and sewage assessments, together with 15% transfer fee upon
the general city tax roll covering the premises with legal interest upon
which water and sewer charges have accrued, and such charges shall be
collected and such lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for
in the collection of general city taxes assessed on such rolls and the
enforcement of the lien thereof.



   (C)   The City of Hamtramck reserves the right to certify delinquent
properties to the county to preserve the city’s lien rights in accordance
with the state and county tax laws regarding foreclosure requirements.



   (D)   Unpaid charges shall be a personal debt to the City of
Hamtramck. The city reserves the right to collect unpaid charges as allowed
through Michigan’s Act 178 of 1939, chapter 123.162, sec. 2.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. , passed 12-4-2013)



§ 51.027  SERVICE SHUT-OFF; LABOR COST; TURN-ON CHARGE



   Whenever the water is turned off from any premises at the request of
the owner or because of a violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of
the city by the owner or occupant thereof, or the failure to pay a water bill
or charge on the premises, the same shall not be turned on again until the
owner has paid to the city the sum to cover the labor cost, and in cases
where extraordinary labor is required, the additional sum as will compensate
for the additional labor and parts.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.028  METER READING.



   The Department shall have charge of the reading of all meters and shall
keep a record of all meter readings. The Department shall keep accounts of
the charges for water furnished to all premises, whether upon a meter or flat
rate, and shall render bills for same. All water charges shall be collected
by the City. All payments made to the City shall be reported to the
Department, who shall credit the sum to the property account.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.029  USE AND OPERATION OF WATER SYSTEM.



   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Department shall from
time to time establish all necessary rules and regulations in respect to the
use and operation of the city water supply system, in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



COLLECTION OF WATER DEPOSIT



§ 51.040  INTENT.



   The intent of this subchapter is to provide for the collection of a
water deposit if an affidavit is filed with the Department indicating that
the premises are leased and that the lessee is responsible for the water
account pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1939 (M.C.L.A. § 123.161 et seq., MSA 5.2531(1) et seq.), as
amended.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.041  COLLECTION.



   The Department shall collect a deposit equivalent to one year's water
supply based upon records and estimates, the deposit to be collected within
one week of an affidavit being filed pursuant to Act 178 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1939 (M.C.L.A. § 123.161 et seq., MSA 5.2531(1) et seq.)
indicating that a lessee is responsible for the water bill.  Once the
deposit is collected the lessee will be responsible for all charges to the
water account.  If payment goes delinquent for two bills submitted by the
Department the water will be shut off until proper payment is made to the
city.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.042  DEPOSIT; IF NOT PAID.



   If the deposit is not paid within seven days:



   (A)   The water supply will be shut off;



   (B)   The property or specific water account for the failure to post
the deposit, and remain shut off until the deposit is paid.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



DRINKING WATER WELLS



§ 51.050  PROHIBITION.



   The installation of drinking water wells within the city is prohibited.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.051  FILING OF COPY.



   A copy of this subchapter shall be filed with the Wayne County Register
of Deeds.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.052  NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.



   Notice of any proposed modification of this subchapter, the lapsing or
revocation of this subchapter shall be given to the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources and Environment.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



WATER CONSERVATION



§ 51.060  DETERMINATION.



   Whenever the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit shall
determine that the amount of pump age of water from its distribution system
has reached a volume so that, unless restricted, the public health, safety
and general welfare is likely to be endangered, it shall prescribe rules
and/or regulations to conserve the water supply during the emergency.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.061  PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any
rule and/or regulation, provided, that before any rule and/or regulation
shall become effective it shall be approved by resolution of the City
Council, and then published in one issue of a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.062  RULES; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   (A)   Lawn sprinkling is prohibited on odd/even days by address
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Friday.



   (B)   Water used by the city is to be curtailed by restrictions at
least equal to those of the City of Detroit, and it is to be so notified
immediately under the appropriate provisions of our contract.



   (C)   The Board of Water Commissioners of Detroit may relax or waive
any rule whenever in their judgment it may be done safely.



   (D)   This subchapter shall be effective June 1 to September 30,
inclusive.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



CROSS-CONNECTIONS



§ 51.110  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BACKFLOW.  Water of questionable quality, waste, or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  A connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which a backflow could occur.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.111  CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED; RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment being R
325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.112  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the
public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the city and as approved by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources and Environment.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.113  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INFORMATION.



   The representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or
systems thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency
any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such
property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when
requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connection.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.114  DISCONTINUING CROSS-CONNECTION SERVICE.



   The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service
after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this subchapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.115  TESTING OF DEVICES.



   All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon
installation in order to confirm that the device is working properly.
Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified
by the city and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the city shall be
qualified to perform such testing. Individual(s) shall certify the results of
his or her testing.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.116  PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.



   Potable water supply made available on the properties served by the
public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this subchapter and by the State and the City Plumbing Code. Any
water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which
is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner
as:



   WATER UNSAFE



   FOR DRINKING



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.117  SUPPLEMENTAL TO STATE PLUMBING CODE.



   This subchapter does not supersede the State Plumbing Code but is
supplementary to it.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Public water service.  Any violation of or failure to comply
with the provisions of §§ 51.001 through 51.029 shall be punished by a fine
of not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court, and when the fine and costs are imposed, the court may provide that in
default of the payment thereof, the offender shall be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 90 days, unless the fine and costs shall be sooner paid
provided, no person shall be imprisoned for a single violation of this
subchapter for a longer period than 90 days.



   (C)   Drinking water wells.  Any person or firm found guilty of
having violated any of the provisions of §§ 51.050 through 51.052 shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days
or both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



   (D)   Water conservation.  Any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of §§ 51.060 through 51.062 or of any rule and/or
regulation lawfully promulgated therewith, shall upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine at the discretion of the court.



   (E)   Cross-connection.  Any person or customer found guilty of
violating any of §§ 51.110 through 51.117 or any written order of the city
in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 for each
violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of §§ 51.110
through 51.117 shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional
violation for the purpose of §§ 51.110 through 51.117.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)



CHAPTER 52:  WASTEWATER



Section



   52.001   Delegation



   52.002   Purpose



   52.003   Authority



   52.004   Definitions



   52.005   Discharge prohibitions



   52.006   Fees



   52.007   Wastewater discharge permits



   52.008   Monitoring facilities



   52.009   Inspection, sampling and record-keeping



   52.010   Confidential information



   52.011   Statutes, laws and regulations



   52.012   Enforcement



   52.013   Reconsideration and appeal



§ 52.001  DELEGATION.



   The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department,
as the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city.  The city has
executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of
Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth
the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this
chapter, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform
the specific responsibilities of Control Authority pursuant to state and
federal law.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the
environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing
pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of
wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment
system under the jurisdiction of the city and enabling the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and the general
pretreatment regulations, being  40 C.F.R. Part 403.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or
welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system
into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim
wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous
manner; and



      (4)   To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of
the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer
regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance,
improvement or replacement of the system.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of contributors to
the Detroit and city wastewater collection and treatment system through the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the
enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.003  AUTHORITY.



   By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the city by the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq; the 1963 Constitution of the State
of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 323.1 et
seq; M.S.A. 3.521 et seq; the 2005 Hamtramck City Charter; the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v.
City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the Eastern District of
Michigan Case No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts
between the Board of Water Commissioners and suburban communities or other
governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the
system, this chapter shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be
contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater
collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.004  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER. 



         (a)   Responsible corporate officer, where the
industrial user submitting the reports required by this chapter is a
corporation, who is either the president, vice-president, secretary, or
treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the
corporation; or the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in second-quarter 1980 dollars,
when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said
manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or



         (b)   A general partner or proprietor where the
industrial user submitting the reports required by this chapter is a
partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. (See § 52.005(N))



      AVAILABLE CYANIDE.  The quantity of cyanide that consists of
cyanide ion (CN) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes
of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver, determined by EPA method
OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved under
40 C.F.R. Part 136.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).  Programs, practices,
procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user
which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of
pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but are not limited
to the Detroit sewer system.  BMPs include, but are not limited to,
equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications,
reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and
improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control and
may include technical and economic considerations.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quality of dissolved
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure five days at 20º C. expressed in terms of mass and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods.



      BOARD.  The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of a wastestream from any
portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility (see 40 C.F.R. §
403.17).



      CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY.  Any facility that
treats any hazardous or non-hazardous industrial waste received from off-site
by tanker truck, trailer  roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms
of shipment including:



         (a)   A facility that treats industrial waste received
exclusively from off-site; and



         (b)   A facility that treats industrial waste generated
on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site.



      COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.  Wastewater that is produced
by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics
similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently
and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater.



      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Pollutants which can be effectively
removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the
POTW residuals and the receiving stream.



      COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A collection of individual samples which are
obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or
flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a
representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period.  A
minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is
manually collected. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403, Appendix E)



      CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.  The information which would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets of the industrial user. (See § 52.010)



      CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
which has been officially designated as such by the state under the
provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a))



      COOLING WATER.  The non-contact water discharged from any use
such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function
is the exchange of heat.



      DAYS.  Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a
period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter.



      DEPARTMENT.  The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
and authorized employees of the Department.



      DIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the state.



      DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department or the Director’s designee.



      DISCHARGER.  A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes,
causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.



      DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or ADMINISTRATOR or EPA
ADMINISTRATOR.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA.



      FACILITY.  A location, which contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a
place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or
private, commercial or charitable.



      FATS, OILS OR GREASE (FOG).  Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids,
soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal,
vegetable or mineral origin that’s extractable by solvent in accordance
with standard methods.



      FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE.  A composite sample taken with regard
to the flow rate of the wastestream.



      GRAB SAMPLE.  An individual sample collected over a period of
time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics
of the stream at the time of sampling.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source
regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).



      INDUSTRIAL USER.  A person who contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a
place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or
private, commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family
residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste
characteristics.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of
energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry,
manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources.



      INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:



         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and



         (b)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the
Resource Conservation and  Recovery Act (RCRA), and state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D
of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or
category of industrial users.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. 
A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided, that the building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site where no other source is located; the building,
structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing
source; or the production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining  whether  these  are 
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source should be considered;



         (b)   Construction on a site where an existing source is
located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of subsection (a) of this definition but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment; or



         (c)   Construction of a new source has commenced where
the owner or operator has begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous
on site construction program: any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to
be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, 
and  contracts  for  feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this section.



      PASS THROUGH.  Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit
of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.



      pH.  The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution,
calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion
activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.



      POLLUTANT.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is
discharged into water.



      POLLUTION.  The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation
or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity
of water.



      PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The
reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited
by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r))



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  All national categorical pretreatment
standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the
specific prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or
specific limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the
discharge prohibitions specified in § 52.005.



      PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental
entity.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).  A treatment works as
defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality,
as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including:



         (a)   Any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste
of a liquid nature;



         (b)   Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they
convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362,
which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges
from such a treatment works.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of
wastewater.



      QUANTIFICATION LEVEL.  The measurement of the concentration of a
contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at
a specified concentration above the detection level.  It is considered the
lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively
measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the
contaminant.



      REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE.  Any sample of wastewater, which
accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and
condition of one or more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLES shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Part 136.



      SANITARY WASTEWATER.  The portion of wastewater that is not
attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from
domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary
facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site
non-commercial consumption.



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.  Any violation which meets one or
more of the following criteria:



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during
a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the
average limit for the same parameter;



         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
defined as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);



         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent
limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the Department determines
has caused,  alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or
has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority;



         (e)   Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting
construction,  completing construction, or attaining final compliance within
90 days after the scheduled date;



         (f)   Failure to provide required reports such as
baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic 
self-monitoring  reports,  and  reports  on compliance with compliance
schedules within 30 days after the due date;



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations which
the Department determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.  Any user of the POTW who:



         (a)   Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons
per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown,
and noncontact cooling water;



         (b)    Has discharges subject to the national
categorical pretreatment standards;



         (c)    Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific
pollutant limitations of this chapter;



         (d)    Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or
regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to
regulation under this chapter as determined by the Department;



         (e)   Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment,
storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by
this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended
by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or
does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not
limited to, leachate or runoff; or



         (f)   Is found by the City of Detroit or the city to
have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the
quality of sludge, the POTW’s effluent quality, or air emissions generated
by the POTW.



      SLUG.  Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including,
but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as
amended.



      STANDARD METHODS.  Methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136,
“Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants”
or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of
analysis, of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater” prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, “Guidelines
for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants.” Where these
two references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a
specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed.



      STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL) .  The total suspended matter which
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other
liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard
methods.



      TOTAL PCB.  The sum of the individual analytical results for
each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during
any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the
quantification level being treated as zero.



      TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS.  The sum of the individual analytical
results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol,
4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol,
4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event
expressed in mg/l.



      TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register
promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other
federal or state laws, rules or regulations.



      TRADE SECRET.  The whole, or any portion or phase, of any
proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret,
is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and
whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from
becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have
access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the
quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or
sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into
the wastewater system tributary thereto.



      UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this chapter or with
national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.



      USER.  Any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes,
causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.



      WASTEWATER or WASTESTREAM.  The liquid and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and
inflow waters, storm water, and cooling water.



      WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.  Permits issued by the Department
in accordance with § 52.007.



      WATERS OF THE STATE.  Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all
other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as
bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the following acronyms shall
have the meanings designated by this section:



 



BMR
 
Baseline monitoring report


BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


FOG
 
Fats, oil or grease


l
 
liter


MDEQ
 
Mighican Department of Environment Quality


mg
 
milligrams


mg/l
 
milligrams per liter


NPDES
 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System


POTW
 
Publicly Owned Treatment Works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


SWDA
 
Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.005  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant
or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general
discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not
the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any
other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In
addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW:



      (1)   Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature
or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any
other way to persons, to the POTW,  or to the operations of the POTW.
Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but
are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than
140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or
quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer
or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not
limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshing,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring
stones;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or
greater than 11.5 units;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing petroleum oil,
non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic
pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or
constitute a hazard to humans or animals;



      (5)   Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either
singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas,
vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life,
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair;



      (6)   Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW’s
effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum
to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a
reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with
any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;



      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate
either the consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the
City of Detroit’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit;



      (8)   Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the
wastewater being discharged;



      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a
public sewer which exceeds 150° F. or which will cause the influent at the
wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104° F. (40° C.);



      (10)   Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug;



      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established
in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations;



      (12)   Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient
to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or



      (13)   Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater
than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are
sufficient to cause interference with the POTW.



   (B)   Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations:



      (1)   Compatible pollutants.  See Appendix C.



      (2)   Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of:



 

 

mg/l





Arsenic (As)
 

1.0



Cadmium (Cd)
 

See Appendix C



Chromium (Cr)
 

25.0



Copper (Cu)
 

2.5



Cyanide (CN) (available)
 

1.0



Iron (Fe)
 

1000.0



Lead (Pb)
 

1.0



Nickel (Ni)
 

5.0



Silver (Ag)
 

1.0



Zinc (Zn)
 

7.3



Total Phenolic Compounds
 

1.0 or see Appendix B



All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period
representative of an industrial user’s discharge, and in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Part 136




 



         (a)   The limitation for Total PCB is non-detect. 
Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA
Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a
higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix
interference.  Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of Total
PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance.  For purposes of
this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing
that the Total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission
of a BMP in accordance with 56-3-66.1(d).



         (b)   The limitation of Mercury (Hg) is non-detect. 
Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S.
EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l,
unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix
interference.  Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of
Mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance.  For the
purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical
data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or
submission of a BMP in accordance with 56-3-66.1(d).  All limitations are
based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an
industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40 C.F.R. Part 136.



      (3)   Compliance period.  Within 30 days of the effective
date of this chapter, the Department shall notify all industrial users
operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement
to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of
this chapter.  The compliance report shall demonstrate the user’s
compliance or non-compliance with these limitations, and, in the event of
non-compliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving
compliance with the stated limitation.  In no event shall a compliance
schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of this chapter.  An
industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the
Department  for a second extension as part of an administrative consent
order.  The Department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and
penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second
extension, and shall enter into such an  agreement only upon a good-faith
showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance
with this provision.



   (C)   National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall
comply with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R.
Subchapter N, effluent guidelines and standards, which are hereby
incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and
requirements, provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement
is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this chapter, then
the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected
dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40
C.F.R. Part 403 and as established by the Department. The national
categorical pretreatment standards which have been promulgated as of the
effective date of this section are delineated in Appendix A.



      (1)   Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking
adjustment of national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.  Upon notification of approval by the
Department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit
accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated
into an industrial user’s permit.



      (2)   Modification of national categorical pretreatment
standards. The Department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is
appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with
the requirements and procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7. The  authorization
may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent
removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought,
provided, that any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit
neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a
result of the removal credit being granted. Where such authorization is given
to the Department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall
make an application to the Department, consistent with the provisions of 40
C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this chapter. Any credits which may be granted under
this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40
C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the Department. A requisite to the
granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a
surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such
surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the Board may establish and,
when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be
modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section.



      (3)   New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources
criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and start-up all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time
and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment
standards.



      (4)   Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a
categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of
pollutant per unit of production, the Department may convert the limits to
equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per
day or effluent concentration for  purposes  of  calculating  effluent
limitations applicable to individual industrial users.  Equivalent
limitations shall be calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c)(3)
and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards
for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 317(d) and of this chapter. Industrial users
will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were
derived.



      (5)   Reporting requirements for industrial users upon
effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within
180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or
180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category
determination submission under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment 
standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the
Detroit POTW shall submit to the Department a report containing the
information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing
this information have already been submitted to the Director or regional
administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b),
the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At
least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any
existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the Department a
report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-5).
In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method
of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested
in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(4) and (5).



   (D)   Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do
so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall
increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical
pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or
requirement imposed by the city, the City of Detroit or by the state.



   (E)   Hauled in wastewater.  Any waste material or wastewater which
is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is
subject to the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to,
permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid
waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or
without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person
proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the
Department for unloading such waste in accordance with the Board’s rules
pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and
conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the Board. Hauled in
wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after
authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements
specified in § 52.007. The Department may establish specific limitations for
sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are
different than the specific limitations in this chapter.



   (F)   Centralized waste treatment. 



      (1)   It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT)
facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit from the Department. Any authorization
granted, or permit issued, by the Department to a Centralized Waste Treatment
(CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is
provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW.  Unless such
industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the Department to require
further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has
submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the
Department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further
authorization from the Department before discharging such wastewater.  An
industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files
an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to
the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof:



         (a)   The general nature, source and process(es)
generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from
those processes and is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards
as delineated in Appendix A, shall be so designated;



         (b)   The identity of the toxic pollutants known or
suspected to be present in the wastewater;



         (c)   At least one sample report showing the results of
an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for
which application is made in division (F)(1) (a) of this section;



         (d)   A statement, that is certified by a professional
engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the
wastewater, received or collected by the facility’s treatment process(es);



         (e)   The identity of the materials and/or pollutants
whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by
any other governmental agency. Upon request, the Centralized Waste Treatment
(CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the
Department; and



         (f)   Other information requested by the Department
including, but not limited to, information required by § 52.007(C)(1)
through (18) or by rules adopted by the Board.



      (2)   The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT)
facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater
delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with
the procedures contained in § 52.007, will be deemed approved for discharge
into the POTW. The Centralized Waste Treatment (CWT) facility shall comply
with all applicable provisions contained in § 52.007 regarding permits. In
furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the Department may
include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the
information mandated in subsections (1)(a) through (f) of this section.



      (3)   All users granted a permit under this section shall
maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character,
and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These
records may be reviewed at any time by the Department.



   (G)   Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted
by the Department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is
prohibited.



      (1)   The Department may authorize the discharge of
groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam,
or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to
appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize
discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply
with this provision within 180 days after its enactment.



      (2)   If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater
resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and
received a permit from the Department, the Department may authorize the
discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 52.007 or in accordance with any rules adopted by
the Board.



   (H)   Right of revision. The City of Detroit and the city reserve
the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the Board, additional
or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
These rules and regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the
rule-making procedures Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter and the
2005 Hamtramck City Charter, if any.  Ninety days after adoption by the
Board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations.



   (I)   Accidental discharges.



      (1)   (a)   Each industrial user, which does not currently
have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this chapter, and all significant industrial users
shall submit to the Department detailed plans which show facilities and
operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such
accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate
accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the
owner’s or industrial user’s cost or expense. Unless the significant
industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all
existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan
within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter.  New significant
industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence
discharging.



         (b)   For purposes of this section, the information
provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such
prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw
materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for
each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into
the POTW and constitute a concentration of 5% or greater in the raw material,
chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of
less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless
lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the
POTW.



         (c)   The industrial user shall promptly notify the
Department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including,
but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory.



      (2)   At least once every two years, the Department shall
evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug
discharges, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise
provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a
plan within 30 days of notification by the Department.



   (J)   Notification requirements.  Unless a different notice is
provided by this chapter or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware
of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal,
state or city laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could
cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the
industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with division
(I)(1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the Department at
its control center and notify the Department of the discharge. The
notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of
discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive
or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or
being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days
after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the
Department, the industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit may be
modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences.
The notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost
of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental
impairment or any other damage to person or property.



   (K)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on
the industrial user’s bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising
employees whom to contact in the Department in the event of an actual or
excessive or prohibited discharge.



   (L)   Recovery of costs.  Any user discharging in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, which produces a deposit or obstruction,
or causes damage to or impairs the Department’s POTW, or causes the
Department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the Department for
any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the Department because
of said violation or discharge.  Prior to assessing such costs, the
Department shall notify the user of its determination that the user’s
discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or
violation of the city’s NPDES permit and the Department’s intent to
assess such costs to the user. Any notice shall include written documentation
which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of
cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. The charge shall be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this chapter, or this code,
or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity.



   (M)   Hazardous waste notification.  All industrial users, who
discharge into the city collection system, shall notify the Department in
writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261.  The
notification must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p).



   (N)   Authorized representative.  The authorized representative, as
defined in § 52.004(A)(2), may designate a duly authorized representative of
the individual designated in § 52.004(A)(2)(a) or (b) where:



      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual
defined in § 52.004;



      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of
equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company; and



      (3)   The written authorization is submitted to the Department.



   (O)   Pollution prevention. The Department shall encourage and
support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention
programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions
beyond the levels required by this chapter. The Department may require an
industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part
of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.006  FEES.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the POTW.  The applicable charges or fees established by
the Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation,
maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law
or by Board action.



   (B)   The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include,
but not be limited to:



      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing,
operating, maintaining, or improving the Department’s industrial waste
control and pretreatment programs;



      (2)   User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration
or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs
including sludge handling and disposal;



      (3)   Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings
including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court
reporters, and transcriptions; and



      (4)   Other fees, which the Board may deem necessary, to carry
out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.007  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Required.  It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into
the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or
otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of § 52.005. It shall
be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Department through
permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   All significant industrial users, which are in existence
on the effective date of this chapter, shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. Significant
industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater
discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to
include all information specified in § 52.007(C) and, where applicable, any
additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline
monitoring report requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b).



      (2)   All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The
application must include all information specified in § 52.007(C)  and,
where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy
the federal BMR requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a permit is
issued and finalized by the Department, no discharge shall be made into the
POTW.



      (3)   Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other
than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request
approval from the Department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to
the commencement of the discharge.



   (B)   Permit application or reapplication.  The Department may
require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and
to submit the same to the Department for determining whether the industrial
user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater
discharges from a user’s facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a
user shall comply with the Department’s request in the manner and form
prescribed by the Department. Failure of the Department to so notify a user
shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this
chapter.



      (1)   A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised
national categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable
national categorical pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is
specified or required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall
provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in
§ 52.007(C) and (G).



      (2)   A separate permit application shall be required for each
separate facility.



      (3)   Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form
prescribed by the Department.



   (C)   Application or reapplication information.  In support of an
application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the
industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation,
the following information:



      (1)   Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s),
federal employer identification number, address, and location of the
discharging facility;



      (2)   Name and title of the authorized representative of the
industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user
financially and legally;



      (3)   All SIC numbers of all processes at this location
according to the Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as
amended;



      (4)   Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and
characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. 
The parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric
limitations as enumerated in § 52.005(A) and (B), those pollutants limited
by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable
industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the
discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or
experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one-year period shall
be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately
shown for each categorical process wastestream. Combined wastestreams
proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall also be
identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and
contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does
not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods
approved by the administrator.



      (5)   A listing and description of activities, facilities and
plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so
designated. As pertains to division (C)(4), identify which pollutants are
associated with each process;



      (6)   Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in
division (C)(4), a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either
used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to
in division (C)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such
information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof
of such immunity;



      (7)   A description of typical daily and weekly operating
cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the
seven days of the week:



      (8)   Denote: the average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow
rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; each
national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water,
sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to
the POTW; and each combined wastestream;



      (9)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling
manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges
into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each
national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive storm
water, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each
combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the
information furnished in division (C)(8) of this section;



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to
production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards
or requirements only;



      (11)   A statement regarding whether or not the requirements
of this chapter and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for
the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements.  This
statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and,
as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional;



      (12)   Basic information on the program for the prevention of
accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of § 52.005(I)(1);



      (13)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of each
pretreatment system for each production process;



      (14)   A schematic and description of each pretreatment
facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch
type or continuous process type;



      (15)   If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
potable water, the industrial user’s source of intake water together with
the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the
estimated wastewater volumes from each source;



      (16)   If additional construction and/or operation and
maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this
division and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or
implement the required operation and maintenance procedures;



      (17)   Identify whether the user has conducted a waste
minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all
feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to
reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the
facility; and



      (18)   Any other information as may reasonably be required to
prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit.



   (D)   Permit issuance.  Upon receipt of an application, the
Department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the
industrial user in writing regarding any of the following:



      (1)   The industrial user does not meet the definition of a
significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater
discharge permit;



      (2)   The industrial user does meet the definition of a
significant industrial user but is found by the Department to have no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to
have a wastewater discharge permit. The Department shall make such
determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6);



      (3)   The application is incomplete or the information only
partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12
or by the Department, and that additional information and data are required
which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is
notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the
application is unacceptable;



      (4)   (a)   The industrial user is required to have a
wastewater discharge permit. The Department shall notify the industrial user
of its determination and the basis of the determination.



         (b)   The Department may withhold issuance of a permit
to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report,
or permit application, to the Department as the control authority in
accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose
discharge is in violation of this chapter. If the Department determines that
an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has
evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be
notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy
of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user’s review. An
industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to
the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in §
52.013, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit
issued as final. Upon disposition by the Department of any contested terms or
conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location
shall be included in each permit.



   (E)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain
all requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to
incorporate all provisions of this chapter, other applicable laws, rules,
regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or
the city without repetition therein.  In addition, permits may contain the
following:



      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than,
or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in § 52.005, or the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standards;



      (2)   Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (3)   Requirements for installation, operation, and
maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the
industrial user;



      (4)   Restrictions on which of the user’s discharge
wastestreams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection
to the POTW;



      (5)   Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs
which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedules;



      (6)   Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges
and the containment of spills or slug discharges;



      (7)   Restrictions based on the information furnished in the
application;



      (8)   Additional reporting requirements:



         (a)   All permittees shall submit a report on the form
prescribed by the Department, or on an alternative form approved by the
Department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions
enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made
applicable to the permit by this chapter. Unless required more frequently,
the reports shall be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be
established by the Department. Analytical data generated by the Department
may not be submitted in lieu of the facility’s own monitoring data as
required by the wastewater discharge permit.



         (b)   Permittees not subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance
with the requirements of § 52.007(E)(8)(d) and (e). The report shall show
the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation
in the permit, or which may be identified by the Department in accordance
with § 52.007(E)(9) and (11).



         (c)   Permittees subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the
times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the Department. A
compliance report shall be submitted to the Department no later than 90 days
following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new
source, no later than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d). A
report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals
thereafter on  the  schedule established  by  the Department  and
incorporated into the industrial  users discharge permit and in accordance
with § 52.007(E)(8)(d) and (e). The reports shall be either on a form
prescribed by the Department or on an alternate form approved by the
Department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants
in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by national
categorical pretreatment standards, or which there is a specific limitation
in the permit, or which may be identified by the Department in accordance
with § 52.007(E)(9) and (11). The report shall include a record of measured
or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the
discharges regulated by the permit.  The combined wastestream formula may be
used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished
to the Department, provided there have been no changes to the elements
composing the combined wastestream.



         (d)   1.   Reports shall contain the results of
representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and
of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for
significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be
cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required
determining compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general
pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R. Part 403, or by the Department, but
no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial
user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
applicable regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments
thereto.  Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator.



            2.   If an industrial user monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the Department using the procedures as
prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included
in such report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements
or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards.



         (e)   1.   This report, and those required under §
52.005(C)(5) and 52.007(E)(8)(b) and (c), shall include the following
certification statement:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete.  I am aware that there
are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations.”



            2.   The certification shall be signed by the
facility’s authorized representative, as defined in § 52.004(A)(2). If an
authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative
definition must be submitted to the Department prior to, or together with,
any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.



         (f)   If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the Department within 24 hours of the time
the user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition,
the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Department within 30 days after the user becomes,
or should have become, aware of the violation.



      (9)   In the event the Director determines that an industrial
user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may
cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the Department has the
authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To
the extent the Department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are
more restrictive than established in this division, the Department shall
provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for
protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES
permit;



      (10)   Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and



      (11)   Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



   (F)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period.  Except as deemed necessary by the Department, or as otherwise
provided for under this chapter, permits shall be issued for a specified
period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing
permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for
permit reissuance to the Department, shall be automatically extended until a
permit is issued as final.



   (G)   Permit modification. 



      (1)   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the Department during the term of the permit as limitations
or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in § 52.005 are
amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification
includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   Material or substantial changes to an industrial
user’s facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the
industrial user’s effluent. It shall be the industrial user’s duty to
request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within
30 calendar days of the change;



         (b)   Change(s) in the Department's NPDES permit;



         (c)   Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement
or of a court order;



         (d)   Any changes necessary to fulfill the
Department’s role as control authority;



         (e)   An industrial user’s noncompliance with portions
of an existing permit;



         (f)   A change of conditions within the POTW;



         (g)   A finding of interference or pass through
attributable to the industrial user;



         (h)   Amendments to, or promulgation of, national
categorical pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part
403 and those delineated in Appendix A of this chapter. Permittees shall
request an application form and apply to the Department for a modified permit
within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national
categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be
subject.  Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be
confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended
national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement.  However,
information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the
previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In
addition, the Department may initiate this action;



         (i)   Changes in the monitoring location (see § 52.008);



         (j)   Typographical errors or omissions in permits;



         (k)   The Department may modify the permit on its own
initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or



         (l)   The user may request a modification of the permit.



      (2)   When initiated by the Department, the industrial user
shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The Department will
issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to
the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the Department will issue a final
permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in §
52.013, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance.



   (H)   Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are
issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to
a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a
new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the
Department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or
operator. It shall be the permit holder’s duty to notify the Department of
any such change at least 30 days before the date of the change.  Wastewater
discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the
Department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of
reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the Department may
revoke a permit.  If a change takes place, the Department may require the
application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply
with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the Department
allows to be retained.



   (I)   Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall
promptly notify the Department in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for
a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change.
Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.008  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and
maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to
facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their
discharge by the Department and the industrial user, and to enable the
Department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for
determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as
provided for in this chapter. In the event the Department determines that the
monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new
monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for
collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the
facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the Department,
the facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by
the Department. The industrial user shall provide the Department with:



      (1)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling
manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges
into the POTW;



      (2)   A flow schematic showing which connections receive each
national categorical process wastestream; which connections receive storm
water, sanitary water or cooling water; and which lines handle each combined
wastestream.  This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. 
If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities
within the prescribed time limits, then the Department may install such
structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the Department
for any costs incurred therein.



   (B)   The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial
user’s premises in a location readily accessible to the Department. When
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the
industrial user, the Department may allow the facility to be constructed in
the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the
responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which
may be required from other government agencies for the location and
construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near
such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling
and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently
installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial
user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Department’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications (see § 52.007(G)).



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.009  INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORD-KEEPING.



   (A)   For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any
other applicable provisions of this code or applicable state or federal laws
and regulations, the Department may inspect the establishment, facility or
other premises of the industrial user. The Department’s employees or
authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user’s
premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or
metering activities.



   (B)   Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced
and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival
at the industrial user’s premises, the Department shall inform the
industrial user, or the industrial user’s employees, that sampling and/or
inspection is commencing, and that the facility’s authorized representative
has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The Department shall
neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its
inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized
representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or
sampling activity.



   (C)   While performing work on private property, employees or
authorized representatives of the Department shall observe all reasonable
safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as
established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or
representatives of the Department shall bear proper credentials and
identification, and at the industrial user’s option may be accompanied by a
duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized
Department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the
facility site.  Department employees or representatives may take photographs
of facilities subject to this chapter. Which shall be maintained by the
Department as confidential in accordance with § 52.010.



   (D)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the
industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the
security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials,
personnel from the Department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.



   (E)   Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their
discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The Department
may require such samples to be split with the Department for the
Department’s independent analysis.



   (F)   Industrial users shall maintain records of all information
from monitoring activities required by this chapter, or by 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three
years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of
any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the
industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit’s Industrial Waste
Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA.



   (G)   Upon the request of the Department, industrial users shall
furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW.
Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the Department
at all reasonable times, and allow the Department to copy such records.



   (H)   In the event the Department obtains samples, and analyses are
made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be
promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user’s authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial user, the Department
employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample
of the user’s discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the
premises for the user’s independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising
over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the Department shall
be controlling unless proven invalid.



   (I)   In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge
described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial
user’s discharge is obtained by the Department, and then analyzed in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and found to contain concentrations of
pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations
as listed in § 52.005(B), or as contained in the facility’s wastewater
discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan,
and shall  provide a written report to the Department within 14 days, which
describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of
the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of
less than two times the limitation in the future.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.010  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   (1)   Information and data on an industrial user obtained
from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Department that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
the industrial user.



      (2)   When submitted to the Department, all information
claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked confidential. When
requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report
determined by the Department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret
processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, to the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the
State Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided,
however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental
agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be
non-confidential by the governmental agency.  Confidential information on
industrial users, which the Department releases pursuant to a request of
another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental
agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The Department cannot
control how another governmental agency handles such confidential
information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the
information released to the governmental agency. The Department will use
sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of
the industrial user’s confidentiality claim.



      (3)   The Department shall determine whether the information
requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements
of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the Department
shall be made in writing. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information.



   (B)   Except as otherwise determined by the Department or provided
for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on
file with the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the
user’s authorized representative during normal business hours.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.011  STATUTES, LAWS AND REGULATIONS.



   The national categorical pretreatment standards defined in 40 C.F.R.
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by
reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any
reference in this chapter to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law
enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or
by any element or organization of government other than the city shall be
construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect
or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this chapter.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.012  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
user to:



      (1)   Fail to completely and/or accurately report the
wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user’s
discharge;



      (2)   Fail to report significant changes in the industrial
user’s operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within
the time frames provided in § 52.007(G)(1);



      (3)   Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's
premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection
or monitoring;



      (4)   Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly,
access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private
property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not
constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon
request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the
Department;



      (5)   Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate
any of the Department’s monitoring devices including, but not limited to,
samplers;



      (6)   Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the
industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit;



      (7)   Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or
requirement of this chapter including any rule, regulation, or order issued
hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater
discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and such
permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this chapter until a
superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with
applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on
the date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance
schedules.



   (B)   Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment
standards where the requirements of subsection (1) are met. 



      (1)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the
affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can
identify the cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   At the time, the facility was being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures;



         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following
information to the Department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a
written submission must be provided within five days:



            1.   A description of the discharge and cause of
noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof;



      (3)   The industrial user shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this chapter
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (C)   Bypass.  Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not
cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it
is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment
system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1)
and (2).



      (1)   Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users
anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the Department at least ten days
in advance.



      (2)   Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall
submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user
becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or
should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain
a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the
bypass has not been corrected, the prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.



      (3)   Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is
prohibited, and the Department may take enforcement action against a user for
a bypass, unless:



         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise  of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime  or 
preventative maintenance; and



         (c)   The industrial user properly notified the
Department as described in division (C)(2).



      (4)   Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in
division (C)(3), the Department may approve an anticipated bypass.



   (D)   Measurements.  Where one or more of the measurements taken
for any pollutant defined in § 52.005(B) during a six-month period exceed by
any magnitude the daily maximum non-detect limit for the same parameter, the
industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives,
or a BMP, as part of its response.  The Department may, as part of an
administrative order, also require development of a BMP as a part of the
Department’s enforcement response.  Upon approval of the Department, these
pollution prevention initiative, or BMPs shall be made an enforceable part of
the wastewater discharge permit.  Industrial users shall provide, at
six-month intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its
implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiative or BMPs.  Upon
demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved
of this implementation requirement. 



   (E)   Emergency suspensions and orders. The Department may order
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater
discharge permit where, in the opinion of the Department, such suspension is
necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons
or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes
or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES
permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the Department provides
informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order
shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to
comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the Department
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW
system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event such
steps are taken, the Director shall notify the industrial user within 24
hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse
available. In any event, the Department shall provide the industrial user
with an opportunity for a hearing before the Director, or his or her
designated representative, within ten days of such action.  The industrial
user shall submit a detailed written statement to the Department within 15
days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of
elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the Department shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service.



   (F)   Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or
threatened discharge as specified in division (E), whenever the Department
has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating
this chapter, the Department shall serve a written notice stating the nature
of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the Department
shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its
approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the Department to issue a
notice of violation shall not preclude the Department from escalating its
enforcement response.



   (G)   Administrative actions. Whenever the Department has reasonable
grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of
its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or
any prohibition of this chapter, the Department, may initiate appropriate
administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or
flagrant violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to
remedy such violation as soon as possible.



      (1)   Conferences. The Department may order any person, who
violates this chapter, to attend a conference wherein the Department may
endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by
establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation
shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall
set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be
conducted by a representative of the Department. The industrial user shall
present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this division.
Nothing contained herein shall require the Department to accept or agree to
any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the Department from proceeding
with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (2) of this section. 
If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the
Department’s duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a
compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of
such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious
efforts to comply with this chapter and any procedures, requirements, and
agreements hereunder.



      (2)   Compliance schedules.  The user and the Department may
agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time
periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the
causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance
agreement, administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this
subsection shall adhere to the following conditions:



         (a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in
the form of dates for the  commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of  upgraded  or additional
pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation  of  additional
operation  and  maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and  standards including, but
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, 
completing  final  plans, executing  contracts  for  major components, 
commencing construction,  and  completing construction; 



         (b)   No single increment referred to in division (I)
shall exceed nine months;



         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit
a progress report to the Department including, at a minimum, whether it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not,
the date which it expects to comply  with this increment of progress, the
reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to
return to the established schedule; and



         (d)   Any deviations from the compliance schedule may
result in the industrial user being found in violation of this chapter.



      (3)   Administrative orders. The Department may order any
industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this chapter or a duly
issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment
facilities, or other related appurtenances.  In addition, orders may contain
such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to
address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring and management practices,  implementation of a 
waste minimization assessment to identify  and implement feasible source
reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of
pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent
order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative
order.



      (4)   Show cause hearing. The Department may order any
industrial user, who violates this chapter or allows such violation to occur,
to show cause before the Department why a proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying
the time and place of a hearing before the Department  regarding  the
violation, the reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before
the Department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or
certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the
hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or
its authorized representative.



         (a)   Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with the procedures adopted by the Board. A hearings officer
shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may:



            1.   In the name of the Board, issue notices of
hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;



            2.   Transmit a report of the evidence and
hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Director for action thereon.



         (b)   Transcript.  At any show cause hearing held
pursuant to this division, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.



      (5)   Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted,
the hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing
any of the following actions:



         (a)   Immediate compliance with the industrial user’s
wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition,
restriction or requirement of this division, or applicable local, state or
federal law or regulation;    



         (b)   Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate
treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment
equipment be accomplished within a specified time period;



         (c)   Submission of compliance reports on effluent
quality and quantity as determined by self- monitoring and analysis during a
specified time period;



         (d)   Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality
and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final
period set by a compliance date;



         (e)   Control of discharge quantities;



         (f)   Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary
inspection, monitoring, and  administration of the industrial user’s
activities by the Department during compliance efforts;



         (g)   Any other orders as are appropriate including, but
not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment 
services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge  permit, or orders
directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater
treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed; and/or



         (h)   A finding the user has demonstrated by a
preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this chapter or of a
duly issued permit did not occur.



      (6)   Public notification of significant noncompliance. The
Department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City
of Detroit and the city a list of all industrial users which were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any
time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a
proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at
least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to
its accuracy.



   (H)   Legal actions.



      (1)   Criminal action.  Any user, who violates any provision
of this chapter including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or
surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued
pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or
wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device required under this division, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both. The Department is hereby authorized, through its counsel,
to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any
provision of this division.



      (2)   Civil action.  Whenever the Department has reasonable
grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of
its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or
any requirement of this chapter, the Director may commence a civil action to
compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user
from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the
violations. The Department or Board may also seek additional legal and/or
equitable relief. The commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive
election of remedies nor prohibits the Department, Director, Board, or City
of Detroit from commencing action in federal court for discharges believed to
be in violation of this chapter, state and federal requirements contained in
the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit’s NPDES permit, or other
applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit may recover
the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees, and other
unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the
person found to have violated this division, or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder.



      (3)    Fines, costs, and penalties.  All fines, costs, and
penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be
payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



§ 52.013  RECONSIDERATION AND APPEAL.



   Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may
contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the Department which result
from its construction, application and enforcement of this chapter. The
procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal
with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this chapter.



   (A)   Selection of reconsideration or of appeal.



      (1)   Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions
which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may
be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial
wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any
action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the
Department by the Director, or an authorized representative, and that
interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this chapter. 



      (2)   An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant,
permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger,
who is adversely affected by a permit issued as final by the Department, or
by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or
after a hearing for reconsideration.



      (3)   Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this chapter,
a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized
representative, and received at the Department’s general offices within 20
days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or
decision in dispute.  A request for reconsideration shall contain the
requester’s name and address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the
factual basis underlying the request.



      (4)   A request for reconsideration shall be filed in
triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general
offices of the Department.  Where a request for reconsideration or appeal
either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or
is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the Director, or
the Department’s authorized representative, is final and any right to
reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived.



   (B)   Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and
proper request for reconsideration, the Department shall notify the applicant
of the time and place for a hearing.



      (1)   A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a
hearings officer who is designated by the Director and may be an employee of
the Department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of
a recommendation to the Director and embodied in an administrative order. 
Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to
by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with
division (C) of this section.



      (2)   Where improperly or untimely submitted, the Department
may reject a request for reconsideration. The Department shall notify the
requester in writing that the request has been rejected.



      (3)   Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties,
the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30
days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the
hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time.



      (4)   The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal
consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel,
shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with
the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the
Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the
requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from
the Department or from the court reporter.



      (5)   Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the
hearings officer shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a
recommendation to the Director. The hearings officer shall send such decision
to the requester by certified mail.



      (6)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of
this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with
this section shall stay the action by the Department that is the subject of
the hearing for reconsideration.



   (C)   Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper
request for an appeal, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing
regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with procedures set by the Board until rules are promulgated
pursuant to Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition:



      (1)   Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of
the Department’s action, determination or decision regarding the request
for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   Where a request either is not filed within the time
period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action,
determination or decision of the Director, or the Department’s authorized
representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where
untimely or improperly submitted, the Department may reject the request for
an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has
been rejected.



      (3)   The Department shall appoint a hearings officer. The
hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the
close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify
or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the Department.



      (4)   The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall
be submitted to the Board which shall render a final decision within 30 days
of its next regularly scheduled meeting.



      (5)   In accordance with applicable law, the user or the
Department may appeal any final decision of the Board to a court of competent
jurisdiction.



      (6)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through,
interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of
this sate, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section
shall stay the action by the Department that is the subject of the appeal.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



APPENDIX A



 



Aluminum forming
 
40 C.F.R. Part 467


Asbestos manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 427


Battery manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 461


Builder’s paper and board mills
 
40 C.F.R. Part 431


Canned and preserved fruits/vegetables
 
40 C.F.R. Part 407


Canned and preserved seafood processing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 408


Carbon black manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 458


Cement manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 411


Centralized waste treatment
 
40 C.F.R. Part 437


Coal mining
 
40 C.F.R. Part 434


Coil coating
 
40 C.F.R. Part 465


Copper forming
 
40 C.F.R. Part 465


Dairy products processing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 405


Electrical and electronic components I and II
 
40 C.F.R. Part 469


Electroplating
 
40 C.F.R. Part 413


Explosives manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 457


Feed lots
 
40 C.F.R. Part 412


Ferroalloy manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 424


Fertilizer manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 418


Glass manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 426


Grain mills
 
40 C.F.R. Part 406


Gum and wood chemicals manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 454


Hospital
 
40 C.F.R. Part 460


Ink formulating
 
40 C.F.R. Part 447


Inorganic chemicals manufacture (I and III)
 
40 C.F.R. Part 415


Iron and steel
 
40 C.F.R. Part 420


Landfills
 
40  C.F.R. Part 445


Leather tanning and finishing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 425


Meat products
 
40 C.F.R. Part 432


Metal finishing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 433


Metal molding and casting
 
40 C.F.R. Part 464


Metal products and machinery
 
40 C.F.R. Part 438


Mineral mining and processing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 436


Nonferrous metals forming
 
40 C.F.R. Part 471


Nonferrous metals manufacturing I
 
40 C.F.R. Part 421


Nonferrous metals manufacturing II
 
40 C.F.R. Part 421


Ore mining and dressing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 440


Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers
 
40 C.F.R. Part 414


Paint formulating
 
40 C.F.R. Part 446


Paving and roofing material
 
40 C.F.R. Part 443


Pesticide chemicals
 
40 C.F.R. Part 455


Petroleum refining
 
40 C.F.R. Part 419


Pharmaceutical
 
40 C.F.R. Part 439


Phosphate manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 422


Photographic
 
40 C.F.R. Part 459


Plastics molding and forming
 
40 C.F.R. Part 463


Porcelain enameling
 
40 C.F.R. Part 466


Pulp, paper, and paperboard
 
40 C.F.R. Part 430s and 431


Rubber manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 428


Soap and detergent manufacturing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 417


Steam electric
 
40 C.F.R. Part 423


Sugar processing
 
40 C.F.R. Part 409


Textile mills
 
40 C.F.R. Part 410


Timber products
 
40 C.F.R. Part 429


Transportation equipment cleaning
 
40 C.F.R. Part 442


Waste combustors
 
40 C.F.R. Part 444




 



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



APPENDIX B



   (A)   An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols
limitation specified in § 52.005(B)(2), to substitute specific limitations
for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the
total phenols limitation.  The following specific limitations, expressed in
mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the total phenols limitation, upon election;



 



2-Chlorophenol
 
2.0 mg/l


4-Chlorophenol
 
2.0 mg/l


4-Chloro-3-methylphenol
 
1.0 mg/l


2,4-Dichlorophenol
 
5.5 mg/l


2,4-Dinitrophenol
 
2.0 mg/l


4-Methylphenol
 
5.0 mg/l


4-Nitrophenol
 
15.0 mg/l


Phenol
 
14.0 mg/l




 



   (B)   Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be
modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user
shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these
parameters.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



APPENDIX C



   No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following
pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations:



   (A)   Compatible pollutants.



      (1)   Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater
than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour
period.



      (2)   Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations
greater than 7,500 mg/l.



      (3)   Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations
greater than 7,500 mg/l.



      (4)   Any phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250
mg/l.



Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected
over an operating period representative of a user’s discharge, and in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 146.



   (B)   Non-compatible pollutants cadmium (Cd), 1.0 mg/l.



(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)



CHAPTER 53:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   53.001   Generally



   53.002   Sidewalk construction



   53.003   Sidewalks on paved streets



   53.004   Sidewalks made of concrete



   53.005   Sidewalks ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or
replaced by the City Council



   53.006   Notification



   53.007   Charge for construction, reconstruction or replacement;
special assessment; liability



   53.008   Maintenance



   53.009   Sidewalks requiring repair



   53.010   Duty of Department of Public Services



   53.011   Neglect of owner, agent or occupant



   53.012   Obstruction or interference with construction and
maintenance



   53.013   Snow and ice



 



   53.999   Penalty



§ 53.001  GENERALLY.



   All sidewalks hereafter built, rebuilt, or repaired in the City of
Hamtramck shall be constructed in the manner, and of the widths and materials
in the following section described to wit.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.002  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.



   Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. No sidewalk or crosswalk
shall be less than five feet in width, and when the lines and grades shall
have been officially established, the sidewalks shall conform to the lines
and grades. Before any sidewalk shall be built or repaired, the proper
sidewalk inspections shall be secured from the Building Department.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.003  SIDEWALKS ON PAVED STREETS.



   When any street shall be paved, the sidewalks shall be raised or
lowered to conform to the lines and grades that shall be officially
established and as required by the Department of Public Services, under whose
direction all sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired, and shall be
relayed to the proper grade when so officially established.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.004  SIDEWALKS MADE OF CONCRETE.



   All sidewalks of concrete shall be made of good material, and the work
done in first class workmanlike manner, and left smooth and even in every
part. All sidewalks being constructed, reconstructed or replaced with
concrete must conform to the following minimum specifications:



   (A)   The foundation shall consist of sand or gravel and must be
free from clay, thoroughly compacted to a thickness of not less than two
inches.



   (B)   Walks must not be less than four inches in thickness and on
driveways not less than six inches.



   (C)   All material entering into the composition of the walks must
be well screened and free from dirt.



   (D)   Top dressing shall not be less than one inch in thickness, of
a mixture of cement and sharp sand in proportion of two parts of sand to one
part of cement, which shall conform to the requirements and specifications.



   (E)   The lower stratum, or concrete filling, of the walk shall
consist of clean gravel and cement in the proportion of one part of cement to
five parts of gravel well tamped.



   (F)   The top course shall be placed while the concrete filling is
still moist and be tamped thoroughly up until water comes to the surface, and
the surface then toweled sufficiently to leave it smooth.



   (G)   The concrete filling shall be made from the same cement as the
finishing layer; joints to be made so that no stone shall have more than 25
feet of superficial area in walks five feet wide.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.005  SIDEWALKS ORDERED TO BE CONSTRUCTED, RECONSTRUCTED OR REPLACED BY
THE CITY COUNCIL.



   All sidewalks ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or replaced by
the City Council and constructed by the city as delinquent pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall be constructed of concrete in the manner
and according to the specifications set forth in § 53.004.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.006  NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Whenever the city shall declare it necessary and expedient
that a sidewalk shall be constructed, reconstructed or replaced on any street
in front of, adjacent to, or adjoining private property in the city, it shall
be the duty of the Department of Public Service to notify the owner, agent,
or occupant of the property in front of, adjacent to, or adjoining which the
sidewalk is to be constructed reconstructed or replaced and or repair the
same within 45 days from the date of the notice, in accordance with the
specifications of the Sidewalk Ordinance of the city.



   (B)   The notice may be either personally served within five days
after the date thereof on the parties interested, or it may be served by
publication in the official newspaper of the city at least once within five
days from and after the date of the notice; and it shall not invalidate the
notice to include therein the several separate descriptions of property on
the street in front of, adjoining, or adjacent to which the sidewalk is
required to be constructed, reconstructed or replaced.



   (C)   The Department of Public Services shall keep a record for that
purpose with the date, descriptions, and the like, contained in all notices
served under this chapter and shall file and keep a copy of the notice with
the return of the date and mode of service endorsed thereupon, and also a
record of publication if service be made in that manner.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, or occupant of any
lot or parcel of a lot when notified by the Department of Public Services to
build or repair sidewalks in accordance with the City Code, to promptly
comply with the notice and construct the sidewalks as ordered, and if the
owner, agent, or occupant shall neglect or refuse to construct the sidewalk
within the time specified in the notice, the city can declare the owner,
agent, or occupant of the premises so notified to be delinquent in the matter
of constructing, reconstructing or replacing the sidewalk, and may order the
sidewalk constructed by either the Department of Public Services or a
contractor.  Any costs associated with the delinquency thereof will be
charged to the owner, agent or occupant of the property constructed, and if
not sooner paid by such owner, agent or occupant, will be assessed against
the property as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.007  CHARGE FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPLACEMENT; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT;
LIABILITY.



   Upon the completion of the construction, reconstruction or replacing of
any sidewalk by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a
bill for the entire cost thereof shall be mailed by the Department of Public
Services to the owner, agent or occupant of the property constructed, to the
address where notice was provided, demanding payment of the amount due.  If
said amount is not paid to the city within 30 days from the date of such
bill, the amount due shall be assessed against such property as a special
assessment, in accordance with the provisions of § 16-05 of the City
Charter.  If any damage to the city or third party results from the neglect
or refusal of the owner, agent or occupant to construct, reconstruct or
replace as herein provided, such owner, agent or occupant shall be liable to
the city or any damaged third party for the full amount of such damages.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 53.008  MAINTENANCE.



   All sidewalks in the city shall be kept in good repair by the owner,
agent, or occupant of the house, lot, or premises adjacent to or in front of
which the sidewalk lies. Whenever any sidewalk within the limits of the city
shall require repairing or shall become dangerous or inconvenient for travel
thereon, it shall be the duty of the Department of Public Services to notify,
by written or printed notice or partly written and partly printed notice, the
owner, agent, or occupant of the house, lot, or premises in front of or
adjacent to which the sidewalk lies, to repair the same within 45 days from
the date of personal service or posting of the notice. The notice may be
served personally upon the owner, agent, or occupant, or posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises in front of, adjoining, or adjacent to
which the sidewalk lies.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.009  SIDEWALKS REQUIRING REPAIR.



   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, or occupant of any lot or
parcel of land when notified by the Department of Public Services, to repair
the sidewalks in accordance with this subchapter, to promptly comply with the
notice, and repair the sidewalks as ordered. If the owner, agent, or occupant
shall neglect or refuse to repair the sidewalk within the time specified in
the notice, and if it shall appear, from the return and report of the notice
made by the Department of Public Services that after proper service or
publication of the notice the sidewalks have not been repaired by the parties
notified within the 45 days prescribed in the notice, then the city may at
once declare the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises so notified to be
delinquent in the matter of repairing the sidewalk, and may order the
sidewalk repaired by either the city or a contractor, as may be deemed best
by the city.  Any costs associated with the delinquency thereof will be
charged to the owner; agent or occupant of the property constructed, and if
not sooner paid by such owner, agent or occupant, will be assessed against
the property as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.010  DUTY OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES.



   Whenever it shall appear to the Department of Public Services that by
reason of the extraordinary or dangerous condition of the sidewalk in front
of, adjoining, or adjacent to any lot or premises in the city an emergency
exists which, in the opinion of the Department of Public Services, requires
immediate remedial action in order to protect persons using the sidewalk from
injury and damage and the city from liability therefore, then and in that
case the Department of Public Services shall have the right, and it shall be
their duty, to immediately make temporary repair as shall obviate the danger
herein set forth pending the proceedings for permanent repair provided in
this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 53.011  NEGLECT OF OWNER, AGENT OR OCCUPANT.



   In case any owner, agent, or occupant shall neglect to build or repair
any sidewalk within the time prescribed in the notice of the Department of
Public Services, as provided in this subchapter, and the city, by any suit or
proceedings, is compelled to pay damages for injury to any person or persons
on account of the neglect, the owner, agent, or occupant shall be liable to
the city for the amount of damages so paid, and the same may be collected, if
necessary, by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.012  OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   No person or persons shall obstruct or interfere with the building,
rebuilding, or repairing of any sidewalk provided for under this subchapter,
nor tamper with or remove any apparatus, tools, grade stakes, or building
material furnished or to be used in connection with the building, rebuilding
or repairing of the sidewalks, nor mutilate, disfigure, or destroy any
sidewalk or part thereof.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.013  SNOW AND ICE.



   (A)   Snow and ice removal. The owner, occupant, or responsible
agent of any property, or the owner or responsible agent of any unoccupied or
undeveloped property, is required to keep the sidewalks in front of, and
adjacent to such property, cleared from snow and ice to facilitate pedestrian
use. Where there are no sidewalks, the occupant, owner, or responsible agent
aforementioned, is required to clear a path free from snow and ice where a
sidewalk would otherwise be to facilitate pedestrian use. Whenever any snow
or ice has fallen or accumulated, it shall be cleared within 12 hours after
it has fallen or accumulated. Snow and ice removal shall apply to all
residential, commercial, and industrial properties located within the City of
Hamtramck.



   (B)   Discarding of snow and ice. No person within the city shall
deposit snow or ice from any premises sidewalks, driveways leading to the
premises, or any street parking area onto the portion of any street or
adjacent public right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person, at any
time, to deposit any accumulation of snow or ice upon the traveled portion of
any street or highway, or upon any public sidewalk, or upon any municipally
owned or leased parking lot, anywhere within the city.



   (C)   Contractfor hire; identification required.



      (1)   Any businesses using a contractor for snow removal are
required to identify their contractor with their yearly business license
application.



      (2)   Any vehicle used for hire, gain or reward of snow
removal shall be clearly and plainly marked with the name of the person,
company, firm or corporation that the business license is issued to.



   (D)   Snow emergency.



      (1)   Declaration of. Whenever the City Manager or other
designee finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain or on
the basis of a forecast by a weather service, may declare a snow emergency,
and initiate the City of Hamtramck Emergency Operations Plan.



      (2)   Parking.



         (a)   During a snow emergency, in addition to the
designated fire routes, parking is prohibited on the following streets:



            1.   Joseph Campau - between Carpenter and
Hamtramck Drive;



            2.   Conant - between Carpenter and Hamtramck
Drive;



            3.   Caniff - between Grand Haven and Buffalo;



            4.   Holbrook - between St. Aubin and Buffalo.



         (b)   The City of Hamtramck Police Chief or his or her
designee is authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle that is
parked in any designated fire route, any street where parking is prohibited
during a snow emergency, or any other vehicle that obstructs or otherwise
impedes traffic, where such vehicles are to be found in violation of snow
emergency regulations, traffic ordinances and regulations of the city.



         (c)   1.   In addition to or in lieu of removal, the
City of Hamtramck Police Chief or his or her designee may issue an appearance
ticket to the owner of any vehicle in violation of this section.



            2.   Motor vehicles with handicapped permits and
stickers, legally parked in designated spots, shall be exempt from the
provision of this section.



         (d)   Once in effect, the snow emergency parking
prohibition shall remain in effect until such time until terminated by
announcement, or until the listed streets are substantially cleared of snow
and ice from curb to curb, for the length of the entire block.



(Ord. 2014-45, passed 6-24-2014)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.999.



   (B)   Construction and maintenance.  Every person convicted of
violating any of the provisions of § 53.012 may be punished by a fine of not
to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution and or be imprisoned for 90 days or
both.



   (C)   Snow and ice removal.



      (1)   Any violation of or failure to comply with the
provisions of § 53.010 may be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and
costs of prosecution and or be imprisoned for 90 days or both.



      (2)   Each day the violation exists shall be deemed a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-45, passed 6-24-2014)



CHAPTER 54:  TREES AND SHRUBS



Section



   54.001   Authority of Department of Public Services



   54.002   Definitions



   54.003   Prohibition



   54.004   Use as anchoring



   54.005   Excavations



   54.006   Trimming of branches



   54.007   Visibility



   54.008   Duty of Department of Public Services



   54.009   Violation



   54.010   Moving of buildings



   54.011   Permit for tree planting



   54.012   Removal of trees and shrubs



   54.013   Deposit; when required



   54.014   Interference



   54.015   Rules and regulations



 



   54.999   Penalty



§ 54.001  AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT PUBLIC SERVICES.



   The Department of Public Services shall be charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter and shall have power and control
over all trees, shrubs and plants, planted or to be planted in the public
right-of-ways or places owned by the city, the Department of Public Services
shall also have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees,
shrubs or plants within the public right-of-way or places owned by the city,
as may be necessary to ensure safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty
of such public grounds.  The Department of Public Services and its
representatives and/or employees may remove or cause to be removed, any tree
or part thereof which, in the Department of Public Services sole discretion,
is in an unsafe condition, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect
or other pest.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 54.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any park, parking lot, parkway or other property under
the control or jurisdiction of the Department of Public Services and the city.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  All of the land lying between property lines on
either side of all public streets, boulevards and alleys.



   TREES.  As used in this chapter, shall not be construed to include
shrubs which do not grow higher than 15 feet



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 54.003  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall prune, cut, break,
deface, destroy, spray or repair  upon any tree or part thereof, or in any
manner interfere with, disturb, or injure any tree, shrub or plant upon the
public rights-of-way or places owned by the city; nor shall any chemicals be
used for control of insects or other diseases, or for any other reason, nor
shall any person, firm or corporation permit any chemicals, either solids or
fluids, to seep, drain or be emptied on or about any tree, shrub or plant
that is now or may hereafter grow upon any public right-of-ways or place
owned by the city, without first obtaining permission from the Department of
Public Services.



   (B)   Provided further, that nothing in this section shall be
construed so as to apply to the removal, under the direction of the
Department of Public Services, of any tree, shrub or plant or part thereof,
when the removal shall be necessary for the construction of any sidewalk,
sewer, water main, conduit, or public improvement, after notifying the
Department of Public Services as to the extent of the project proposed.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.004  USE AS ANCHORING.



   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted, for the purpose of
anchorage, to use any wire, rope, chain or cables, nor shall any person, firm
or corporation nail, tie, or in any other manner, fasten any cards, signs,
posters, boards or any other article to any tree, shrub or plant that is now
or may hereafter grow upon any public right-of-ways or public places owned by
the city.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.005  EXCAVATIONS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or
trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any tree, shrub
or plant that is now or may hereafter be growing upon any public
right-of-ways or places owned by the city, without first obtaining a written
permission from the Department of Public Services.  All persons, firms or
corporations desiring to excavate any ditches, tunnels, and trenches by
drives shall deposit, with the Department of Public Services, a sum
sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and damage that may result.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.006  TRIMMING OF BRANCHES.



   (A)   Every owner of any tree, shrub or plant overhanging the street
or rights-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that they shall
not obstruct the light from any street lamp, or obstruct the view of any
street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of 14 feet
above the surface of the street or right-of-way.



   (B)   The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees,
or broken or decayed limbs which may constitute a menace to the safety of the
public.  The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control
device or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above
the right-of-way.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.007  VISIBILITY.



   All trees, shrubs or plants, located on any corner lot within the
limits of the city, that obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle
approaching a street intersection, shall not be permitted to grow to a height
of more than three feet above the street or right-of-way, in order that the
view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not
be obstructed.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.008  DUTY OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES.



   It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Services in all cases
of any violation of § 54.007, to notify the owners of any property failing
to trim any trees, shrubs or plants in conformity with § 54.007 and order
the owners to cut the same within ten days to the height specified.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.009  VIOLATION.



   If any owners of property fail to trim any trees, shrubs, or plants to
the height specified within ten days after being notified so to do, the
Department of Public Services shall order the tree, shrub or plant to be
trimmed to the height herein specified, and the cost thereof if unpaid, shall
become a legal lien against the property.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 54.010  MOVING OF BUILDINGS.



   Every person, firm or corporation, whether licensed or otherwise,
moving any building or other structure of either wood, metal, stone or
concrete, measuring over eight feet, six inches wide; and 12 feet high,
measuring from the surface of the roadway, along any street or highway or
across any public place within the city, shall file a written notice with the
Department of Public Services of the date of their intentions so to do,
stating the time, the place from and to which the building or structure will
be moved, the route proposed to be taken and shall not in any manner damage
any trees or shrubs planted on any street or highway, and shall deposit, with
the Department of Public Services, a sum sufficient to cover the cost of
inspection and damage that may result. The Department of Public Services
shall have authority to refuse issuance of a permit or change the route if,
in their opinion the moving will cause damage to any property.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.011  PERMIT FOR TREE PLANTING.



   The Department of Public Services shall have control over all trees
located within the public right- of-way or places owned by the city and the
planting and care thereof, subject to the regulations in the chapter. It is
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to plant any trees, shrubs or
any other plant in any public right-of-ways within the city, either for
themselves or anyone else, until he or she has secured written permission
from the Department of Public Services, which permission shall be complied
with in strict accordance with the rules and regulations therein. The
application for permission shall designate locations and species of trees,
shrubs or plants to be planted and method proposed to be followed. Every such
permit authorized by the Department of Public Services shall specifically
state the extent of the authorization and conditions to which it is
subject.  The Department of Public Services shall have authority to refuse
the granting of permission when planting is likely to create a public danger
or a nuisance.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 54.012  REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Services and
its representatives and/or employees to remove or cause to be removed all
trees, shrubs or plants, planted upon the public right-of- way and public
places within the city when, in his or her judgment, removal shall be
beneficial to the peace, health and safety of the public, for public
improvements or where the trees, shrubs or plants are detrimental to the
growth of adjacent trees. The cost for removals shall be from funds provided
from general taxation. 



   (B)   Where an owner of property abutting a public right-of-way or
public places within the city requests the removal of a tree, the Department
of Public Services is authorized, in its sole discretion, to require as a
condition of granting the approval for such removal, that such property owner
make the removal in accordance with regulations established by the Department
of Public Services, assume all or part of the costs or removing such tree,
shrub or plant, and also require that the tree removed be replaced at some
other approved location by planting another tree, not necessarily of the same
type, or require sufficient funds to be placed in escrow, with the Department
of Public Services to provide for future planting.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 54.013  DEPOSIT; WHEN REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to remove a live tree for
construction of walks, drives, buildings or any other structures for his or
her own gain, shall deposit with the Department of Public Services a sum
equal to the value of the tree or trees as determined by the Department.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) 



§ 54.014  INTERFERENCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Department of Public Services or any of its employees, agents or
servants, while engaged in carrying out provision of this chapter and while
engaged in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, spraying or
removing of any trees, shrubs or plants in or upon any public right-of-way or
public place in the city or private grounds as authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.015  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Department of Public Services may make and publish additional rules
regulations pertaining to planting, removal and care of trees, scrubs or
plants not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.  No person,
firm or corporation shall fail to obey such rules or regulations.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision
of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion
of the court.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   LOADING REGULATIONS



      74.   BICYCLES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Michigan Vehicle Code



   70.001   Code adopted



   70.002   References in Code



   70.003   Notice to be published



Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act



   70.015   Adoption



   70.016   Reference to mean City of Hamtramck



Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages



   70.030   Adoption



   70.031   Reference to mean City of Hamtramck



 



   70.999   Penalty




MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE




§ 70.001  CODE ADOPTED.



   The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.1 through 257.923 is adopted by reference.



(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)



§ 70.002  REFERENCES IN CODE.



   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to local authorities shall mean
the City of Hamtramck.



(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)



§ 70.003  NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED.



   The City Clerk shall publish this subchapter in the manner required by
law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the
Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the Code is
available to the public at the office of the Clerk for inspection.



(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)




MICHIGAN MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT




§ 70.015  ADOPTION.



   The Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act, as amended and Public Act 300 of
1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.722 is hereby adopted by reference in it entirety
and made part thereof. Notice is hereby given that a copy of the Public
Safety Act and Michigan Compiled Law is available for inspection during
business hours at the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 462, passed 5-1-1997)



§ 70.016  REFERENCE TO MEAN CITY OF HAMTRAMCK.



   Any references in the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act and/or Public
Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.722 to a city, township or village
and/or governmental unit shall mean the City of Hamtramck.



(Ord. 462, passed 5-1-1997)




UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE FOR MICHIGAN CITIES, TOWNSHIPS AND VILLAGES




§ 70.030  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages
promulgated by the Director of State Police and published in the 1979 edition
of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments thereto is hereby adopted
by reference in its entirety and made a part hereof.



   (B)   Current and future amendments and current and future addenda
are adopted by reference.



   (C)   Notice is hereby given that a copy of the Code is available
for inspection during business hours at the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 410, passed 2-11-1984; Am. Ord. 461, passed 5-1-1997)



§ 70.031  REFERENCE TO MEAN CITY OF HAMTRAMCK.



   References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships
and Villages to governmental unit shall mean the City of Hamtramck.



(Ord. 410, passed 2-11-1984)



§ 70.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Michigan Vehicle Code.  The penalties provided by the
Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the
city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the
maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.



(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   71.001   Adopted by reference



§ 71.001  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The revised and amended ordinances regulating traffic, copies of which
are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as
part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 86, passed 3-26-1929; Am. Ord. 179, passed 11-12-1941; Am. Ord. 205,
passed 10-23-1947; Am. Ord. 245, passed 10-29-1957; Am. Ord. 285, passed
10-1-1963; Am. Ord. 310, passed 9-5-1967; Am. Ord. 311, passed 2-20-1968; Am.
Ord. 327, passed 3-10-1970; Am. Ord. 332, passed 8-25-1970; Am. Ord. 333,
passed 12-15-1970; Am. Ord. 339, passed 7-13-1971; Am. Ord. 381, passed
10-17-1978; Am. Ord. 431, passed 10-6-1988)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Parking on Public Lots



   72.001   Restrictions



   72.002   Removal and impoundment



   72.003   Registered owner



Impoundment



   72.015   Impoundment situations



   72.016   Police Chief action



Parking of Boat or Trailer on Residential Streets



   72.030   Restriction



   72.031   Violation



   72.032   Enforcement



Parking Meters



   72.045   Definitions



   72.046   Need for parking meters; recommendation



   72.047   Council approval; effect



   72.048   Parking meter zones



   72.049   Department of Parking Meters established



   72.050   Designation of parking spaces



   72.051   Installation of parking meters



   72.052   Operation of parking meters



   72.053   Parking time limits



   72.054   Violations



   72.055   Towage and storage



   72.056   Registration plate prima facie evidence that owner is
violator



   72.057   Use of funds



   72.058   Duties of City Treasurer



Residential Parking Areas



   72.070   Designation by City Council



   72.071   Restrictions to be posted



   72.072   Use of permit by unauthorized persons



   72.073   Falsified information to obtain permit



   72.074   Permit issued



   72.075   Number of permits



   72.076   Permit affixed to inside center bottom of rear window



   72.077   Fees



   72.078   Parking allowed with permit during designated hours



   72.079   Threatening a person lawfully parked prohibited



Parking on Private Premises



   72.090   Unlawful to park without permission



   72.091   Parking without permission on private premises prima facie
evidence



 



   72.999   Penalty




PARKING ON PUBLIC LOTS




§ 72.001  RESTRICTIONS.



   A person shall not park a vehicle on any parking lot open to the public
for the purpose of doing any of the following:



   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;



   (B)   Washing, polishing, greasing and repairing the vehicle, except
for repairs necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Displaying advertising;



   (D)   Selling merchandise from the vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under the
ordinances of this governmental unit; and/or



   (E)   Storage for more than 48 continuous hours.



(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.002  REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   The Police Chief and/or any person or persons designated by the Police
Chief may remove and impound any vehicle from any area where it is parked in
violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994)



§ 72.003  REGISTERED OWNER.



   The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this
subchapter shall be presumed to be the party who committed the violation.



(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994)




IMPOUNDMENT




§ 72.015  IMPOUNDMENT SITUATIONS.



   The Police Chief and/or a person or persons designated by him or her
may remove and impound a vehicle from public or private property in any of
the following situations:



   (A)   The vehicle is in a condition that the continued operation of
the vehicle would constitute an immediate hazard to the public;



   (B)   The vehicle is parked or standing in a manner as to create an
immediate public hazard or an obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;



   (C)   The vehicle is parked in a posted tow away zone;



   (D)   There is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any
part of the vehicle is stolen;



   (E)   It is necessary to seize the vehicle to preserve evidence of a
crime or there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in
the commission of a crime;



   (F)   Removal of the vehicle is necessary in the interest of public
safety because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or man-made disaster and
other emergency;



   (G)   The vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the
owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which
impedes the movement of another vehicle;



   (H)   The driver of the vehicle is taken into custody by the Police
Department and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended;



   (I)   Removal is necessary to permit snow removal, street
construction, cleaning and repair; tree work and other public utility work
after at least 24-hours notice thereof has been posted;



   (J)   A vehicle is unattended and the registered owner of the
vehicle has six or more unpaid outstanding citations for parking violations.
In lieu of or prior to impoundment under this provision, the Police Chief
and/or a person or persons authorized by him or her may attach to the vehicle
a device that will prevent the vehicle from being moved. A fee set by Council
resolution shall be charged for attachment and removal of the device. The
device may be removed by the Police Chief and/or a person or persons
designated by him or her if the violations and fee for attachment and removal
are paid, if security is posted for court appearance on the violations, if
the violations are dismissed, or if it is necessary to impound the vehicle it
is unlawful for any person to remove a device without authorization of the
Police Chief and/or a person or persons designated by him or her;



   (K)   Inoperative vehicles.



      (1)   No person shall park, store, leave or allow to be left
upon private property controlled by him or her, any motor vehicle in a
rusted, wrecked, junk and partially dismantled or inoperative condition
whether attended or not, unless in connection with an auto maintenance or
repair business or unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a garage.



      (2)   Provided, however, that while no vehicle can be
maintained in the rear yard for a period not to exceed 30 days after notice
to remove the vehicle is served by the city so long as the vehicle is not
within 20 feet of an abutting residential lot.



   (L)   Unregistered vehicles.  No person shall park, store, leave or
allow to be left upon the streets, highways or parking lots of the city, any
motor vehicle not displaying current license plates registered to that
vehicle; and



   (M)   In any other situation in which impoundment is authorized
under the State Motor Vehicle Code and adopted by the Uniform Traffic Code.



(Ord. 440, passed 1-30-1992)



§ 72.016  POLICE CHIEF ACTION.



   (A)   If a vehicle is impounded under § 72.015(L), the Police Chief
and/or his or her assigns shall proceed in accordance with the requirements
of § 252d of the State Motor Vehicle Code.



   (B)   If a vehicle is impounded under § 72.015(J), the Police Chief
and/or his or her assigns shall not require a bond or cash deposit by the
owner of the motor vehicle in excess of $500 in order to recover the
possession of a motor vehicle pending final adjudication of the case.



(Ord. 440, passed 1-30-1992)




PARKING OF BOAT OR TRAILER ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS




§ 72.030  RESTRICTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a boat or a boat trailer
for longer than one hour on any residential street or city owned property in
the city.



(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.031  VIOLATION.



   Any person who violates this subchapter shall be responsible for
committing a civil infraction.



(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.032  ENFORCEMENT.



   All of the provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by any
officer of the City Police Department.



(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988)




PARKING METERS




§ 72.045  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan.



   CLERK.  The City Clerk of the City of Hamtramck, Michigan.



   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The Department of Public Works in the
city.



   OPERATOR.  Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof or as the agent, employee and permittee of  the owner, or is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs and
signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.



   PARKING METER.  Any mechanical device or meter placed or erected for
the regulation of parking by authority of this subchapter. Each PARKING METER
installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established
by the city and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of
legal parking time, and at the expiration of the period shall indicate
illegal or overtime parking.



   PARKING METER SPACE.  Any space within a parking meter zone; adjacent
to a parking meter, which is duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the
surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.



   PARKING METER ZONE.  Any street or part thereof upon which parking
meters are to be installed and placed in operation.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT.  The Police Department in the city.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.



   STREET.  Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path
and other public place or parking lot located in the city and established for
the use of vehicles.



   TREASURER.  The City Treasurer in the city.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a street, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.046  NEED FOR PARKING METERS; RECOMMENDATION.



   (A)   Where it is deemed that because of traffic congestion or other
cause, the public safety is imperiled, the public convenience can be better
served and traffic regulations can be more adequately enforced with the
assistance secured through the installation and maintenance of parking
meters, parking meters may be installed under and in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   When the Chief of Police deems that conditions on or along any
particular street or streets in the city appear to require the regulation of
traffic by parking meters, he or she shall make or cause to be made through
the Police Department a survey of the situation to determine the need for the
regulation, and if he or she finds a need therefor, he or she shall make a
determination of the fact, and shall file the determination together with his
or her recommendations with the City Council.



   (C)   The recommendations above referred to shall include among
other things:



      (1)   The parking meter zone or zones;



      (2)   Number of parking meter spaces;



      (3)   State the legal parking time in each zone;



      (4)   State the amount of the parking fee for each zone;



      (5)   State the hours during which the use of parking meters
shall be in operation in each zone; and



      (6)   Make any other recommendation that will facilitate the
movement or control of vehicular traffic and eliminate congestion thereof.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.047  COUNCIL APPROVAL; EFFECT.



   The Council may by appropriate resolution approve, modify prior to
approval and may disapprove any recommendation. If and when the
recommendation is approved by the Council, the recommendations as approved
shall be the equivalent of adoption by the Council and shall have the same
force and effect as though they had been set forth in a resolution in detail,
and shall be deemed to be regulations promulgated by the Council in the
control of traffic on the streets; provided, however, that nothing herein
stated shall be deemed to prevent the Director of the department whose duty
it is to enforce this subchapter to formulate rules and regulations as
authorized by the Charter for the organization and conduct of the department;
provided, further, that the promulgated regulations by the City Council shall
not be effective until signs have been erected sufficient in size and number
to apprise the ordinarily observant person of the existence of the parking
meter regulations. Upon the approval and the regulations becoming effective,
the Department of Parking Meters, as hereinafter established, shall thereby
be authorized and empowered to install parking meters and enforce the
regulations pertaining thereto as herein authorized.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.048  PARKING METER ZONES.



   The following named and described areas, streets or portions of
streets, and any other areas, as may hereafter be included in this section by
amendment hereto or by appropriate resolution of the City Council as provided
in this section, and lying within the corporate limits of the city, shall
constitute parking meter zones, namely:



   (A)   Both east and west sides of Joseph Campau Avenue, starting at
the southerly boundary of the city and extending to the northerly boundary;



   (B)   All streets intersecting the west side of Joseph Campau
Avenue, from the alley immediately west of Joseph Campau Avenue, extending
easterly, to Joseph Campau Avenue and including the south side of Holbrook
Street from the alley west of Joseph Campau Avenue to the westerly street
line of the Holbrook parking lot;



   (C)   The parking lot on the west side of Joseph Campau Avenue and
fronting on Holbrook Avenue and known as the “Holbrook Parking Lot” and
located specifically on Lots 102 to 109, all inclusive of Casgrain’s
Subdivision; and



   (D)   All streets intersecting the east side of Joseph Campau
Avenue, from the alley immediately east of Joseph Campau Avenue, extending
westerly to Joseph Campau Avenue, and including the north side of Holbrook
Street between Joseph Campau and Mitchell Avenues, and the north side of
Caniff Street between Joseph Campau and Mitchell Avenues.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.049  DEPARTMENT OF PARKING METERS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established in the city government
a department to be known as the Department of Parking, which Department shall
be part of the Traffic Control Department, which shall be under the
direction, supervision and control of the Chief of Police, appointed by the
City Manager in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have the following powers, duties
and responsibilities:



      (1)   To see that the provisions of this subchapter and the
regulations promulgated in connection therewith are enforced at all times;



      (2)   To install or cause to have installed parking meters in
places and locations as have been determined by Council approval as herein
provided;



      (3)   To see that the meters are properly maintained, serviced
and kept in a state of good repair so that they will be ready, and available
for use and operation when required;



      (4)   To cause the parking meter spaces to be individually
marked or painted on the street surface, curb or parking lots and the
markings to be continuously maintained, after the location thereof has been
designated as herein provided;



      (5)   To make or cause to be made regular collections of the
sealed coin boxes or containers from the meters and to deliver the boxes with
seals unbroken to the Treasurer or to the person or persons designated by the
Treasurer for the receipt of the boxes and the handling thereof and the
accounting for the contents thereof in his or her office;



      (6)   To obtain as often as necessary from the Treasurer the
quantities of sealed coin boxes or containers for inserting in the parking
meters to replace those removed containing coins, and to insert the empty
boxes in the meters for use;



      (7)   To keep a daily record of the sealed coin boxes properly
identified, which have been removed from meters and delivered to the
Treasurer;



      (8)   To file with the Traffic Violations Bureau of the city
on the following business day a carbon copy report of all violation notices
issued on the preceding day covering overtime parking and to file with the
City Council on the tenth day of each succeeding month a monthly report
showing the monies received from overtime parking and the disposition of each
violation notice issued during that current month;



      (9)   To erect or cause to be erected signs in sufficient
number and of suitable size to apprise the ordinarily observant person of the
existence of the parking meter regulation applicable to the parking meter
space and zone;



      (10)   To sign any and all complaints that may be necessary
for the proper enforcement of this subchapter;



      (11)   If the vehicle is not towed away, to issue a notice of
violation to every person, either as owner or operator involving every
vehicle that is illegally parked under the provisions of this subchapter and
the regulations promulgated thereunder; and



      (12)   To make recommendations from time to time to the
Council covering any matters requiring the Council’s help in enabling his
or her Department to function more effectively and efficiently.



   (C)   Any and all of the duties hereinabove specified may be
performed by the Chief of Police or by the person or persons by him or her
duly authorized.



   (D)   The cooperation of the Department of Public Works, the Police
Department and other administrative departments in the city is hereby
requested in setting up the parking meter program and in its continuation to
benefit the city.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.050  DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   In determining the number of parking spaces that shall be
installed in each parking zone, a minimum of 20 feet in length shall be
allowed for each space for parallel parking when the space is interior, and a
minimum of 18 feet when the space is at the end of the zone. All parking
shall be parallel to curb, unless the Chief of Police shall determine and the
Council shall approve angle parking in any zone. A minimum of seven feet in
width shall be allowed for parallel parking, and a minimum of eight feet in
width shall be allowed for angle parking.



   (B)   The individual parking spaces shall be designated by lines
painted or durably marked on the surface of the street or on the curbing.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a way that the
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.051  INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS.



   (A)   After the parking meter zones have been established and the
number of parking spaces determined as herein provided, parking meters shall
be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking
spaces, the installation to be placed not more than two feet from the curb
and not more than four feet from the front line of the parking space as
indicated. Each meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal
parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins which are lawful
money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by
appropriate Council regulation. Each meter shall be so arranged than upon the
expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible
signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in cases the right of
the vehicle to occupy the space shall cease and the operator or owner thereof
shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Where angle parking is designated for any parking meter zone,
the meter should be installed in the location that the portion of the vehicle
nearest the curb will be closest to the meter.



   (C)   Each parking meter shall be placed or set in a manner as to
plainly show or display, by a signal or otherwise, that the parking meter
space adjacent to the meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter
shall also indicate by a proper legend the coin to be deposited; the hours
during which the use of the meter is required; the legal parking time
established; and when operated, each meter shall indicate visibly on and by a
dial and pointer, or otherwise, the elapsing legal parking time, and upon the
expiration of the time, shall indicate the illegal or over-parking.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.052  OPERATION OF PARKING METERS.



   Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer,
when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to
which a parking meter is located, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon
entering the parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be
deposited in the meter proper coin of the United States as it required for
the parking meter and as is designated by proper directions on the meter,
and, failure to deposit the proper coin shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter. Upon the deposit of coin the parking space may be lawfully
occupied by the vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed
for the zone in which the parking space is located; provided, that any
persons placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which
indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous
occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his
or her occupancy of the space does not exceed the indicated unused parking
time. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the
parking time limit set for the parking space, and if the meter shall indicate
by its dial and pointer that the time has elapsed and that parking is
illegal, then, and in that event, the vehicle shall be considered as parking
overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and the parking shall
be deemed a violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.053  PARKING TIME LIMITS.



   Parking a vehicle in a designated space in a parking meter zone shall
be lawful for the period of time specified for that zone as shown by a sign
on the meter or by one or more signs posted along the street in sufficient
number and of sufficient size to apprise the ordinarily observant person of
the existence of the limited period within which lawful sparking  can be had
along and upon the street. The parking meters shall be operated in the
parking meter zones Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. and Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except
Sundays and holidays. Parking of a vehicle in any parking meter space for a
period longer than that allowed by the sign shall be deemed to be illegal and
a violation of this subchapter, provided, however, that lawful parking may be
had in the space during any hours when the parking meter regulations are in
effect, and on Sundays and holidays; provided, further, holidays as herein
used shall be deemed to mean and include only the following days, to wit:
January 1, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, December 25 and the day
designated as a day of Thanksgiving.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.054  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this
subchapter for any person:



   (A)   To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in
the name of, or operated by the person to be parked overtime, or beyond the
period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described;



   (B)   To deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of
parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking
meter zone and space;



   (C)   To permit any vehicle to remain in any parking space adjacent
to any parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal indicating that
the vehicle occupying the parking space has already been parked beyond the
period prescribed for the parking space;



   (D)   To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking
space meter or in a position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within
the area designated by the lines or markings;



   (E)   To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy and impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this subchapter, except persons legally authorized to open the
meter; or



   (F)   To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any
slugs, device or metal substance; or other substitute for lawful coins.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.055  TOWAGE AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking
meter space overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time established
for the space, or shall be found parked therein during any period when
parking is prohibited or shall be found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter, the vehicle may be removed by, or under the
direction of any person authorized to enforce this subchapter by means of
towing the same to the automobile and vehicle pound, and the removal shall be
at the risk of the owner. Before the owner or person in charge of the vehicle
shall be permitted to remove the same from the pound, he or she shall furnish
evidence of his or her identity and ownership or right to possession, shall
sign a receipt for the vehicle, the enforcing officer may in lieu of towing
the vehicle to the pound serve upon the owner or operator of the vehicle, or
attach to the vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to
appear at the Traffic Violations Bureau of the city within the time specified
in the notice.



   (B)   The notice shall state the date and location of the meter
adjacent to the space where the violation occurred, the time of violation,
the kind of vehicle, the state license number of each vehicle, and any other
facts relevant to the violation. A copy of the notice may be attached to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place, which will notify the owner or operator that
the vehicle was parked in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and
instructing the owner or operator that the violation can be fully settled and
satisfied by the payment within 24 hours of the time of issuance of the
ticket.



   (C)   All sums thus collected by the Traffic Violations Bureau
relative to and all fines or penalties imposed arising out of parking meter
violations shall be paid to the Treasurer and credited to the Parking Meter
Receiving Fund.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Ord. 264, passed 6-6-1961; Am. Ord. 357,
passed 7-2-1974)



§ 72.056  REGISTRATION PLATE PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE THAT OWNER IS VIOLATOR.



   In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the registration plate
displayed on a motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of a vehicle as the person who parked
the vehicle at the place where the violation occurred.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.057  USE OF FUNDS.



   The coins deposited in parking meters are required and shall be used to
defray the expense of proper regulation of traffic upon the public streets of
the city; to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation, and control of
the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones, and to cover the cost of
purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation,
maintenance, control and use of parking meters.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



§ 72.058  DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   The monies collected in the meter coin boxes shall be
delivered to and received by the City Treasurer and the City Controller or
his or her authorized representative, and accounted for and deposited by the
City Treasurer as, directed in this subchapter.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall keep a detailed record of all monies
received from day to day from the several respective meters throughout the
city, and shall prepare a monthly summary of the receipts from each of the
meters. A copy of the summary shall be available to the City Controller and
to any other city official on request. He or she shall also prepare a monthly
report of miscellaneous monies received from fines and penalties from
overtime parking and submit the same the City Council.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)




RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREAS




§ 72.070  DESIGNATION BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council is authorized to designate by resolution an area or
areas within the city in which parking is restricted to residents of the area
and their guests for specified hours of designated days of the week and to
adopt regulations for the administration of the designated residential
parking areas.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)



§ 72.071  RESTRICTIONS TO BE POSTED.



   The hours and days and conditions under which parking is permitted
shall be posted on signs in the designated areas so as to give notice thereof
to the general public.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)



§ 72.072  USE OF PERMIT BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.



   It is shall be unlawful to permit an unauthorized person to use a
residential parking permit or a visitor’s parking permit or, to falsify
information to obtain these permits or to fail to surrender the permit to the
Chief of Police, or any of his or her designees, on his or her demand if the
permits are used in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.073  FALSIFIED INFORMATION TO OBTAIN PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify information to obtain a
residential parking permit or a visitor parking permit, or to fail to
surrender the permit to the Chief of Police, or his or her duly designated
agent, on demand if it is used in violation of this subchapter or to
otherwise violate the regulations governing the issuance of the permits.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.074  PERMIT ISSUED.



   (A)   The Chief of Police upon application shall issue a residential
parking permit to each resident of a designated residential parking area for
each vehicle leased or owned by the resident upon presentation of a current
vehicle registration with the appropriate address, or with a tax bill if the
vehicle is not registered with the appropriate address.



   (B)   A RESIDENT for the purpose of this subchapter is any person
who rents or owns and lives in a designated residential parking area.
Residential parking permits shall be renewed on May 1 of each year.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)



§ 72.075  NUMBER OF PERMITS.



   The Chief of Police shall issue three visitor’s parking permits to
each residential unit making application for a residential parking permit.
The resident’s address shall be recorded on the permit. Visitor’s parking
permit shall be coded and shall be renewed on May 1 of each year.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)



§ 72.076  PERMIT AFFIXED TO INSIDE CENTER BOTTOM OF REAR WINDOW.



   The residential parking permits shall be permanently affixed to the
inside center bottom of the rear window of the vehicle for which the permit
was issued; the visitor’s parking permits shall be displayed so as to be
visible at the center bottom of the rear window of the vehicle.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.077  FEES.



   There shall be no charge for initial issue each year of the residential
parking permits or visitor’s parking permits but there shall be a fee of $3
for the replacement of residential parking permits or visitors parking
permits.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)



§ 72.078  PARKING ALLOWED WITH PERMIT DURING DESIGNATED HOURS.



   (A)   No person shall park in a designated residential parking area
without a residential parking permit or a visitor’s parking permit during
the designated hours.



   (B)   Any vehicle parked not in conformity with the provisions of
this section shall be issued a violation tickets for the illegal parking and
the penalty therefor shall be as determined by City Council.



   (C)   The illegally parked vehicles also may be towed away to an
area designated by the Chief of Police.



   (D)   A towing fee as determined by City Council shall be paid by
the owner of the vehicle before it is released.



   (E)   The penalty and fee prescribed in this section shall be in
addition to any penalty otherwise prescribed for violations other than those
contained in this section.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.079  THREATENING A PERSON LAWFULLY PARKED PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to threaten, prevent or hinder any person who has
lawfully parked, or is attempting to lawfully park, a vehicle within the city.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)  Penalty, see § 72.999




PARKING ON PRIVATE PREMISES




§ 72.090  UNLAWFUL TO PARK WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave or cause to be
parked or left any automobile or other motor vehicle on the premises of
another after having been warned not to do so by word of mouth or sign or
otherwise, however, the person shall not be held in violation of this
subchapter unless a complaint by the property owner is first made; provided
that this section, shall not apply to employees of the city in the discharge
of their official duties.



(Ord. 236, passed 9-7-1954)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.091  PARKING WITHOUT PERMISSION ON PRIVATE PREMISES PRIMA FACIE
EVIDENCE.



   The presence of an unattended automobile or other motor vehicle on the
premises of one who is not the owner or in control of the automobile or other
motor vehicle shall raise a prima facie presumption that the registered owner
of the automobile or other motor vehicle parked or left or caused to be
parked or left the automobile or other motor vehicle on the premises, and the
burden of proof shall be upon the registered owner to show otherwise.



(Ord. 236, passed 9-7-1954)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Parking on public lots.  Any person who violates any
provision of §§ 72.001 through 72.003 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days
or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994)



   (B)   Impoundment.  Any person violating any of the provisions of
§§ 72.015 and 72.016 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a find of
not more than $500 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days
or to both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 440, passed 1-30-1992)



   (C)   Parking of boat or trailer on residential streets.  Any
provision of §§ 72.030 through 72.032 which describes an act or omission
which constitutes a civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through
257.923, as amended, shall be processed as a civil infraction and any person
found to have committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil fine
of not more than $100 and costs.



(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988)



   (D)   Parking meters.  Any person who shall violate or fail to
comply with any of the provisions of §§ 72.045 through 72.058, or the
regulations promulgated by the Council in connection therewith, who shall
counsel, aid or abet any violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of not to exceed $100, or imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, by both a
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)



   (E)   Residential parking areas.  Any person convicted of violating
any of the provisions of §§ 72.070 through 72.079 shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a
fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)



   (F)   Parking on private premises.  Any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of §§ 72.090 and 72.091 shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $100 or imprisonment in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of confinement as may hereafter be selected by the
justice of the peace of the city, for a period of not to exceed 90 days, or
both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 236, passed 9-7-1954)



CHAPTER 73:  LOADING REGULATIONS



Section



   73.001   Establishment



   73.002   Application for loading zone



   73.003   Erection of no parking signs



   73.004   Installation and maintenance fees



   73.005   Establishment of installation and maintenance fees



   73.006   Exemptions



 



   73.999   Penalty



§ 73.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Special loading, shipping or receiving zones in front of entrances may
be provided and established under the conditions herein provided.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)



§ 73.002  APPLICATION FOR LOADING ZONE.



   Any owner or occupant of a building adjacent to a street or alley
desiring a certain loading zone immediately in front of an entrance to the
building shall make application to the Chief of Police setting forth all
relevant information and stating the number of feet desired for that
purposes. The Chief of Police shall have authority to grant or refuse the
application when in his or her judgment the public welfare so requires, or to
grant the same with the restrictions or limitations as he or she may deem
necessary. In case the application is granted, the Chief of Police shall
issue to the applicant a permit, or certificate, setting forth the location
of the loading, shipping or receiving zone the number of feet fixed for the
zone and other limitations that may be pertinent. The permit may, at any
time, be withdrawn or modified by the Chief of Police whenever in his or her
judgment the public welfare so requires.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.003  ERECTION OF NO PARKING SIGNS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, in order to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, shall erect no parking signs and other appropriate signs
marking the limits of the loading, shipping or receiving zones and setting
forth the hours during which the provisions shall be in effect.



   (B)   During the hours when the provisions applicable to the loading
zone are in effect, no vehicle shall be parked in any zone, except for the
purpose of taking on or discharging merchandise or freight, or for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, and in no case for longer
than 30 minutes.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.004  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE FEES.



   The installation and maintenance fees for loading, shipping or
receiving zones established under the terms of this chapter shall be as
hereinafter provided.



   (A)   Where the establishment of a zone does not necessitate the
removal of vehicle parking meters, an installation fee of $1 per foot
frontage shall be paid to the city by the applicant to defray the cost of
establishing a zone. In addition, an annual maintenance fee of $5 shall be
paid to the city by the permit holder on or before May 1 of each year to
defray the cost of maintenance for the following 12-month period, or fraction
thereof. In the event of failure to pay the maintenance fee by May 1, the
permit issued hereunder shall automatically expire.



   (B)   Where the establishment of a loading, shipping or receiving
zone necessitates the removal of one or more vehicle parking meters, an
installation fee of $75 shall be paid to the city by the applicant to defray
the cost of removing the vehicle parking meters and installing signs in each
loading, shipping or receiving zone established on the street. In addition,
the annual maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the city by the permit
holder on or before May 1 of each year for the zones established where the
vehicle parking meters were removed, where it was necessary to remove not
more than two meter stalls, and an additional fee of $25 shall be paid to the
city by the permit holder for each meter stall in excess of two which shall
have been removed to provide the zone on or before May 1 of each year, the
fee to defray maintenance and loss of revenues to the city for the 12-month
period, or fraction thereof following. In the event of failure to pay the
above maintenance fee by May 1, the permit issued hereunder shall
automatically expire.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.005  ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE FEES.



   The installation and maintenance fees for building entrance zones
established under the terms of this chapter shall be as hereinafter provided:



   (A)   Where the establishment of building entrance zones do not
necessitate the removal of vehicle parking meters, an installation fee of $25
shall be paid to the city by the applicant to defray the cost thereof. In
addition, an annual maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the city by the
permit holder on or before May 1 of each year, the fee to defray maintenance
for the 12-month period, or fraction thereof follow the maintenance fee by
May 1, any permit issued hereunder shall automatically expire.



   (B)   Where the establishment of a building entrance zone
necessitates the removal of one or more vehicle parking meters, an
installation fee of $75 shall be paid to the city by the applicant to defray
the cost of removing the vehicle parking meters and installing signs in each
building entrance established on the street. In addition, an annual
maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the city by the permit holder on or
before May 1 of each year for each building entrance zone established in an
area where the vehicle parking meters existed, where it was necessary to
remove not more than two meter stalls, and an additional fee of $25 shall be
paid to the city by the permit holder for each meter stall in excess of two
which shall have been removed to provide the building entrance zone on or
before May 1 of each year, the fee to defray maintenance and loss of revenues
to the city for the 12-month period, or fraction thereof following. Failure
to pay the fees shall subject the permit holder to the penalties established
for violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.006  EXEMPTIONS.



   The installation and maintenance fees to be paid under the provisions
of this chapter shall not be required of governmental institutions, public or
parochial schools, churches, hospitals, asylums, public libraries, public
museums or charitable institutions.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)



§ 73.999  PENALTY.



   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a
fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES



Section



   74.001   Short title



   74.002   Definitions



   74.003   Authority



   74.004   Operation regulations



   74.005   Registration required



   74.006   Record keeping; payment of fees; rules and regulations
promulgated by Chief of Police



   74.007   Buying and selling bicycles



   74.008   Reciprocal right of bicycle operators



   74.009   Impoundment



 



   74.999   Penalty



§ 74.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be referred to as the Bicycle Chapter.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



§ 74.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  As defined by the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of
1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.10 et seq. At the time of the adoption of this
chapter, BICYCLE means a device propelled by human power upon which a person
may ride, having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle
arrangement, all of which are over 14 inches in diameter.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The person ultimately in charge of public safety
within the city or his or her designee.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



§ 74.003  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted under the authority granted to the city under
the Michigan Vehicle Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §
257.606.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



§ 74.004  OPERATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 12 years shall operate a bicycle
upon any public highway, street and alley in the city; provided, however,
that the person under 12 years of age may operate a bicycle upon the
sidewalks in the city, and provided further that the person so operating the
bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an
audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.



   (B)   A person of the age of 12 years or older and under the age of
18 years shall be permitted to operate a bicycle upon any public highway,
street and alley in the city provided that the person has in his or her
possession a designation on his or her operator’s license, issued by the
Chief of Police in accordance with this chapter, in his or her possession the
written consent to do so of his or her parent or legal guardian.



   (C)   No person shall operate a bicycle during the hours when the
person is forbidden by any regulation establishing a curfew, unless the
person is not considered in violation of the regulation establishing a curfew.



   (D)   If the city establishes a usable and designated path for
bicycles adjacent to a roadway, a bicycle rider shall use that path.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.005  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every owner desiring to operate a bicycle upon the public
highways, streets, sidewalks and alleys shall register their bicycle with the
Chief of Police not later than 90 days from the date of purchase or
acquisition of the bicycle, or within 30 days of the passage of this chapter.
The registration shall state the owner’s name, date of birth, residence
address, make of bicycle, serial number, and any other information as the
Chief of Police shall require. A registration fee may also be required.



   (B)   No person in the city shall keep any bicycles for hire unless
the same shall have been registered in accordance with this chapter and shall
be licensed to do business in the city in accordance with the applicable
business licensing regulation.



   (C)   Upon registration of the bicycle with the Chief of Police, he
or she shall cause to attach proof of registration to the bicycle. The Chief
of Police shall be authorized to determine the color, type and form of the
proof of registration to be attached to the bicycle, provided that the proof
of registration is numbered and contains the words “City of Hamtramck,
MI.” A duplicate of a lost, mutilated or destroyed proof of registration
may be secured from the Chief of Police upon filing of an affidavit with him
or her, demonstrating the facts, and upon payment of the appropriate fee.



   (D)   All proof of registration shall remain the property of the
city and the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to confiscate and take
possession or custody of any proof of registration attached to any bicycle
for which it was not issued, or when the owner of the bicycle has made or is
making an unlawful use of his or her proof of registration. Proof of
registration shall not be covered, obscured, bent, altered, or defaced in any
manner likely to impair its legibility. No person shall removed, destroy,
mutilate, alter, or counterfeit any proof of registration, or issue any
forged or counterfeit proof of registration. No person shall operate a
bicycle on the public highways, streets, sidewalks and alleys within the
corporate limits of the city under a proof of registration other than that
issued by the Chief of Police.



   (E)   All proof of registration issued by the Chief of Police shall
expire if and when the owner sells or transfers ownership of the bicycle for
which the proof of registration was issued, unless the proof of registration
is sooner revoked by the City Council for cause following a public hearing
conducted under the procedures determined by the City Council and
incorporated as part of the rules adopted at the first meeting of the new
Council. The Chief of Police may at any time, for cause, temporarily suspend
the proof of registration until the next regular meeting of the Council, but,
in no case, to exceed ten calendar days.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.006  RECORD KEEPING; PAYMENT OF FEES; RULES AND REGULATIONS
PROMULGATED BY CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall keep a complete and accurate record
of all bicycle registrations.



   (B)   All fees required by this chapter shall be established
annually by the City Council during adoption of the annual budget.



   (C)   Any rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police
shall be written and shall be made available for public inspection upon
request.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



§ 74.007  BUYING AND SELLING BICYCLES.



   (A)   All persons engaged in the business of buying new and
second-hand bicycles shall make a monthly report to the Chief of Police,
containing information and in the form as the Chief of Police shall require.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the buying of second-hand
bicycles to purchase any bicycle that has not been registered with the Chief
of Police. All persons engaged in the business of buying second-hand bicycles
shall be licensed to do business in accordance with the general business
licensing requirements of the city.



   (B)   All persons engaged in the business of selling new or
second-hand bicycles shall make a monthly report to the Chief of Police,
giving a list of all sales made by the dealers and containing the information
and in the form as the Chief of Police shall require. All persons engaged in
the business of buying second-hand bicycles shall be licensed to do business
in accordance with the general business licensing requirements of the city.



   (C)   Every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle
shall report the sale or transfer by returning the proof of registration to
the Chief of Police and the name and address of the person to whom the
bicycle was sold or transferred, within seven calendar days of the date of
the sale or transfer. The purchasers or transferee of the bicycle shall
register within seven calendar days of the sale or transfer in accordance
with the registration provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.008  RECIPROCAL RIGHT OF BICYCLE OPERATORS.



   Where adjacent municipalities have an ordinance similar to this chapter
and contain a similar provision, then it shall be lawful for a resident of
the adjacent municipality to operate bicycles upon the public highways,
streets, alleys and sidewalks in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter, provided that a nonresident so operating a bicycle shall provide
proof to any police officer in the city, upon request, that he or she
possesses a registration card issued by his or her home municipality.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



§ 74.009  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any bicycle, the owner of which has failed to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, may be impounded by the Chief of Police and
released only upon payment of the registration fee, a penalty equal to the
amount of the registration fee, and full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



§ 74.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   In the event of any violation of this chapter by a person
under the age of 18 years, the Police Department of the city shall be
authorized to immediately impound the bicycle of the person so operating for
a certain period, but not exceeding six months, and in addition thereto shall
notify the parent or guardian of the violator and giving details of the
violation and recommending to the parent or guardian to revoke for a period,
during which the bicycle is impounded, any written permission issued to the
person. The parent of a child or the guardian of a ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit the child or ward to violate this chapter.



   (B)   Any firm, corporation and person, of the age of 18 years and
over, which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with
any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense. The fine structure shall be established by annual
resolution of the City Council upon adoption of the budget.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003)



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Truck routes



SCHEDULE I.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any truck whether loaded or unloaded,
weighing more than 8,000 pounds as determined by its certificate of
registration, to be operated on any street in the city except those streets
hereinafter designated as “truck routes,” provided, however, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to trucks in excess of the weight
limit herein specified when the operation of the truck is necessary for the
purposes of making one or more deliveries or pickups of materials,
manufactured products, goods, wares and merchandise on streets other than
those designated “truck routes” in the city; provided further, that the
operation shall be permitted only for the shortest possible distance when
necessary to effect the delivery or pickup; provided further that trucks
operated by the city in connection with the rendering of necessary service to
the residents of the city may be operated on any or all streets in the city.



   (B)   The streets designated in this chapter as “truck routes”
shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon or at the entrance to the street
or highway or part thereof affected, with a suitable sign indicating the
words “truck route.”



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any truck, weighing in excess of
8,000 pounds as determined by its certificate of registration, on any street
in the city. The Chief of Police, for good cause shown, may grant special
parking permits allowing parking of those vehicles, provided the permit is
granted for a definite and specific period of time.



   (D)   All the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the
City Police Department.



   (E)   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil
infraction subjecting the violator to civil fines and court costs as
permitted by law.



   (F)   The streets hereinabove referred to as “truck routes” are
hereby designated as follows.



 



Alpena Avenue from Caniff Avenue to Edwin Avenue


Buffalo Avenue from Caniff Avenue to Holbrook Avenue


Caniff Avenue from Grand Haven Avenue to Buffalo Avenue


Carpenter Avenue from Conant Avenue to Dequindre Avenue


Commor Avenue from Dequindre Avenue to Grand Trunk RR


Conant Avenue from Hamtramck Drive to Carpenter Avenue


Denton Avenue from Conant Avenue to St. Aubin Avenue


Dequindre Avenue from Carpenter Avenue to Poland Avenue


Hamtramck Drive from Conant Avenue to West City Limit


Holbrook Avenue from St. Aubin Avenue to Buffalo Avenue


Joseph Campau Avenue from Denton Avenue to Hamtramck Drive


Lumpkin Avenue from Denton Avenue to Poland Avenue


Miller Avenue from Conant Avenue to McDougall Avenue


Nagel Avenue from Caniff Avenue to Carpenter Avenue


Poland Avenue from Lumpkin Avenue to Dequindre Avenue


Vincent Avenue from Conant Avenue to Marcus Avenue




 



(Ord. 416, passed 5-7-1985; Am. Ord. 471, passed 5-13-1999)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   FIREWORKS



      92.   DANGEROUS OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS



      93.   NUISANCES



      94.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      95.   LEAD HAZARDS



      96.   FORECLOSED, VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.001   Short title



   90.002   Purpose



   90.003   Definitions



   90.004   Cruelty to animals; cropping dog ears



   90.005   License required



   90.006   Running at large



   90.007   Sanitation



   90.008   Sanitary requirements



   90.009   Failing to produce license



   90.010   Failing to keep license and collar on dog



   90.011   Harboring a barking dog or howling cat



   90.012   Harboring a vicious dog or cat



   90.013   Failing to surrender a rabid animal



   90.014   Failing to report rabid animal



   90.015   Stray animals



   90.016   Animal shelter



   90.017   Release of dogs or cats



   90.018   Unclaimed dogs or cats



   90.019   Prohibition of certain animals and pigeons



   90.020   Cruelty to birds or poultry



   90.021   Kennels, fees and regulations



   90.022   Keeping other animals



   90.023   Responsibility for damages



   90.024   Violation notices



   90.025   License; application; fee



Licensing, Immunization and Reasonable Control of Dogs



   90.040   Generally



   90.041   License applications



   90.042   License fees



   90.043   Tags



   90.044   Keeping of dangerous dogs



   90.045   Pound



   90.046   Pound fees



   90.047   Animal control officer



   90.048   Cruelty to dogs



   90.049   Stray dogs



   90.050   Leader dog; no fees



Poultry



   90.065   Locking or tying wings prohibited



   90.066   Overcrowding prohibited



   90.067   Sale, barter or give away of fowl as pets or novelties



   90.068   Violation



   90.069   Limits



   90.070   Pigeons



 



   90.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and cited as Animal Subchapter of the
city.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the public health, safety,
comfort and general welfare of the community through the proper control and
care of animals by their owners and others.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  The person or persons employed by the city as
its enforcement officer formerly known as the dog warden.



   ANIMALS.  Shall include but not be limited to pigs, cats, dogs, sheep,
goats, chickens, ducks, rabbits, ponies, horses and any other animals as may
be kept in the city.



   AT LARGE.  Any animal shall be deemed at large when it is off the
property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person.



   BIRDS.  Includes domestic birds, including pigeons.



   EXPOSURE TO RABIES.  An animal has been exposed to rabies within the
meaning of this subchapter if it has been bitten by, or been in contact with
any animal known to have been in contact with any animal known to have been
exposed to rabies.



   KENNEL.  Any establishment wherein three or more dogs or other
warm-blooded animals are confined or kept for sale, boarding, breeding or
training purposes, for remuneration.



   OWNER.  Any person, group of persons, association, partner or
corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog or other animal.



   PERSON.  Any individual, employee, corporation, co-partnership or
association.



   POULTRY.  Includes all domestic fowl.



   RESTRAINT.  An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this
subchapter if it is controlled by a leash, on or within a vehicle being
driven or parked on the street, or confined within the property limits of its
owner or keeper.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.004  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CROPPING DOG EARS.



   Whoever overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded, overworks,
tortures, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance, cruelly beats,
mutilates or cruelly kills, or causes or procures to be so overdriven,
overloaded, driven when overloaded, overworked, tortured, tormented, deprived
of necessary sustenance, cruelly beaten, mutilated or cruelly killed any
animal and whoever having the charge or custody of any animal, either as
owner or otherwise, inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon the same, or wilfully
fails to provide the same with proper food, drink, shelter or protection from
the weather, shall, for every offense, be punished by imprisonment in jail
not exceeding 90 days or by fine not exceeding $500, or by both fine or
imprisonment. The cropping of dogs ears shall be considered to be a
mutilation or cruelty to an animal within the meaning of this subchapter,
unless the cropping is performed by a registered veterinary surgeon, while
the dog is under an anaesthetic.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.005  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, household or family unit
to harbor, maintain or keep more than a total of four cats and/or dogs when
the cats or dogs are over six months of age unless the owner obtains a kennel
license under § 90.021.



   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, any person who shall allow,
permit or suffer any cat or dog to remain on or about his or her premises for
the space of ten days or more shall be deemed the owner thereof.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord. 2014-64, passed 8-12-2014)  Penalty,
see § 90.999



§ 90.006  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping a dog or cat to
permit the dog or cat to run at large in any street, alley or public place,
or upon the premises of another without the express permission of the owner
or occupant of the property.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.007  SANITATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat owned or
harbored by him or her to deposit fecal matter in any place other than the
premises where the dog or cat is harbored or kept.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.008  SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person lawfully keeping any animal shall maintain the premises in
which it is kept in a sanitary condition and free of insects, vermin or
obnoxious odors.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.009  FAILING TO PRODUCE LICENSE.



   Whoever owns or harbors a dog more than six months of age and fails to
procure and produce a valid dog license upon the request of any person
authorized to enforce this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.010  FAILING TO KEEP LICENSE AND COLLAR ON DOG.



   Whoever owns or harbors a dog more than six months of age and fails to
affix a valid dog license to a substantial collar which shall at all times be
kept on the dog for which the license is issued shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.011  HARBORING A BARKING DOG OR HOWLING CAT.



   Whoever harbors or keeps any dog or cat which by loud and frequent or
habitual and constant barking, yelping, howling or screeching causes an
annoyance to the neighborhood shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.012  HARBORING A VICIOUS DOG OR CAT.



   Whoever harbors or keeps a fierce or vicious dog or cat, a dog or cat
that has been bitten, or any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.013  FAILING TO SURRENDER A RABID ANIMAL.



   (A)   Whoever refuses to surrender any animal in his or her
possession upon the demand of a peace officer who has reason to believe the
animal has contracted rabies, been subjected to rabies, or has bitten any
person is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any animal so surrendered shall be held for treatment and
observation for a period of ten days in a facility designated by the city and
at the sole expense of the animal owner.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.014  FAILING TO REPORT RABID ANIMAL.



   Whoever owns or harbors any animal which is bitten by another animal
showing symptoms of rabies who fails to report the incident to the Police
Department or animal control officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.015  STRAY ANIMALS.



   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or any other person
designated by the Chief of Police to seize and impound any dog or cat
straying unlawfully or kept in violation of this subchapter, and, further it
shall be the duty of the animal control officer or designated person to
dispose or destroy the animal in a humane manner. However, if the owner of
the animal is known, he or she shall be notified and if the owner appears
within 72 hours of the sending of the notice and produces proof to the
satisfaction of the animal control officer or the designated person that the
release of the dog or cat will not result in a future violation of this
subchapter, the dog or cat shall be turned over to the owner thereof after
payment of fees set forth herein.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.016  ANIMAL SHELTER.



   An animal shelter shall be utilized by the city at a place and location
as shall be selected and designated by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.017  RELEASE OF DOGS OR CATS.



   (A)   No dog or cat shall be released from the animal shelter unless
his or her owner or authorized agent shall pay to the city a fee as set forth
in the following schedule:



 

For release of dog or cat
 

$25



Payment of the cost of harboring the dog or cat, for each day or fraction
thereof
 

$5




 



   (B)   When a dog or cat is released which has not been properly
immunized against rabies, the owner shall post a cash bond in the amount of
$25 which shall be held pending proof by the owner that the cat has been
properly immunized. The animal control shelter shall keep a record of all
seizures of dogs or cats and the collection of all fees and shall on a weekly
basis deliver all fees and other monies collected to the City Treasurer,
together with a list or copy of receipts containing the name and address of
persons posting cash bonds or paying fees, the fees to be reviewed from time
to time as necessary.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.018  UNCLAIMED DOGS OR CATS.



   (A)   The animal shelter may not sell or otherwise dispose of a dog
or cat within four days after its acquisition. If the dog or cat has a collar
or other evidence of ownership, the animal control officer or his or her
agent or the operator of the animal shelter shall notify the owner, if known,
and disposition of the animal shall not be made within three days from the
date of mailing of the notice. The operator of the animal shelter or the
animal control officer will maintain a record on each identifiable dog or cat
acquired, indicating a basic description of the animal, the date it was
acquired and under what circumstances. The record shall also indicate the
date of notice sent to the owner of an animal and subsequent disposition.



   (B)   This section does not apply to animals which are sick or
injured to the extent that the holding period would cause undue suffering, or
to animals whose owners request immediate disposal. Dogs or cats acquired,
having been exposed to rabies, or any dog or cat that has bitten a person or
other animal, shall be kept until the time and under conditions as may be
required by the Police Department.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.019  PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS AND PIGEONS.



   The owning, keeping or harboring of pigs, horses, cows, sheep, goats,
chickens, ducks, rabbits and pigeons is prohibited and anyone violating this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.020  CRUELTY TO BIRDS OR POULTRY.



   Whoever molests, injures, kills or captures any domestic or wild bird
or poultry, or whoever disturbs the nest of any wild birds, unless otherwise
permitted by law, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be imprisoned
for not more than 90 days or fined not more than $500 or by both.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.021  KENNELS, FEES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General.  For the purposes of this subchapter, a kennel shall
be construed as an establishment wherein or whereon three or more dogs or
other warm blooded animals of six months or older, are confined and kept for
sale, boarding, breeding or training purposes for remuneration. Any person
requiring a kennel license shall make application to the City Clerk. The
license shall be issued only after investigation of the Building Department,
Police Department and Fire Department regarding compliance with all codes and
ordinances of the city, and a report regarding same shall be submitted in
writing to the Clerk’s office. The buildings, including walls and floors,
shall be of a construction as will adequately and comfortably house the
animals kept therein and the facilities used to confine the animals shall be
kept clean and free from accumulation of filth, mud, waste matter vermin and
debris. All warm blooded animals kept or maintained in connection within the
kennels shall be furnished with a clean, fresh water supply and adequate and
proper food to maintain the animals in normal condition of health.



   (B)   Fees.  The fee for the license shall be $50.



   (C)   Posting of license.  Each kennel license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises where the kennel is maintained and no
kennel license shall be transferable.



   (D)   Vaccination and license.  All dogs retained in any kennel
shall be vaccinated and licensed subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   Certificate to be provided.



      (1)   Any person or persons, commercial establishment or
organization offering animals for sale shall provide the buyer with a
certificate guaranteeing that the animal is free from all disease and has had
all appropriate shots (including name of veterinarian and date).



      (2)   No animal offered for sale shall be placed in a kennel
or cage where a previously diseased animal was housed until the kennel or
cage is cleaned, disinfected and found to be free from disease in a manner
approved by the County Health Department and or any Board of the Michigan
Humane Society.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.022  KEEPING OTHER ANIMALS.



   Except for common household pets such as dogs and cats, it shall be
unlawful for any person to keep any animal or fowl within 175 feet of any
dwelling other than dwelling of owner, or to permit any animal or any fowl
owned by him or her, or in his or her possession or control, to run at large
in any street, alley or public place, or upon the premises of another without
express permission of the owner or occupant thereof.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.023  RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   Every owner of a dog or cat shall be liable for damages for any and all
injuries to person or property caused by the dog or cat, to be determined and
collected in appropriate civil proceedings, and nothing in the subchapter
contained shall be construed to impose any liability upon the city, its
agents or employees, for damages caused by a dog or cat.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.024  VIOLATION NOTICES.



    The Police Department of the city and any person employed as an animal
control officer for the enforcement of this subchapter, is hereby authorized
upon the witnessing of violations where it is not practical, possible or
desirable in their judgment to impound the dog or cat, may issue to the owner
of the dog or cat a written notice of the violation pursuant to which the
owner shall pay to the city Police Department or City Clerk within 72 hours
after receipt of the notice a fee in an amount to be imposed pursuant to a
resolution of the City Council. The fees shall be added to the cost of
prosecution if a complaint is obtained against the owner of a dog or cat. If
the owner of a dog or cat shall fail to pay the service fees within the 72
hour period, the person issuing the notice shall forthwith file a complaint
in the court having jurisdiction thereof, and secure a warrant for the arrest
of the owner of the dog or cat, and all further proceedings shall be had in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 90.025  LICENSE; APPLICATION; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor any cat
or other non-prohibited animal aged six months or over without first having
applied for and obtained a license therefor from the City Clerk of the city.
The license fee shall cost no less than $5 per animal per year and shall be
due on and annually renewable on the May 1; provided however this section
shall not apply to dog licenses which are already covered and mandated under
§§ 90.040 through 90.050.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)




LICENSING, IMMUNIZATION AND REASONABLE CONTROL OF DOGS




§ 90.040  GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor
a dog six months of age or over in the city without first having obtained a
license therefor. Every person in possession, of any dog or who shall suffer
the dog to remain about his or her premises for the space of ten days or
more, shall for the purpose of this subchapter, be deemed the owner thereof.



   (B)   No dog shall be permitted upon the public streets or off the
premises of the owner unless the dog has been immunized against rabies in a
manner approved by the Health Department, and unless the dog is under the
reasonable control of the owner or unless the dog is confined in the process
of being transported to and from the premises of the owner. For the  purpose
of this subchapter, a dog shall be deemed under the REASONABLE CONTROL when
the dog is with the owner or some member of the owner’s family or some
other person with permission of the owner.



   (C)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a dog shall be deemed NOT
TO BE UNDER REASONABLE CONTROL when the dog commits damage to the person or
property of any other than the owner, except in the defense of the owner, his
or her family or his or her property; or; in the case of a female dog while
in heat; off the premises of the owner, unless confined in the process of
being transported to or from the premises of the owner.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.041  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   License to own, possess or harbor a dog shall be issued by the City
Clerk upon application for license and payment of the license fee required by
this subchapter. The application for license shall be accompanied by proof of
vaccination of the dog for rabies within one year prior to the effective date
of the license by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine;
provided, that when the dog is vaccinated with modified live rabies virus of
chick embryo origin, proof of vaccination within two years prior to the
effective date of the license shall be deemed compliance with the foregoing
provision. It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog on or
before May 1 of each year or on or before any dog becomes six months of age,
or within 30 days after the person becomes a resident of the city, or within
30 days after he or she becomes the owner of a dog six months of age or more
to apply for a license; provided that no person or family unit shall keep
more than two dogs of the age of six months or over without first having
obtained a kennel license from the state. Further provided, that any person
who runs a dog kennel that is properly licensed by the state need not apply
for individual dog licenses under this subchapter. The applicant for a dog
license shall give his or her full name and address and the age and
description of the dog. If the applicant has become a resident of the city
within 30 days, the applicant shall give the date of becoming a resident or
acquiring a dog, as the case may be. All dog licenses hereafter issued shall
expire on May 1 in the year following their issuance.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.042  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   License fees shall be as follows: $3 for each dog, whether
male or female. At the time of issuing the same, and for each renewal
thereof, provided that when the license is issued from the State Humane
Society they are authorized to deduct the sum of $0.50 for each license so
issued, to pay the State Humane Society for the administrative costs
incurred, before depositing the balance with the licensing officer.



   (B)   In case of a dog which has been duly licensed in another
county, city or village in the state, or by lawful authority of any state in
the United States of America, if application is made by the owner or person
harboring a dog within 30 days prior to the expiration of his or her foreign
license, the fee shall be $1 for each dog. The Clerk shall retain and file
the foreign license and return it to the owner thereof on demand if the owner
at any time desires the return of the license and deposits with the Clerk his
or her Hamtramck license in exchange thereof.



   (C)   When application is made for a license after May 1, or after a
dog is six months of age, or more than 30 days after the dog has been
acquired or its owner has moved into the city, an additional charge shall be
made by way of penalty amounting to $1 for each dog, provided, however, in
the case of anyone moving into the city after May 1, or owning or acquiring a
dog becoming six months of age after May 1, or acquiring a dog after May 1,
and furnishing satisfactory proof to the Clerk of the fact, the license fee
shall be the same as for licenses issued prior to May 1.



   (D)   In the case of any license issued after December 15, provided
the owner proves to the satisfaction of the City Clerk that the dog was not
acquired by the owner prior to November 15, or did not become six months of
age prior to November 15, or that the owner was not a resident of the city
and owner of the dog prior to November 15, the fees shall be $1 for each dog.



   (E)   In case at any time the vaccination against rabies is no
longer required, licenses for unimmunized dogs may be issued upon payment of
a fee of $4 or if application is made after May 15, of any year, $5.50.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.043  TAGS.



   Upon issuance of a license there shall be delivered to the licensee by
the Clerk, a license tag of metal or other suitable material, and not less
than one inch in length or diameter; containing the number of the license
duly stamped or engraved thereon, the year of issuance, the words:
“Licensed, Hamtramck, Michigan” and also bearing the word:
“Immunized.” In case at any time the vaccination against rabies is no
longer required by the county, the word “Immunized” shall be omitted from
the license tag for an unimmunized dog. Every person owning or harboring a
dog shall provide the same with a substantial collar of durable material and
shall be responsible for attaching the license tag securely thereto, and
shall cause the collar with license tag attached thereto, to be worn by the
dog. Absence of the collar and license tag from any dog shall be prima facie
evidence that the dog is not licensed and any person finding the dog on his
or her premises or running at large, may seize and deliver the dog to the
pound. No person shall remove any license tag from any dog without the
consent of the person owning or harboring the dog and no tag shall be used on
the collar of harness of any dog other than the dog for which the tag was
issued. In case of the loss of a tag the owner may secure a duplicate from
the City Clerk upon payment of $0.50.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.044  KEEPING OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   No person shall harbor or keep any dog which by loud, or
frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause a serious
annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro upon the
streets.



   (B)   No person shall own or harbor a vicious dog or a dog that has
been afflicted with rabies. Any person who shall have in his or her
possession a dog which has contracted rabies, or which has been bitten by an
animal suspected of being afflicted with rabies, or which has bitten any
person shall, upon demand of the animal control officer or the health officer
or any police officer of the city, produce and surrender up the dog to the
animal control officer or Health Department of the city to be held for
observation for a period of ten days. Provided, that with the approval of the
Health Department or animal control officer, any dog may be surrendered to a
registered veterinarian or to any approved, non-profit corporation organized
for the purpose of sheltering dogs, or may be confined for a period of ten
days at the owner’s home. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or
allow the removal from his or her premises of a dog so confined for
observation without the written permission of the health officer or animal
control officer. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining that a dog
is rabid, shall immediately notify the animal control officer or a police
officer who shall either remove the dog to the pound or summarily destroy it.
Whenever any dog is brought to the pound for having bitten a person, the
animal control officer may, if deemed necessary and after holding the dog for
a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements of the Health
Department, cause the dog to be destroyed as a vicious animal.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.045  POUND.



   The city shall provide and maintain a dog pound or its equivalent
facilities and it shall be the duty of the animal control officer, or any
other person employed by the Chief of Police for that purpose, and of any
police officer of the city, to promptly seize, take up and place in the pound
all dogs that may be found running at large, or being kept or harbored any
place within the city contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)



§ 90.046  POUND FEES.



   (A)   The owner of a dog impounded under the provisions of this
subchapter may claim the dog by properly identifying himself or herself as
the owner of the animal and upon meeting the following conditions:



      (1)   Payment of an impounding fee of $2.50;



      (2)   Payment of a boarding fee of $1.00 for each 24 hours or
fraction thereof that the dog is held, after the first 24 hours; and



      (3)   The showing of a dog license for the dog, or if the dog
has no license, then the securing of a license and the showing of proof of
vaccination of the dog for rabies.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to destroy
in a humane manner, all impounded dogs which are not claimed and released
within three days after being impounded; provided, however, if in his or
her  judgment, the dog is valuable or otherwise desirable for keeping, the
animal control officer may dispose of the dog to any reasonable person who
will undertake to remove the dog from the city or keep and harbor the dog
within the city in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. The
bodies of all dogs destroyed at the pound or elsewhere in the city shall be
disposed of by the animal control officer in a manner approved by the Health
Department.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)



§ 90.047  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or other
person designated by the Chief of Police for the purpose, to make diligent
inquiry as to the dogs owned, harbored or kept, or kennels operated in the
city, and whether the dogs and kennels are licensed.



   (B)   Any dog found unlicensed after May 1 of each year may be
seized and impounded by the animal control officer or other authorized person.



   (C)   If the owner or person harboring the dog be known, the animal
control officer or other officer shall file a complaint against the owner or
person in the Municipal Court; provided, however, the person owning or
harboring the dog may in lieu of having his or her dog seized and impounded
or having a complaint filed against him or her, pay to the animal control
officer for the use of the city, a penalty of $3, which penalty will be
returned to the owner if within ten days after payment of same he or she
procures a license for the dog.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)



§ 90.048  CRUELTY TO DOGS.



   No person owning or harboring any dog, or any other person, shall treat
a dog in a cruel or inhuman manner, or wilfully or negligently cause or
permit any dog to suffer unnecessary torture or pain.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.049  STRAY DOGS.



   Any stray dog unclaimed by its owner within 72 hours after it has been
picked ups, any dog running at large in the streets or public places in the
city, or any dog which may in any manner disturb the quiet of any person or
neighborhood or any dog which shall bite a person may be declared to be a
nuisance, subject to abatement by the Police Department or the Department of
Health, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter and
the rules and regulations of the Police Department and the Department of
Health applicable thereto.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.050  LEADER DOG; NO FEES.



   Dog licenses required under this subchapter shall be issued by the
licensing officer of the city without any charge therefore to leader dogs
made use of by blind persons. All licenses issued under this subchapter shall
expire upon May 1 following their issue.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)




POULTRY




§ 90.065  LOCKING OR TYING WINGS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, by himself,
herself or another, to lock or tie the wings of any chicken, turkey, goose,
duck or other domestic fowl for the purpose of weighing or handling or cause
the same to be done.



(Ord. 282, passed 3-12-1963)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.066  OVERCROWDING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to overcrowd
in any crate, box or other receptacle rabbits, domestic fowl or poultry or to
fail to provide proper food, water, shelter or sanitation for the same.



(Ord. 282, passed 3-12-1963)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.067  SALE, BARTER OR GIVE AWAY OF FOWL AS PETS OR NOVELTIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, or
offer for sale, barter or give away baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings or other
fowls as pets or novelties, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise
artificially treated. This subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in proper brooder facilities
by hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same to be
raised for commercial purposes.



(Ord. 282, passed 3-12-1963)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.068  VIOLATION.



   In case of any violation of this subchapter, it shall be the duty of
any fully appointed humane officer, peace officer, sheriff or health officer
to seize the fowl or pets and provide the necessary care and attention, and
the fowl or pets shall not be returned until all expenses for the care and
attention shall have been paid.



(Ord. 282, passed 3-12-1963)



§ 90.069  LIMITS.



   Rabbits, ducks, and other small animals are limited to a total of six
per household and require a license obtained annually from the City Clerk’s
office with a fee annually set by City Council. Chickens and roosters are not
permitted. Prior to issuance of the annual permit the city shall either
inspect or cause to be inspected any outdoor animal coops, houses, or
enclosures for compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2014-64, passed 8-12-2014)



§ 90.070  PIGEONS.



   No person shall keep, maintain or harbor any pigeons within the city
except upon the conditions prescribed in this section, which conditions are
hereby declared to be in addition to such restrictions as may be contained in
all other ordinances. A license shall be obtained annually from the City
Clerk’s office with a fee annually set by City Council. Prior to issuance
of the annual permit the city shall either inspect or cause to be inspected
any outdoor coop, houses, or enclosures for compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2014-64, passed 8-12-2014)



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Animals.



      (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions §§ 90.001
through 90.025 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more
than $500 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or to both
a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



      (2)   Each day that a violation is continued or permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense punishable upon conviction as
herein provided.



(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984)



   (B)   Licensing, immunization and reasonable control of dogs.  Any
person or persons violating any of the provisions of §§ 90.040 through
90.050 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment
in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967)



   (C)   Poultry.  Any person, firm or corporation violating §§
90.065 through 90.068 shall be prosecuted and upon conviction of the
violation shall be guilty of misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding
the sum of $100 or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail, or other place
of confinement as may be hereafter established by the City Council, for a
period not exceeding 30 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause.



(Ord. 282, passed 3-12-1963)



CHAPTER 91:  FIREWORKS



Section



   91.001   Definitions



   91.002   Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks



   91.003   Possession of consumer fireworks by minor



   91.004   Sale, give, furnish to minor



   91.005   Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks



   91.006   Restrictions on use when under the influence



   91.007   Enforcement; seizure



 



   91.999   Penalty



§ 91.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APA. The American Pyrotechnics Association.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible efforts by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500
and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2-3-5. CONSUMER
FIREWORKS do not include low impact fireworks.



   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27
CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172 and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.



   FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting
pistol, flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation.
FIREWORKS consist of consumer fireworks, low impact fireworks, articles
pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects.



   LOW IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that
phrase is defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1 to 3.1.8 and 3.5.



   MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years old.



   NATIONAL HOLIDAY. Legal public holidays:



      (1)   New Years Day, January 1.



      (2)   MLK Day, third Monday in January.



      (3)   Washington’s Birthday, third Monday in February.



      (4)   Memorial Day.



      (5)   Independence Day.



      (6)   Labor Day.



      (7)   Columbus Day.



      (8)   Veterans Day.



      (9)   Thanksgiving Day.



      (10)   Christmas Day.



   NOVELTIES. That term as defined under APA standard 87-1, and all of the
following: toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls
or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive
content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive
content per cap; flitter sparklers in paper tube not exceeding one-eighth
inch in diameter.



   PERSON. An individual, agent, association, charitable organization,
company, LLC, corporation, labor organization, or any other legal or
commercial entity.



(Ord. 486, passed 11-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)



§ 91.002  PROHIBITION ON USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the
City of Hamtramck, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from
the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding,
the day of, or the day after a national holiday, provided further, however,
that no person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on those
days, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., consistent with Sec. 7
(2) of Public Act 65 of 2013. This provision does not apply to City of
Hamtramck sponsored events.



(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.003  POSSESSION OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS BY MINOR.



   A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks.



(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.004  SALE, GIVE, FURNISH TO MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, furnish,
give or cause to be sold, furnished or given any consumer fireworks to a
person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 486, passed 11-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)  Penalty,
see § 91.999



§ 91.005  IGNITION, DISCHARGE AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public
property, school property, church property or the property of another without
that person or organization’s express permission to use those fireworks on
those premises.



(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.006  RESTRICTIONS ON USE WHEN UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   A person shall not use consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance or
combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance (as defined by
M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1d and 257.8b).



(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.007  ENFORCEMENT; SEIZURE.



   (A)   The City Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or their respective
designee(s), or sworn law enforcement officers of the city are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   If the City Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or their respective
designee, or a sworn law enforcement officer of the city, determines that a
violation of this chapter has occurred, the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or
designee, or sworn officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of
the violation.



(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or both. Each day that a
violation is continued or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 486, passed 11-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014)



CHAPTER 92:  DANGEROUS OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS



Section



   92.001   Dangerous buildings defined



   92.002   Standards for repair, vacation or demolition



   92.003   Dangerous buildings; nuisances



   92.004   Duties of Housing Code Inspector



   92.005   Duties of Housing Code Board of Appeals



   92.006   Duties of City Attorney



   92.007   Emergency cases



   92.008   When owner absent from the city



   92.009   Administrative liability



   92.010   Duties of Fire Department



   92.011   Duties of Police Department



 



   92.999   Penalty



§ 92.001  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED.



   All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following
defects shall be deemed DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:



   (A)   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to an extent that a plumb line passing through
the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;



   (B)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more, of
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of damage
or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;



   (C)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors
or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;



   (D)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so
as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the city;



   (E)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed,
unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are
likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein;



   (F)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are
inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human
beings who live or may live therein;



   (G)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire
or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of communication;



   (H)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached they may
fall and injure members of the public or property;



   (I)   Any building or structure which becomes hazardous to the
safety, health or welfare of the public by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment;



   (J)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the
Building Code of this city or any provision of the Fire Prevention Code or
other ordinances of this city;



   (K)   Any building which shall become vacant and open at door or
window, leaving the interior exposed to the elements or accessible to
entrance by trespassers or animals;



   (L)   Any building which has been damaged, vandalized or has
deteriorated to an extent as to be unfit or unsuitable for occupancy and
which has not been made habitable or safe to the standards of this chapter
within 30 days after notice by the building official upon the last known
owner or person having the right to possession thereof; and/or



   (M)   Any sign, fence, shed, lean-to, cellar or other structure
which has become so rotted, broken, infirm or dilapidated as to be likely to
fall over or otherwise injure persons coming upon the premises.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.002  STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION.



   The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector or the Housing Code Inspector in ordering repair, vacation or
demolition.



   (A)   If the “dangerous building” can reasonably be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it
shall be ordered repaired.



   (B)   If the “dangerous building” is in a condition as to make
it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its
occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.



   (C)   In any case where a “dangerous building” is 50% damaged or
decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be
demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a “dangerous building” is a fire hazard
existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any
ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.003  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; NUISANCES.



   All “dangerous buildings” within the terms of § 92.001 of this
chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired,
vacated or demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.004  DUTIES OF HOUSING CODE INSPECTOR.



   The Housing Code Inspector shall:



   (A)   Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually, all public
buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial,
manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any
conditions exist which render those places a “dangerous building” within
the terms of § 92.001 of this chapter;



   (B)   Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints
are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is
or may be existing in violation of this chapter;



   (C)   Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as
hereinafter provided for) by the Fire or Police Departments of this city as
probably existing in violation of the terms of this chapter;



   (D)   Inspect annually buildings in the following sections of this
city, to determine whether they are “dangerous buildings” within the
terms of § 92.001 of this chapter;



   (E)   (1)   Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building as
shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of the county, of any
building found by him or her to be a “dangerous building” within the
standards set forth in § 92.001 of this chapter that:



         (a)   The owner must vacate, or repair or demolish the
building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this chapter;



         (b)   The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or
may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession;
and



         (c)   The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an
interest in the building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county may at his or her own risk repair, vacate or demolish the
building or have the work or act done.



      (2)   Provided, that any person notified under this division
to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given reasonable time,
not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or
act required by the notice provided for herein.



   (F)   Set forth in the notice provided for in division (E) hereof, a
description of the building and a picture of the building, or structure
deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or
structure a “dangerous building” and in order requiring the same to be
put in the condition as to comply with the terms of this chapter within a
length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable;



   (G)   Report to the Housing Code Board of Appeals and the Building
Inspector any noncompliance  with the notice provided for in divisions (E)
and (F) hereof;



   (H)   Appear at all hearings conducted by the Housing Board of
Appeals and testify as to the condition of “dangerous buildings;” and



   (I)   Place a notice on all “dangerous buildings” reading as
follows:



      This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the
Housing Code Inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is
repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been
given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building, and
all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Wayne. It is unlawful to
remove this notice until the notice is complied with.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.005  DUTIES OF HOUSING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS.



   The Housing Code Board of Appeals shall:



   (A)   Upon receipt of a report of the Housing Code Inspector as
provided for in § 92.004(G) hereof, give written notice to the owner,
occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest
in the building as shown by land records of the Recorder of Deeds of the
county to appear before the Housing Board of Appeals on the date specified in
the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a
“dangerous building” should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in
accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the Housing Code
Inspector’s notice provided for herein in § 92.004(F);



   (B)   Hold a hearing and hear testimony as the Housing Code
Inspector or the owner, occupant mortgagee, lessee or any other person having
an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county shall offer relative to the “dangerous building;”



   (C)   Make written findings, of fact from the testimony offered
pursuant to division (B) as to whether or not the building in question is a
“dangerous building” within the terms of § 92.001 hereof;



   (D)   Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to
division (C) commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all
other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land records
of the Recorder of Deeds of the county, to repair, vacate or demolish any
building found to be a “dangerous building” within the terms of this
chapter and provided that any person so notified, except the owners, shall
have the privilege of either vacating or repairing the “dangerous
building”; or any person not the owner of the “dangerous building” but
having an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the county may demolish the “dangerous building” at
his or her own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon
which the “dangerous building” stands by the city as provided in division
(E) hereof;



   (E)   If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply
with the order provided for in division (D) hereof, within ten days, the
Housing  Code Inspector shall cause the building or structure to be
repaired, vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards
hereinbefore provided for in § 92.002 of this chapter, and shall with the
assistance of the City Attorney cause the costs of the repair, vacation or
demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a
municipal lien or cause the costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an
assessment or to be levied as a special tax against the land upon which the
building stands or did stand or to be recovered in a suit at law against the
owner; provided, that in cases where the procedure is desirable and any delay
thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of the people of this city, the Housing Code Inspector shall notify
the City Attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all
necessary repairs or demolish the building; and



   (F)   Report to the City Attorney the names of all persons not
complying with the order provided for in division (D) above.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.006  DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY.



   The City Attorney shall:



   (A)   Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the
notices provided for herein  in §§ 92.004(E) and (F), and the order
provided for in § 92.005(D);



   (B)   Appear at all hearings before the Housing Board of Appeals in
regard to dangerous buildings;



   (C)   Bring suit for collect all municipal liens, assessments or
costs, incurred by the Housing Code Inspector in repairing or causing to be
vacated or demolished dangerous buildings; and



   (D)   Take any other legal action as is necessary to carry out the
terms and provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.007  EMERGENCY CASES.



   In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined
herein is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the Building Inspector
shall report the facts to the Housing Code Inspector and the Housing Board of
Appeals shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of the
dangerous building. The costs of an emergency repair, vacation or demolition
of the dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided
in § 92.005(E) hereof.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.008  WHEN OWNER ABSENT FROM THE CITY.



   In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for herein
shall be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee
and all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of the county to the last known address of
each, and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
“dangerous building”to which it relates. The mailing and posting shall be
deemed adequate service.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.009  ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.



   No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself or
herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent
or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter shall be defended by the
City Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.010  DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The employees of the Fire Department shall  make a report in writing
to the Housing Code Inspector of all buildings or structures which are, may
be, or are suspected to be “dangerous buildings” within the terms of this
chapter. The reports must be delivered to the Housing Code Inspector within
24 hours of the discovery of the buildings by any employee of the Fire
Department.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.011  DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   All employees of the Police Department shall make a report in writing
to the Housing Code Inspector of any buildings or structures which are, may
be or are suspected to be “dangerous buildings” within the terms of this
chapter. The reports must be delivered to the Housing Code Inspector within
24 hours of the discovery of the buildings by any employee of the Police
Department.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



§ 92.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   The owner of any “dangerous building” who shall fail to
comply with any notice or order, to repair, vacate or demolish the building
given by any person authorized by this chapter to give the notice or order
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined
not exceeding $500 for each offense and a further sum of $10 for each and
every day the failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance or 90 days imprisonment or in the discretion of the court both a
fine and imprisonment.



   (B)   The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with
any notice to vacate and who fails to repair the building in accordance with
any notice given as provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500 for
each offense and a further sum of $10 for each and every day the failure to
comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance or 90 days
imprisonment, or in the discretion of the court both a fine and imprisonment.



   (C)   Any person removing the notice provided for in § 92.004(I)
hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined
not exceeding $500 for each offense.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980)



CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES



Section



Junk, Trash, Abandoned Vehicles and the Like



   93.001   Definitions



   93.002   Determination



   93.003   Trash and abandoned vehicles—misdemeanor



   93.004   Junk automobiles—misdemeanor



   93.005   Abandoned dwellings—misdemeanor



   93.006   Storage of building materials—misdemeanor



   93.007   Action by Chief of Police



Noxious Weeds and Vegetation



   93.035   Purpose



   93.036   Definitions



   93.037   Growth of grass and weeds



   93.038   Duty of occupant or owner



   93.039   Cutting and destruction



   93.040   Owners and occupants responsible for premises



   93.041   Notice to abate



   93.042   Abatement procedure



Trash; Abandoned and Junk Vehicles; Abandoned Dwellings; Storage of Building
Materials—Civil Infractions



   93.045   Trash and abandoned vehicles—civil infraction



   93.046   Junk automobiles—civil infraction



   93.047   Abandoned dwellings—civil infraction



   93.048   Storage of building materials—civil infraction



 



   93.999   Penalty




JUNK, TRASH, ABANDONED VEHICLES AND THE LIKE




§ 93.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  Any vehicle which has remained on private property
for a period of 48 continuous hours or more, without the consent of the owner
or occupant of the property or for a period of 48 continuous hours or more
after the consent of the owner or occupant has been revoked.



   BLIGHTED STRUCTURE.  Any dwelling, garage or outbuilding or any
factory, shop, store, warehouse or any other structure or part of a structure
which, because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical
deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the
purpose for which it may have been intended.



   BUILDING MATERIALS.  Lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks,
plumbing materials, electric wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment,
shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials
used in constructing any structure.



   JUNK.  Parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused furniture, stoves,
refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other
castoff material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any
reasonable use.



   JUNK AUTOMOBILES.  Any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use
upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of 60 days and shall
also include, whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative
for any reason for a period in excess of 60 days, provided that there is
excepted form this definition unlicensed, but operative, vehicles which are
kept as the stock in trade of a regularly licensed and established new or
used automobile dealer.



   PERSON.  All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations and
all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether
acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All PERSONS who
violate any of the provisions of this subchapter, whether as owner, occupant,
lessee, agent, servant or employee shall, except as herein otherwise
provided, be equally liable as principals.



   TRASH and RUBBISH.  Any and all forms of debris not herein otherwise
classified.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)



§ 93.002  DETERMINATION.



   It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash,
rubbish, junk, junk automobiles, abandoned vehicles, building materials and
the maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the
city tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the increase
in criminal activity, the spread of vermin and disease and is contrary to the
public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the community.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)



§ 93.003  TRASH AND ABANDONED VEHICLES—MISDEMEANOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or permit the storage or
accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles
on any private property in the city except within a completely enclosed
building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer,
dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.004  JUNK AUTOMOBILES—MISDEMEANOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove parts from, or otherwise
disassemble any automobile, whether or not the same be a junk automobile,
abandoned vehicle, or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery, except in a
completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk
dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or
junk gatherer.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.005  ABANDONED DWELLINGS—MISDEMEANOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or
vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or
warehouse unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or
neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by
unauthorized persons or unless the structure is in the course of construction
in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the
construction is completed within a reasonable time.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Cross-reference:



   Dangerous or abandoned buildings, see Ch. 92



§ 93.006  STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS—MISDEMEANOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a
completely enclosed building or except where the building materials are part
of the stock in trade of a business located in the property, or except when
the materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the
property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and
unless the construction is completed within a reasonable time.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.007  ACTION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police may remove or cause to be removed any junk
automobile or abandoned vehicle, or parts of either, from any unenclosed
private property after having notified in writing the owner or occupant of
the property of his or her intention to do so at least 48 hours prior to the
removal. The notice shall be served personally upon the owner or occupant of
the property, if occupied, or may be posted in a conspicuous place upon
vacant or unoccupied property. Junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or
parts of either, shall be removed to the automobile pound and disposed of in
accordance with law. The removal by the Chief of Police shall not excuse or
relieve any person of the obligation imposed by this subchapter to keep his
or her property free from storage or accumulation of junk automobiles or
abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, nor from the penalties for violation
thereof.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)



NOXIOUS WEEDS AND VEGETATION



§ 93.035  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to preserve and promote health,
safety and general welfare of residents, motorists and pedestrians alike
through regulation of growth of noxious weeds, rank vegetation and grasses
which are deemed to detract from the appearance and character of a
neighborhood, negatively affect the value and marketability of surrounding
property, constitute a traffic or fire hazard and cause additional health
problems for persons with respiratory ailments. Failure to comply with
provisions of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)



§ 93.036  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  A person(s) authorized and empowered to issue
and serve municipal civil infraction citations for alleged violations to this
subchapter.



   ERADICATE.  To get rid of, wipe out, destroy, by the natural process
or human interaction.



   GRASS.  Any plant of the family Gramineae (or Poaceae) characterized
by jointed stems, sheathing leaves, flower spikelets and fruit consisting of
a seed-like grain or caryopsis.



   NOXIOUS WEEDS.  Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species
of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of
Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa
incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron),
poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other plants which are recognized as
deleterious to health, safety or public welfare and recognized as a common
nuisance.



   PROPERTY.  Any real property that is or has been put to residential,
commercial, institutional, or industrial use; including, for the purpose of
this article, abutting street right-of-way lying between the curb and
sidewalk or a drainage course paralleling the street where there is no curb
abutting the property. In addition, any lot in any subdivision where
buildings have been erected on 50% or more of the lots of the subdivision
shall be defined as improved property.



   RANK VEGETATION.  Profuse or unmanageable communities of plants in a
region.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)



§ 93.037  GROWTH OF GRASS AND WEEDS.



   (A)   Declared nuisance.  The presence of noxious weeds, rank
vegetation or tall grass upon properties, as prohibited below, is hereby
deemed detrimental to public health, safety and welfare and shall constitute
a public nuisance.



   (B)   Growth on property.  The owner, occupant or responsible agent
of any property, or the owner or responsible agent of any unoccupied or
undeveloped property, shall not permit or maintain on the property growth of
noxious weeds, tall grass or rank vegetation to a height greater than five
inches or accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. An owner or occupant
shall not cause, or permit noxious weeds, other poisonous plants, or plants
detrimental to health, to grow on any improved property.



   (C)   Fences and alleyways. Fences, sidewalks, walkways, and
alleyways adjacent to the property shall be kept free of weeds, trees, and
other nuisance vegetation.



   (D)   Exempted. Exempted from the five-inch height limitation are
reasonably maintained flower gardens, plots of shrubbery and vegetable
gardens.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-42, passed 6-10-2014)



§ 93.038  DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER.



   Every occupant or owner of property, whether improved or unimproved,
shall cut and remove or destroy by lawful means, all noxious weeds, tall
grass or rank vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-29-2017)



§ 93.039  CUTTING AND DESTRUCTION.



   A published notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
provided by advertising the following notice or substantially similar notice
annually prior to commencement of enforcement in a newspaper with circulation
in the city and designated by the City Council as the official, legal
advertising media for the city.




NOTICE




To all property owners, agents and occupants, notice is hereby given to all
persons owning or occupying property within the City of Hamtramck, that
pursuant to  the City Code, it shall be the duty of the owners or occupants
to keep all grass, weeds and vegetation cut below a height of five inches on
properties and free from noxious weeds. All properties shall include the
abutting street right-of-way lying between the curb and sidewalk or the
drainage course paralleling the street where there is no curb abutting the
properties and any abutting alley.  If the provisions of this ordinance are
not complied with within three days of notice of the violation, the city
shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut or destroyed, and the actual cost
of cutting or destruction plus an administrative fee as established by
resolution of City Council, shall be charged to the property owner and, if
necessary, collected as a tax lien against the property.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-29-2017)



§ 93.040  OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS RESPONSIBLE FOR PREMISES.



   A person who owns, manages, leases, rents or occupies a premise shall
not create, maintain, operate or permit to be created, maintained or operated
any nuisance as defined in this subchapter. All persons who own, manage,
lease, rent or occupy any premises shall be equally responsible for keeping
the premises in a clean and habitable condition and take necessary
precautions to prevent any nuisance, as defined in this subchapter, from
existing on the premises. Each day a violation continues is deemed a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)



§ 93.041  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Upon observation of a violation of the provisions of this subchapter, a
code enforcement, police officer, or other designee of the City Manager may
issue notice to abate either personally, by mail, or email notification if so
subscribed and previously consented to, to the owners and occupants
responsible as designated in § 93.040. Posting a notice of the violation
upon the property shall be deemed adequate notice. Failure to receive the
notice is no defense to any action by the city to abate the violation,
collect abatement costs, collect administrative costs or impose penalties
authorized by this code.  The notice to abate shall inform the owner and
occupant of the following:



   (A)   The nature of the violation;



   (B)   The time frame within which the owner and/or occupant shall
abate the violation, being not more than ten days from the date of the
notice. The enforcement officer may grant additional time where bona fide
efforts to abate the violation are in progress;



   (C)   If the owner or occupant fails to abate the violation, the
enforcement officer may issue a municipal civil infraction citation;



   (D)   The city may act to abate the violation if it is not abated by
the owner or occupant; and



   (E)   The cost of abatement by the city, plus administrative fee set
by Council annually, shall be a personal debt of the owner which may be
assessed as a tax lien against the property or assessed by the 31st District
Court until paid.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-42, passed 6-10-2014)



§ 93.042  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   City to cut or destroy; expenses to be paid by owner; liens. 
If the provisions of this subchapter are not complied with after the legal
notices have been published, then an officer, inspector or other agent
authorized by the City Council between April 1 and October 31 may enter upon
a property as many times as necessary to cut or destroy tall grass, noxious
weeds and rank vegetation, and the owner or occupant of the property shall
pay all expenses incurred by the city.  The city shall have a lien upon the
property for the expenses, and a lien may be enforced in the manner
prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of
tax liens.



   (B)   Means of abatement.  The officer, inspector or other agent
authorized by the city may use hand or mechanical means to abate the
violation, and shall take reasonable care to avoid unnecessary damages to the
property.



   (C)   Owner liability.  Owner liability shall be as follows:



      (1)   Lien upon property.  From the time of commencement of
the cutting or destruction of prohibited grasses, rank vegetation and noxious
weeds, the city shall have a lien upon the property.



      (2)   Costs.  The owners of property shall be liable for all
costs incurred by the city in connection with cutting or destruction. The
City Council will by resolution set the minimum cost for the cutting or
destruction of the prohibited grasses, rank vegetation and noxious weeds. In
addition, an administrative fee in the amount of 25% of the actual cost of
the cutting or destruction will be included in the total cost.



      (3)   Municipal civil infraction citation.  The enforcement
officer may issue a civil infraction citation to a property owner or occupant
for failure to adhere to the provisions of this subchapter, which may result
in a citation for each offense as described in this section with the
penalties set forth in § 93.999.



   (D)   Collection of costs.  Collection of costs shall be
accomplished as follows:



      (1)   Billing. For purposes of determining ownership of the
property, it shall be presumed in evidence that the person to whom the
property is assessed on the city’s most recent tax roll is the owner of the
property. Billing of costs will be mailed to owners of the property by
regular mail to the address shown on the city’s tax rolls. If the charges
are not paid by the owner within 30 days from the date of billing, payment
shall be deemed delinquent.



      (2)   Delinquent charges; tax lien.  In the event of
delinquent charges, the city shall have a lien upon the property for the
charges and the lien shall be enforceable as a tax lien and collected as in
the case of general property tax.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)



TRASH; ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES; ABANDONED DWELLINGS; STORAGE OF BUILDING
MATERIALS—CIVIL INFRACTIONS



§ 93.045  TRASH AND ABANDONED VEHICLES—CIVIL INFRACTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or permit the storage or
accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles
on any private property in the city except within a completely enclosed
building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer,
dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.046  JUNK AUTOMOBILES—CIVIL INFRACTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove parts from, or otherwise
disassemble any automobile, whether or not the same be a junk automobile,
abandoned vehicle, or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery, except in a
completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk
dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or
junk gatherer.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.047  ABANDON DWELLINGS—CIVIL INFRACTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or
vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or
warehouse unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or
neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by
unauthorized persons or unless the structure is in the course of construction
in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the
construction is completed within a reasonable time.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.048  STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS—CIVIL INFRACTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a
completely enclosed building or except where the building materials are part
of the stock in trade of a business located in the property, or except when
the materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the
property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and
unless the construction is completed within a reasonable time.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Junk, trash, abandoned vehicles and the like.  Any violation
of, or failure to comply with the provisions of §§ 93.001 through 93.007
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, and costs, or prosecution, or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. When the fine and costs are imposed, the court may
provide that, in default of payment thereof, the offender shall be imprisoned
for a period not to exceed 90 days unless the fine and costs shall sooner be
paid. Each day that a violation of §§ 93.001 through 93.007 is continued or
permitted to exist without compliance shall constitute a separate offense
punishable upon conviction in the manner prescribed in this section, provided
no person shall be imprisoned for a single but continuing violation of §§
93.001 through 93.007 for a period longer than 90 days.



(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)



   (B)   Noxious weeds and vegetation, trash and abandoned vehicles. 
A person who violates provisions of §§ 93.035 through 93.048, as amended,
may be fined for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:



      (1)   Civil fines shall apply in the event of determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction. Fines shall be in an amount
set forth for the offense in the schedule of fines adopted by the
Thirty-First District Court, costs and other sanctions, for each offense.



      (2)   The defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction may be required to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses.  The judge or magistrate may issue any judgment, writ
or order necessary to enforce or enjoin the violation.



      (3)   Each violation act, as well as each subsequent day, will
constitute a separate offense.



      (4)   In addition to any remedies provided for by §§ 93.035
through 93.048, any equitable or other remedies available and/or permitted by
law may be sought.



      (5)   The judge or magistrate may impose costs, damages and
expenses as provided by law.



      (6)   A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser
included offense of a criminal offense or of the City Code or other city
ordinance violation which is not a civil infraction.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. , passed 3-26-2013)



CHAPTER 94:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   94.001   Title



   94.002   Definitions



   94.003   Automatic dialing prohibited



   94.004   Registration required by owner



   94.005   Automatic shutoff required



   94.006   Existing alarm systems registration required



   94.007   Licensing and regulations of alarm installers



 



   94.999   Penalty



§ 94.001  TITLE.



   This chapter may be known and cited as the Burglar Alarm Chapter.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)



§ 94.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single
device, except for an alarm system on a motor vehicle, arranged to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention to which Police and/or Fire
Departments are expected to respond.



   FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system causing a sound or
visual signal through mechanical failure, faulty equipment, malfunction,
improper installations or the negligence or improper or mistaken use by the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents which
shall be established when there is no evidence of criminal activity, or
illegal entry or an attempt thereof, fire or need for medical attention upon
the activation of the alarm system with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Severe storm conditions;



      (2)   Alarm system malfunction, if corrective measures have
been taken or installed within five days thereafter, and a copy of a repair
order by a licensed alarm system contractor is provided within 30 days of the
false alarm except as follows: no penalty shall be imposed for three alarm
system malfunctions in a calendar year. However, more than three shall be
considered false alarms, and the following penalties of § 94.999 shall apply
as follows: the fourth malfunction shall trigger a higher penalty; the fifth
malfunction shall trigger a higher penalty, and the sixth malfunction shall
trigger a higher penalty;



      (3)   False alarms that can be substantiated as being
activated by disruption or disturbance of the telephone company facilities;



      (4)   Utility pole accidents;



      (5)   A testing of the alarm system when prior notification
has been received by the Police Department and/or Fire Department; and



      (6)   Where the Fire Chief or his or her designee has waived
the fee the because there has been a request for waiver due to documented
extenuating circumstances.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Includes, but is not limited to, any public service,
utility, Fire Department or police agency.



   TELEPHONE NUMBER.  Includes any additional numbers assigned by a
public utility company, engaged in the business of providing communication
services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other systems to
connect when the primary telephone number is in use.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)



§ 94.003  AUTOMATIC DIALING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell,
install, use, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device,
or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically,
electronically, or by other means initiate the automatic calling, dialing or
connection directly to any City Police Department or Fire Department
telephone number.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.004  REGISTRATION REQUIRED BY OWNER.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or occupies a
premises in which an alarm system is installed, used or maintained shall
register the alarm system with the City Police Department on forms provided
by the city. The City Clerk shall inform the City Police Department of any
person, firm or corporation.



   (B)   A person, firm or corporation who registers a system with the
City Police Department shall provide the Chief of Police or his or her
designee with its name, the telephone number and address of the premises
where the alarm system is located, and also the name and telephone number of
at least one other person, firm or corporation who can be reached at any
time, day or night, and who, within a 30-minute response time, can open the
promises in which the alarm system is installed and deactivate the audible
and/or visible signal.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.005  AUTOMATIC SHUTOFF REQUIRED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or
corporation to maintain and operate an alarm system equipped with audible
signal(s) (e.g. bells, horns, sirens and the like) that is not equipped with
a shutoff device that automatically silences the audible signal(s) within ten
minutes of the signal activation. This section shall not apply to fire alarm
systems.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.006  EXISTING ALARM SYSTEMS REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Persons, firms or corporations using, owning, leasing or occupying a
promises in which an alarm system exists on the effective date of this
chapter, shall comply with the requirements of §§ 94.003 through 94.005
within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter; and shall be jointly
and severally liable for violations of this section. Failure to comply with
this section would result in a $50 fine. Each day shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.007  LICENSING AND REGULATIONS OF ALARM INSTALLERS.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm
or corporation to engage in the business of installing an alarm system unless
the person has been licensed by the state in accordance with Public Act 330
of 1968, being M.C.L.A. § 338.1083, or is the owner or is installed by the
owner or occupant of a residence in his or her residence.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm
or corporation who is an alarm contractor, or its agent, to knowingly
misrepresent any services rendered to an alarm user.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.999  PENALTY.



   Except as specified in § 94.002, the occurrence of a false alarm or
other prohibition of this chapter shall be punishable as a municipal civil
infraction by imposition of civil fines as annually adopted by resolution of
the City Council.



(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)



CHAPTER 95:  LEAD HAZARDS



Section



   95.001   Policy and intent



   95.002   Definitions



   95.003   Presumptions and obligations



   95.004   Violations



   95.005   Inspection for violations



   95.006   Remedy for violations



   95.007   Standards for clearance examination and report



   95.008   Lead-safe hazard reduction and control



   95.009   Notice to tenants



   95.010   Occupant protection and worksite preparation



   95.011   Safe work practices



   95.012   Emergency actions; weather conditions



   95.013   Exemptions



   95.014   Prohibition of retaliatory action



   95.015   Database for properties



   95.016   Enforcement



 



   95.999   Penalty



§ 95.001  POLICY AND INTENT.



   It is the policy of the city to assist in poison prevention of its
residents by requiring that the presence of deteriorated lead-based paint on
the interior and exterior of pre-1978 residential structures and on the
exterior of pre-1978 nonresidential structures be identified and be addressed
by reducing and controlling lead based paint hazards which may be present in
order to prevent exposure to these hazards.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 95.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABATEMENT.



      (1)   Any set of measures designed to permanently eliminate
lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards (see definition of PERMANENT).



      (2)   ABATEMENT includes:



         (a)   The removal of lead-based paint and dust-lead
hazards, the permanent enclosure or encapsulation of lead-based paint, the
replacement of components or fixtures painted with lead-based paint and the
removal or permanent covering of soil-lead hazards; and



         (b)   All preparation, cleanup, disposal and post
abatement clearance testing activities associated with the measures.



   CERTIFIED.  Licensed or certified to perform activities as risk
assessment, lead-based paint inspection, or abatement supervision by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Part 745, Subpart  L.



   CERTIFIED LEAD-BASED PAINT INSPECTOR.  An individual who has been
trained by an accredited training program, as defined by 40 C.F.R. §
745.223, and certified by EPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 745.226 to conduct
lead-based paint inspections. A certified lead-based paint inspector also
samples for the presence of lead in dust and  soil for the purpose of
clearance testing.



   CERTIFIED RISK ASSESSOR.  An individual who has been trained by an
accredited training program, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 745.223, and
certified by EPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 745.226 to conduct risk
assessments. A CERTIFIED RISK ASSESSOR also samples for the presence of lead
in dust and soil for the purposes of clearance testing.



   CHEWABLE SURFACE.  An interior or exterior surface painted with
lead-based paint that a young child can chew. A CHEWABLE SURFACE is the same
as an accessible surface as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 4851b(2). Hard metal
substrates and other materials that cannot be dented by the bite of a young
child are not considered chewable.



   CLEARANCE EXAMINATION.  An activity conducted following lead-based
paint hazard reduction activities to determine that the hazard reduction
activities are complete and that no soil-lead hazards or settled dust-lead
hazards, as defined in this section, exist in the dwelling unit or worksite.



   COMMON AREA.  A portion of a residential property that is available
for use by occupants of more than one dwelling unit. Such an area may
include, but is not limited to, hallways, stairways, laundry and recreational
rooms, playgrounds, community centers, on-site day care facilities, porches,
basements, attics, garages and boundary fences.



   COMPONENT.  An architectural element of a dwelling unit or common area
identified by type and location, such as a bedroom wall, an exterior window
sill, a baseboard in a living room, a kitchen floor, an interior window sill
in a bathroom, a porch floor, stair treads in a common stairwell or an
exterior wall.



   CONTAINMENT.  The physical measure taken to ensure that dust and
debris created or released during lead-based paint hazard reduction are not
spread, blown or tracked from inside to outside the worksite.



   DETERIORATED PAINT.  Any interior or exterior paint or other coating
that, through a visual assessment, is found to peel, chip, flake, chalk or
crack, or any paint or coat located on an interior or exterior surface or
fixture that is otherwise damaged or separated from the substrate, or a
chewable surface that contains visual signs of chewing.



   DRIPLINE.  The area within three feet surrounding the perimeter of a
building.



   DRY SANDING.  Sanding without moisture and includes both hand and
machine sanding.



   DUST-LEAD HAZARD.  Surface dust that contains a dust-lead loading
(area concentration of lead) at or exceeding levels promulgated by the EPA
pursuant to § 403 of the Toxic Substances Control Act.



   DWELLING UNIT.



      (1)   Single-family dwelling, including attached structures
such as porches and stoops; or



      (2)   Housing unit in a structure that contains more than one
separate housing unit, and in which each unit is used or occupied, or
intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, as the home or separate
living quarters of one or more persons.



   ENCAPSULATION.  The application of a cover or coat that serves as a
barrier between the lead-based paint and environment and is dependent that
relies for its durability on adhesion between the encapsulant and the painted
surface, and on the integrity of the existing bonds between paint layers and
between the paint and the substrate. ENCAPSULATION may be used as a method of
abatement if it is designed and performed so as to be permanent.



   ENCLOSURE.  The use of rigid, durable construction materials that are
mechanically fastened to the substrate in order to act as a barrier between
lead-based paint and the environment. ENCLOSURE may be used as a method of
abatement if it is designed to be permanent.



   EVALUATION.  Risk assessment, a lead hazard screen, a lead-based paint
inspection, paint testing or a combination of these to determine the presence
of lead-based paint hazards or lead-based paint.



   FRICTION SURFACE.  An interior or exterior surface subject to abrasion
or friction, including, but not limited to, certain window, floor and stair
surfaces.



   g.  Gram.



   HAZARD REDUCTION.  A measure designed to reduce or eliminate human
exposure to lead-based paint hazards through methods including interim
controls or abatement or a combination of the two.



   HEPA VACUUM.  A vacuum cleaner with a high-efficiency particulate air
(HEPA) filter through which contaminated air flows. A HEPA filter is one that
captures at least 99.97% of airborne particles of at least 0.3 micrometers in
diameter.



   IMPACT SURFACE.  An interior or exterior surface subject to damage by
repeated sudden force, such as certain parts of door frames.



   INTERIM CONTROLS.  A set of measures designed to reduce human exposure
or likely exposure to lead-based paint hazards. INTERIM CONTROLS include, but
are not limited to, repairs, painting, temporary containment, specialized
cleaning, clearance, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities and the
establishment and operation of management and resident education programs.



   LEAD-BASED PAINT.  Paint or other surface coatings that contain lead
equal to or exceeding 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5% by weight
or 5,000 parts per million (ppm) by weight.



   LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD.  Any condition that causes exposure to lead
from dust-lead hazards, soil-lead hazards or lead-based paint that is
deteriorated or present in chewable surfaces, friction surfaces or impact
surfaces, and that would result in adverse human health effects.



   LEAD-BASED PAINT INSPECTION.  A surface-by-surface investigation to
determine the presence of lead-based paint and the provision of a report
explaining the results of the investigation.



   LEAD HAZARD INFORMATION PAMPHLET.  The most recent publication of the
developed by the EPA, the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and the Consumer Product Safety Commission pursuant to § 403 of
the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. § 2686), entitled Protect Your
Family From Lead in Your Home.



   mg.  Milligram; thousandth of a gram.



   OCCUPANT.  A person who inhabits a dwelling unit.



   OWNER.  A person, firm, corporation, nonprofit organization,
partnership, government, guardian, conservator, receiver, trustee, executor
or other judicial officer, or other entity which, alone or with others, owns,
holds or controls the freehold or leasehold title or part of the title to
property, with or without actually possessing it. The definition includes a
vendee who possesses title, but does not include a mortgagee or an owner of
an opposing interest under a ground rent lease.



   PAINT REMOVAL.  A method of abatement that permanently eliminates
lead-based paint from surfaces.



   PAINT STABILIZATION.  Repair any physical defect in the substrate of a
physical defect painted surface that is causing paint deterioration, removing
loose paint and other material from the surface to be treated, and applying a
new protective coating or paint.



   PAINTED SURFACE TO BE DISTURBED.  A paint surface that is to be
scraped, sanded, cut, penetrated or otherwise affected by rehabilitation work
in a manner that could potentially creates a lead-based paint hazard by
generating dust, fumes or paint chips.



   PAINT TESTING.  The process of determining, by a certified lead- based
paint inspector or risk assessor, the presence or absence of lead-based paint
on deteriorated paint surfaces or painted surfaces to be disturbed or
replaced.



   PERMANENT.  An expected design life of at least 20 years.



   PORCH, OPEN.  An open structure projecting from the exterior wall of a
building and having at least 70% of the total area of the vertical planes
forming its perimeter unobstructed in any manner except by screen between
floor and ceiling.



   REDUCTION.  Measures designed to reduce or eliminate human exposure to
lead-based paint hazards through methods including interim controls and
abatement.



   REHABILITATION.  The improvement of an existing structure through
alterations, additions or enhancements. REHABILITATION includes repairs
necessary to correct the results of deferred maintenance, replacement of
fixtures and components, improvements to increase the efficient use of energy
and installation of security devices.



   REPLACEMENT.  A strategy of abatement that entails removal of building
components that have surfaces coated with lead-based paint and installation
of new components free of lead-based paint.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  A dwelling unit, common area, building exterior
surface and any surrounding land, including outbuildings, fences and play
equipment affixed to the land, belonging to an owner and available for use by
residents, but not including land used for agricultural, commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential purposes and not including paint on the
pavement of parking lots, garages or roadways.



   RISK ASSESSMENT.



      (1)   An on-site investigation to determine the existence,
nature, severity and location of lead-based paint hazards; and



      (2)   Provision of a report by an individual or firm
conducting risk assessment  which explain results of the investigation and
options for reducing lead-based paint hazards.



   SOIL-LEAD HAZARD.  Bare soil on residential property that contains
lead equal to or exceeding levels promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to § 403 of the Toxic Substances
Control Act.



   TENANT.  The individual named as the lessee in a lease, rental
agreement or occupancy agreement for a dwelling unit.



   ug.  Microgram; millionth of a gram.



   VISUAL ASSESSMENT.  An examination for, as applicable:



      (1)   Deteriorated paint;



      (2)    Visible surface dust, debris and residue found as part
of an inspection pursuant to § 95.005, a risk assessment or clearance
examination;



      (3)   The completion or failure of a lead-based paint hazard
reduction measure as part of a clearance examination.



   WET SANDING or WET SCRAPING.  A process to remove loose paint in which
the painted surface to be sanded or scraped is kept wet to minimize dispersal
of paint chips and airborne dust.



   WINDOW TROUGH.  An area between the interior window sill (stool) and
the storm window frame. If there is no storm window, the window trough is the
area that receives both the upper and lower window sashes when they are both
lowered.



   WIPE SAMPLE.  A sample collected by wiping a representative surface of
known area, as determined by ASTM E1728, Standard Practice for Field
Collection of Settled Dust Samples Using Wipe Sampling Methods for Lead
Determination by Atomic Spectrometry Techniques, or equivalent method, with
an acceptable wipe material as defined in ASTM E 1792, Standard Specification
for Wipe Sampling Materials for Lead in Surface Dust.



   WORKSITE.  An interior/exterior area where lead-based paint hazard
reduction activity takes place. There may be more than one worksite in a
dwelling unit or at a residential property.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 95.003  PRESUMPTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, all paint on the interior or
exterior of any residential building for which a certificate of occupancy is
required on which the original construction was completed prior to January 1,
1978.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, all paint on the interior or
exterior of any nonresidential structure on which the original construction
was completed prior to January 1, 1978 shall be presumed to be lead-based.



   (C)   Any person seeking to rebut these presumptions shall establish
through the means set forth in § 95.004 that the paint on the building or
structure in question is not lead-based paint.



   (D)   Residential buildings subject to the certificate of occupancy
requirements are maintained free of lead-based paint hazards.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 95.004  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Deteriorated paint violation.  The interior and exterior of
any residential building for which a certificate of occupancy is required, on
which the original construction was completed prior to January 1, 1978, and
the exterior of any non-residential structure on which the original
construction was completed prior to January 1, 1978, shall be maintained in a
condition so that the paint thereon does not become deteriorated paint,
unless the deteriorated paint surfaces total no more than:



      (1)   Twenty square feet on exterior surfaces;



      (2)   Two square feet in any one interior room or space; and



      (3)   Ten percent of the total surface area on an
interior/exterior type of component with a small  surface area. Examples
include windowsills, baseboards and trim.



   (B)   Bare soil violation.  Bare soil shall not be present within
the drip line of any residential building for which a certificate of
occupancy is required pursuant to § 95.016 on which the original
construction was completed prior to January 1, 1978.



   (C)   Dust-lead hazard violation.  A dust-lead hazard shall be
identified and cited in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 95.005.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.005  INSPECTION FOR VIOLATIONS.



   All inspections, including, but not limited to, inspections performed
as part of an application for a certificate of occupancy, or renewal of a
certificate of occupancy, or based upon the filing of a complaint, shall
include a visual assessment for deteriorated paint and bare soil violations.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.006  REMEDY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Following a visual assessment which results in the citation of a
deteriorated paint violation, the violation may be removed only by one of the
following methods.



   (A)   Certification by a lead-based paint inspector or risk assessor
that the property has been determined through a lead-based paint inspection
conducted in accordance with the federal regulations at 40 C.F.R. §
745.227(b) not  to contain lead-based paint.



   (B)   Certification by a lead-based paint inspector or risk assessor
that all lead-based paint in the property has been identified and cited.
Violations, have been abated, or identified and interim controls implemented
and clearance has been achieved in accordance with standards found at 40
C.F.R. § 745.227(e), regardless of whether abatement has been achieved or
interim controls implemented and provided however that the property has been
inspected pursuant to those standards since the deteriorated paint or
dust-lead hazard violation was last detected cited.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.007  STANDARDS FOR CLEARANCE EXAMINATION AND REPORT.



   The remedy available shall require that a clearance examination be
completed for a property upon which a deteriorated paint violation has been
cited in accordance with the following requirements.



   (A)   Qualified personnel.  Certification of clearance shall be
issued by:



      (1)   A certified risk assessor; or



      (2)   A certified lead-based paint inspector.



   (B)   Required activities.



      (1)   A clearance examination shall include a visual
assessment, dust sampling, submission of samples for analysis for lead,
interpretation of sampling results and preparation of a report. 
Examinations shall be performed in dwelling units, common areas and exterior
areas in  accordance with this section and the steps set forth at 40 C.F.R.
§ 745.227(e)(8) and (9).



      (2)   A visual assessment shall be performed to determine if
deteriorated paint surfaces and/or visible amounts of dust, debris, paint
chips or other residue are present. Both exterior and interior painted
surfaces shall be examined for the presence of deteriorated paint. If
deteriorated paint and visible dust, debris or residue are present in areas
subject to dust sampling, they must be eliminated prior to the continuation
of the clearance examination. If exterior painted surfaces have been
disturbed by the hazard reduction, maintenance or rehabilitation activity,
the visual assessment shall include an inspection of the ground and any
outdoor living areas close to the affected exterior painted surfaces. Visible
dust or debris in outdoor living areas shall be cleaned up and visible paint
chips on the ground shall be removed.



      (3)   Dust samples shall be wipe samples and shall  be taken
on floors, including/excluding open porches and, where practicable, interior
windowsills and window troughs. Dust samples shall be collected and analyzed
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(f) and (g).



   (C)   Report.  The clearance examiner shall ensure that an
examination report is prepared that provides documentation of the examination.



      (1)   The report shall include the following information:



         (a)   The address of the residential property and, if
only part of a multi-family property is affected, the specific dwelling units
and common areas affected;



         (b)   The date(s) of the examination;



         (c)   The name, address and signature of each person
performing the examination, including their EPA certification number;



         (d)   The results of the visual assessment for the
presence of deteriorated paint and visible dust, debris, residue or paint
chips;



         (e)   The results of the analysis of dust samples, in
ug/square foot, by location of sample; and



         (f)   The name and address of each laboratory that
conducted the analysis of dust samples, including the identification number
for each laboratory recognized by EPA under § 405(b) of the Toxic Substances
Control Act (15 U.S.C. § 2685(b)).



      (2)   When abatement is performed, the report shall be an
abatement report in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(e)(10).



   (D)   Clearance standards.  Where a deteriorated paint or dust-lead
hazard violation has been cited, the dust-lead standards in 40 C.F.R. §
745.65(b) shall be met before a certificate of occupancy may be issued or a
violation removed. With respect to porches, the standard required for
clearance shall be 400 ug/square foot, provided however, that if a porch is
found to contain more than 40 ug/square foot, the inspector or assessor shall
advise the occupants of the premises that the porch constitutes a potential
lead-based paint hazard that requires continued caution and that the
occupants should read and follow closely the information in the lead hazard
information pamphlet regarding lead safe maintenance practices such as
frequent washing and that pamphlet shall be provided to the occupants.



   (E)   Requirement to avoid conflict of interest regarding clearance
inspection.  All examinations shall be performed by persons or entities
independent of those performing hazard reduction or maintenance activities.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.008  LEAD-SAFE HAZARD REDUCTION AND CONTROL.



   (A)   No person shall disturb or remove lead-based paint, or in any
other way generate excessive dust or debris during work on the interior or
exterior of any existing building or structure except in accordance with the
requirements of this section and other sections of this chapter.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to activities that disturb or
remove paint where the activities are being performed on buildings on which
construction was completed on or after January 1, 1978.



   (C)   Sign required when exterior lead-based paint is disturbed.



      (1)   Not later than the commencement date of any lead-based
paint hazard reduction work, the owner, or the contractor when the owner has
entered into a contract with a contractor to perform work on the exterior of
a building or structure, shall post signs in a location or locations clearly
visible to the adjacent properties stating the following:



   LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD REDUCTION WORK IN PROGRESS



   PUBLIC ACCESS TO WORK AREA PROHIBITED POSTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
CITY OF HAMTRAMCK CODE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PHONE --------------



      (2)   The sign required by this division shall be not less
than 24 inches square and shall be in large boldface capital letters no less
than one-half inch in size, and shall contain the notification in English.
The sign required by this division shall  remain in place until the lead
based paint hazard reduction work has been completed.



      (3)   Where it is not possible to post signs in a conspicuous
location or locations clearly visible to the adjacent properties, the owner
or where the owner has entered into a contract with a contractor to perform
lead-based paint hazard reduction work, the contractor shall provide the
notice in written form, such as a letter or memorandum, to the occupants of
adjacent properties.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.009  NOTICE TO TENANTS.



   Where lead-based paint hazard reduction work is to be performed on the
interior or exterior of buildings occupied by one or more tenants, not less
than three business days before any lead-based paint hazard reduction work is
to commence, the owner shall provide the following information.



   (A)   Content of notice.  Provide written notice to tenants of the
building on which the work is being performed that lead-based paint hazard
reduction work is being performed. This notice shall be in compliance with
the EPA pre-renovation notification rules set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 745,
Subpart E, shall be in the form of a sign, letter or memorandum, and shall
prominently state the following:



      Work is scheduled to be performed beginning __________ (date) on
this property that may disturb or remove lead-based paint. The persons
performing this work are required to follow federal and local laws regulating
work with lead-based paint. You may obtain information regarding these laws,
or report any suspected violations of these laws, by calling the City of
Hamtramck at ________ (a number to be designated by the city). The owner of
this property is also required to provide tenants with a copy of the lead
hazard information pamphlet. Retaliatory action against tenants is prohibited
by the Municipal Code.



   (B)   Lead hazard information pamphlet.  The owner shall provide
all tenants in the building with a copy of the lead hazard information
pamphlet.



   (C)   Notice by contractor.  Where lead-based paint hazard
reduction work is being performed by a contractor on residential property,
the contractor shall at least three business days prior to the commencement
of the work, notify the property owner of potential lead hazards during the
project by delivering to the owner a copy of the lead hazard information
pamphlet.



   (D)   Early commencement of work by owner.  A property owner may
commence, or may authorize a contractor to commence, lead-based paint hazard
reduction work less than three business days after providing notices required
above when the work must be commenced immediately to correct an emergency
condition, such as work necessitated by non-routine failures of equipment,
that were not planned but result from a sudden, unexpected event that, if not
immediately attended to, presents a safety or public health hazard, or
threatens equipment and/or property with significant damage.



   (E)   Early commencement of work requested by tenant.  Upon written
request of a tenant, an owner may commence or authorize a contractor to
commence, lead-based paint hazard reduction work on that tenant’s unit less
than three business days after providing notices required in division (A)
above.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.010  OCCUPANT PROTECTION AND WORKSITE PREPARATION.



   (A)   Occupant protection.



      (1)   Occupants shall not be permitted to enter the worksite
during hazard reduction activities (unless they are employed in the conduct
of these activities at the worksite) until after hazard reduction work has
been completed and clearance has been achieved.



      (2)   Occupants shall be temporarily relocated during hazard
reduction activities and until a clearance examination has been successfully
completed on the occupant’s unit, and occupants who relocate to a unit not
owned by their landlord shall not be liable for rent accruing during that
time, except relocation shall not be necessary if:



         (a)   Treatment will not disturb lead-based paint,
dust-lead hazards or soil lead hazards;



         (b)   Only the exterior of the dwelling unit is treated,
and windows, doors, ventilation intakes and other openings in or near the
worksite are sealed during hazard control work and cleaned afterward, and
entry free of dust-lead hazards, soil-lead hazards and debris is provided;



         (c)   Treatment of the interior will be completed within
one period of eight daytime hours, the worksite is contained so as to prevent
release of leaded dust and debris into other areas and treatment does not
create other safety, health or environmental hazards (e.g., exposed live
electrical wiring, release of toxic fumes or on-site disposal of hazardous
waste); or



         (d)   Treatment of the interior will be completed within
15 calendar days, the worksite is contained so as to prevent the release of
leaded dust and debris into other areas, treatment does not create other
safety, health or environmental hazards; and, at the end of work on each day,
the worksite and the area within at least ten feet of the containment area is
cleaned to remove any visible dust or debris, and occupants have safe daily
access to sleeping areas, and bathroom and kitchen facilities.



      (3)   The dwelling unit and the worksite shall be secured
against unauthorized entry, and occupants’ belongings protected from
contamination by dust lead hazards and debris during hazard reduction
activities. Occupants’ belongings in the containment area shall be
relocated to a safe and secure area outside the containment area, or covered
with an impermeable covering with all seams and edges taped or otherwise
sealed.



      (4)   In addition to protections afforded elsewhere by law, if
interior hazard reduction activities will not be or are not completed within
60 calendar days, occupants shall have the right to terminate their lease and
shall have no further obligation to pay rent under that rental agreement,
provided, however, that this division shall not relieve the occupant of the
obligation to pay any previously accrued rent for which he or she is
otherwise liable.



   (B)   Worksite preparation.



      (1)   The worksite shall be prepared, including the placement
of containment barriers, to prevent the release of leaded dust, and contain
lead-based paint chips and other debris from hazard reduction activities
within the worksite until they can be safely removed. Practices that minimize
the spread of leaded dust, paint chips, soil and debris shall be used during
worksite preparation.



      (2)   A warning sign shall be posted at each entry to a room
where hazard reduction activities are conducted when occupants are present;
or at each main and secondary entryway to a building from which occupants
have been relocated. Each warning sign shall be as described in 29 C.F.R. §
1926.62(m), except that it shall be posted irrespective of employees’ lead
exposure and, to the extent practicable, provided in the occupants’ primary
language.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.011  SAFE WORK PRACTICES.



   (A)   Prohibition.  Lead-based paint shall not be applied to any
exterior or interior surface.



   (B)   Prohibited methods.  The following methods of paint removal
shall not be used:



      (1)   Open flame burning or torching;



      (2)   Machine sanding or grinding without a high-efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) local exhaust control;



      (3)   Abrasive blasting or sandblasting without HEPA local
exhaust control;



      (4)   Heat guns operating above 1,100°F or charring the paint;



      (5)   Dry sanding or dry scraping, except dry scraping in
conjunction with heat guns or within 1.0 foot of electrical outlets, or when
treating defective paint spots totaling no more than two square feet  in any
one interior room or space, or totaling no more than 20 square feet on
exterior surfaces.



      (6)   Paint stripping in a poorly ventilated space using a
volatile stripper that is a hazardous substance in accordance with
regulations of the Consumer Product Safety Commission at 16C C.F.R. §
1500.3, and/or a hazardous chemical in accordance with the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration regulations at 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.1200 or
1926.59, as applicable to the work.



   (C)   Worksite preparation.  The worksite shall be prepared in
accordance with §§ 95.010(B) through 95.011(B).



   (D)   Specialized cleaning.  After hazard reduction activities have
been completed, the worksite shall be cleaned using cleaning methods,
products and devices that are successful in cleaning up dust-lead hazards,
such as a HEPA vacuum or other method of equivalent efficacy, and
lead-specific detergents or equivalent.



   (E)   De minimis levels.  Safe work practices are not required when
maintenance or hazard reduction activities do not disturb painted surfaces
that total more than:



      (1)   Twenty square feet on exterior surfaces;



      (2)   Two square feet in any one interior room or space; or



      (3)   Ten percent of the total surface area on an interior or
exterior type of component with a small surface area. Examples include
windowsills, baseboards and trim.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.012  EMERGENCY ACTIONS; WEATHER CONDITIONS.



   (A)   For emergency actions necessary to safeguard against imminent
or immediate danger to human life, health or safety, or to protect property
from further structural damage, including demolitions ordered, occupants
shall be protected from exposure to lead in dust and debris generated by
emergency actions to the extent practicable. This exemption does not apply to
any work undertaken subsequent to, or above and beyond emergency actions,
other than the demolitions noted above.



   (B)   Performance of lead-based paint hazard reduction or lead-based
paint abatement on an exterior painted surface as required under this chapter
may be delayed for a reasonable time during a period when weather conditions
render impossible the completion of conventional construction activities,
provided however, that this limitation shall continue only for the period in
which work cannot be performed in the work safe manner as provided for herein.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.013  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to properties taken by a
governmental entity in a foreclosure proceeding which are vacant and secured
and:



      (1)   Scheduled for demolition; or



      (2)   Scheduled for sale within 12 months.



   (B)   The requirements of this chapter which are applicable to
residential buildings for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall
not include owner-occupied dwellings for which a certificate of occupancy may
be required.



   (C)   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any
person(s) who owns fewer than three residential buildings in the county for
which a certificate of occupancy is required.



   (D)   All dwellings for which a certificate of occupancy is required
shall be inspected regardless of their exemption but shall receive only
documentation of the problem(s) noted during the inspection.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.014  PROHIBITION OF RETALIATORY ACTION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for an owner, or any person acting on his or
her behalf, to take any retaliatory action toward a tenant who reports a
suspected lead-based paint hazard to the owner or to the city. Retaliatory
actions include but are not limited to any actions that materially alter the
terms of the tenancy (including rent increases and non-renewals) or interfere
with the occupants’ use of the property.



   (B)   There shall be a rebuttal presumption that any attempt by the
owner to raise rents, curtail services, refuse to renew or attempt to evict a
tenant within six months after any report to the city or the owner or any
enforcement action in connection with a suspected lead hazard is a
retaliatory action in violation of this section, except that in instances of
nonpayment of rent or commission of waste upon the premises by the tenant no
presumption shall apply. After six months from the date of the reporting of a
suspected lead hazard, or the most recent activity related to any enforcement
action, the defense of retaliatory eviction shall remain available to the
tenant, but without the benefit of the presumption created by this section.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be given effect in
any case in which it is established that the condition from which the
complaint or action arose was caused by the tenant, a member of the
tenant’s household or a guest of the tenant. Nor shall it apply in a case
where a tenancy was terminated pursuant to the terms of a lease as a result
of a bona fide transfer of ownership.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.015  DATABASE FOR PROPERTIES.



   (A)   The city shall maintain a database, accessible to the public,
of all residential properties where lead hazards have been identified,
reduced and controlled with funds received by the city from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development which require that a database be
maintained. The city shall further maintain a database of all residential
properties granted a certificate of occupancy after the effective date of
this chapter.



   (B)   The databases created pursuant to this section shall be kept
available for “walk in” inspection by the public. No person requesting
access shall be required to complete a freedom of information request in
order to view this database.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 95.016  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to
promulgate any rules and regulations deemed necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The city may commence an action to obtain injunctive relief to
prevent actions prohibited by this chapter, to enforce corrective orders and
conciliation agreements authorized by this chapter.



   (C)   In cases involving alleged violations of this chapter, the
city may enter into agreements whereby persons agree to methods of conforming
to this chapter in case of hardship as determined by the City Manager.
Violations of the agreements shall be violations of this chapter and may be
punishable through the appropriate judicial processes. The agreements shall
be a part of public record, and the city shall maintain the right to make any
and all parts of the agreement public.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.999  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each violation
of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500,
imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both.



(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)



CHAPTER 96:  FORECLOSED, VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section



Foreclosed, Vacant or Abandoned Property Registration



   96.001   Purpose



   96.002   Definitions



   96.003   Evidence of vacant or abandoned property



   96.004   Registration required



   96.005   Amendment of registration information



   96.006   Designation of responsible local agent required



   96.007   Transfer of ownership



   96.008   Duty to maintain and secure



   96.009   Monitoring of property; fee; inspection



   96.010   Abatement



   96.011   Fire damaged property



   96.012   Fees and charges



   96.013   Nuisance per se



   96.014   Disclaimer of liability



Re-Occupancy of Vacant, Abandoned, Foreclosed Property



   96.025   Purpose



   96.026   Definitions



   96.027   Application required



   96.028   Certificate of occupancy required



   96.029   Inspection required



   96.030   Dangerous conditions



   96.031   Severability



   96.032   Disclaimer of liability



 



   96.999   Penalty



FORECLOSED, VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION



§ 96.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent blight, protect property
values and neighborhood integrity, avoid the creation and maintenance of
nuisances, ensure the safe maintenance of buildings and to protect public
health, safety and welfare by creating a vacant property registry and
establishing inspection and maintenance standards.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 96.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows, terms not herein defined shall have the
meanings customarily assigned to them:



   ABANDONED. A property that is vacant as a result of the relinquishment
of possession or control by a mortgager or the mortgager's assigns whether or
not the mortgager or mortgager's assigns have relinquished equity and title.



   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly authorized agent.



   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any dwelling or structure that is in violation of
any condition referenced in § 92.001 of this code.



   FORECLOSURE. The process by which a lien, mortgage or security interest
is enforced against a parcel of real property. A parcel of real property for
which there is any of the following shall constitute a FORECLOSED PROPERTY:



      (1)   A notice of foreclosure;



      (2)   A notice of trustee's sale;



      (3)   A foreclosure sale of the real property where the title
to the real property was retained by the beneficiary of the mortgage;



      (4)   A pending tax sale; and



      (5)   Any transfer of title under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure or deed in lieu of sale.



   LANDSCAPING. Shall include, without limitation, items such as trees,
shrubs, plants, grass, ground cover including mulch and rocks, borders,
ornamental fences, items and structures.



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local
agent stating that there has been a violation of a provision of this
subchapter or any other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations
concerning the premises.



   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the premises.



   PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property within the City of
Hamtramck and includes the building and structures located on the property
regardless of condition.



   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The responsible local agent shall be an
individual person, and shall be either the property owner, representative of
a corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, or designated by the owner as responsible for operating the
premises in compliance with all the provisions of the city codes and
ordinances. All official notices and violations may be issued to the
responsible local agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have
been issued upon the owner of record.



   SECURE MANOR. Includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking
of windows, doors (including garage doors), gates and any other opening that
may allow access the property and structure.



   VACANT PROPERTY. An improved lot or parcel of real property with at
least one building or structure that is not currently legally used or
occupied for a period of 30 days. Exceptions:



      (1)   A building or structure which remains furnished, has
active utilities in use, and is consistently maintained by the owner while
not occupied.



      (2)   The vacancy of an individual dwelling unit in a
multi-family dwelling or apartment building.



      (3)   The vacancy of individual tenant units in a commercial
building that has multiple tenant spaces with one common access.



      (4)   A building under construction that meets all of the
following conditions:



         (a)   There is a current and valid building permit on
file with the city;



         (b)   There is significant and continuous progress being
made toward completion of the building and/or project;



         (c)   The contractor, owner or tenant secures the
property and takes all other necessary safety precautions;



         (d)   The contractor, owner or tenant takes all
reasonable measures to maintain the exterior of the property in compliance
with all applicable codes; and



         (e)   Otherwise complies with this chapter and all other
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.



(Ord. , passed - - 2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 96.003  EVIDENCE OF VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   Property will be presumed abandoned when there is evidence of
conditions, taken separately or as a whole that would lead to the conclusion
that the property is vacant. Scope of evidence includes, but is not limited
to evidence of overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnect
utilities; accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris; abandoned vehicles;
open entryways, broken or boarded windows; statements of neighbors,
passersby, delivery or utility agents, city workers and code officials,
Police and Fire Department employees.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 96.004  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner of any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property
shall register the property with the City of Hamtramck within 30 days of the
earlier of:



      (1)   The property becoming subject to foreclosure.



      (2)   The property becoming a vacant or abandoned property.



      (3)   Notice sent to the owner by the city that the property
has been declared a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property.



   (B)   No registration is valid unless completed accurately and
correctly, signed by the owner or responsible local agent, and the proper
fees have been paid. Once issued, certificates are not transferable as to
person or place and fees may not be refunded.



   (C)   Registration shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The address of the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned
property.



      (2)   The date of which the property became foreclosed, vacant
or abandoned.



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners
of the dwelling or structure including the name, address and phone number of
the majority shareholder of any owner that is a business or corporation.



      (4)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license
number or other legal identification and date of birth of the responsible
local agent for the property.



      (5)   A mailing address where mail is to be sent that will be
acknowledged as received by owner or agent. If mail sent to the address is
returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof
that the owner has failed to comply with registration requirements.



      (6)   Affirmation of utility connects or disconnects.



      (7)   The acknowledgment and signature of a designated
responsible local agent.



      (8)   The acknowledgment of inspection, if required, and
scheduled date of inspection.



   (D)   Payment in full of all fines, fees and other debts on the
property that are owed to the city, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Outstanding water and sewer bills.



      (2)   All charges for cleanup, mowing, boarding or other
maintenance debts.



      (3)   Any fines or penalties arising from violations.



   (E)   Foreclosed, vacant, abandoned property registration is valid
for one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed annually
thereafter until the property has become legally occupied.  Renewal
registration must be applied for 60 days prior to the expiration date of the
current certificate. Failure to register after notice or to timely renew a
property registration is a violation of this subchapter and shall subject the
property owner to late fees.



   (F)   Registration fees, renewal fees, late fees as well as any
other charges in connection with foreclosed, vacant or abandoned registration
and compliance shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.005  AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   If any information that is submitted on a foreclosed, vacant or
abandoned registration changes, including the name or responsible party of
any limited liability company or corporation, the owner or registered agent
must notify the city with an amended application within ten days of the
change. There shall be no fee for an amended application if done within ten
days; however failure to update necessary information within ten days shall
subject the property owner to late fees.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.006  DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT REQUIRED.



   The owner of any vacant dwelling or structure shall designate an
individual person as the responsible local agent who shall be responsible for
maintaining the dwelling or structure and who shall provide access for
inspection by the code official for compliance with the applicable ordinance
requirements. The owner may act as the responsible local agent. The
responsible local agent shall reside within a 50 mile radius of the city.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.007  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   The seller of a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property must
notify the city within 15 days of the date of the sale or transfer and
provide the name and address of the purchaser or transferee. The purchaser or
transferee must apply for a property registration within 15 days of the sale
or transfer, unless it is intended to be occupied as a single-family owner
occupied structure and a principal residence exemption is on file with the
city. No refunds or credits of fees will be given when there is a transfer of
ownership.



   (B)   Any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property which meets one
of the following conditions will be required to obtain a new certificate of
occupancy pursuant to the provisions of §§ 96.025 through 96.032:



      (1)   Any vacant or abandoned residential property that has
been unoccupied for a period of 180 days or more that will be occupied after
sale or transfer of ownership.



      (2)   Any vacant or abandoned commercial or industrial
property that has been unoccupied for a period of 90 days or more that will
be occupied after sale or transfer of ownership.



      (3)   Any property that has been foreclosed, regardless of the
period of vacancy, which will be occupied after sale or transfer of ownership.



(Ord. , passed - - 2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.008  DUTY TO MAINTAIN AND SECURE.



   It is declared a public nuisance for any owner or agent to cause,
permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to the provisions of this
section. The owner or agent responsible for the care and control of the
property shall perform regular inspections of the property to assure
compliance with the requirements of this section and all other codes and
ordinances.



   (A)   Property shall be kept free of the following:



      (1)   Grass taller than five inches.



      (2)   Weeds on property, along fence lines, in alleyways.



      (3)   Vegetation growth onto, or between sidewalk and driveway
flags or from cracks in the pavement.



      (4)   Dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris,
building materials, conditions for rodent harborage.



      (5)   Accumulated snow on sidewalks and driveways.



      (6)   Any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and
notices.



      (7)   Discarded items including, but not limited to:
furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, signage,
containers, equipment, construction materials.



      (8)   Any illegal outside storage of vehicles.



   (B)   Property shall be kept free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior structure.



   (C)   Property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to
be accessible to unauthorized persons. Broken windows must be repaired or
replaced within 30 days. Boarding up of open or broken windows is prohibited
except as a temporary measure for no longer than 30 days.



   (D)   Property shall comply with minimum security fencing, barrier
and maintenance requirements of the construction code and the International
Property Maintenance Code. Security fencing shall be kept in good repair.



   (E)   Landscaping shall be properly maintained.



   (F)   Pools, spas, or other water features located on the property
shall be drained and kept dry and free of debris, and must comply with the
minimum security fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the
construction code and the International Property Maintenance Code.



   (G)   Utilities at the property must be properly and safely
connected or fully disconnected by the utility company.



   (H)   Any building accessory or attachment must be securely attached
so as not to cause a blighted condition, including, but not limited to,
gutters, downspouts, shutters, railings, guards, steps, awnings, canopies,
signs, light fixtures, and fire escapes.



   (I)   Signs and lighting systems shall be structurally sound, and
maintained so as not to cause a blighted condition, or removed.  Any sign
that no longer advertises or identifies a use conducted on the property shall
be removed by the property owner within 30 days of the date the use ended.



   (J)   Fencing and retaining walls shall be maintained structurally
sound. Any fence or wall with broken or hanging components shall be repaired,
straightened, or removed.



   (K)   Perishables shall be removed from the interior of all
structures on the property.



   (L)   Windows shall not be obscured with newspapers, paper or
plastic sheets or similar materials.  Blinds and drapes designed for said
purpose shall be permitted.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.009  MONITORING OF PROPERTY; FEE; INSPECTION.



   (A)   The city shall inspect and monitor the condition of any
property required to be registered under this subchapter, including building,
water, fire, police, and any other inspections deemed necessary by the code
official.



   (B)    Fees will be set by resolution of City Council to offset
costs incurred by the city, including but without limitation to, responding
to phone calls, complaints, inquires, site visits, owner notifications, and
inspecting and monitoring of the site. No refunds or credits of the
monitoring fee will be given.



   (C)   The code official shall have the authority to require the
owner or agent to implement additional maintenance, security, or other
measures not specified in § 96.008, as may be reasonably required to prevent
further decline or blight.



   (D)   Upon application for a new vacant registration the subject
property's exterior premises shall be inspected for compliance with all
applicable codes.  In the event the inspection reveals any violations the
owner shall, within ten days, apply for any necessary permits, and shall
within 30 days, or such additional period as authorized by the building
official not to exceed six months from the application date, complete all
required repairs. The application fee for a new registration shall include
one initial inspection and one re-inspection. Additional re-inspections shall
be shall be assessed a re-inspection fee.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.010  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   If the owner fails to secure or maintain the property as
required under this subchapter, such failure shall constitute a hazardous and
nuisance condition. After notice to abate has been provided, the code
official may abate the nuisance without further notice, by arranging for city
employees or private contractors to secure and board the structure, remove
rubbish and debris, landscape, or make repairs. The cost of abating the
nuisance condition, plus any applicable administrative costs or late fees,
shall be charged to the owner and against the property. Such billing shall be
a personal debt against the owner, which may be assessed as a lien against
the property.



   (B)   The code official may abate the public nuisance without notice
if the public health and safety requires immediate abatement.



   (C)   The billing of costs and fees for abatement shall not exclude
the owner/agent from the issuance of citations for failing to meet any of the
requirements under this subchapter.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.011  FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTY.



   If any building or structure that is damaged by fire, the owner or
agent shall have 90 days from the date of the fire to apply for the
appropriate permits to begin construction or demolition. Failure to do so
will result in the property being deemed vacant or abandoned and subject to
the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, See §
96.999



§ 96.012  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   All fees applicable to this subchapter shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and may include without limitation:



      (1)   Annual registration fees charged to the owner or agent
at time of registration of the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned residential
property.



      (2)   Annual registration fee charged to the owner or agent at
time of registration of the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned commercial or
industrial property.



      (3)   Late fees charged to the owner or agent for failing to
register the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property or renew a registration
in a timely manner.



      (4)   An inspection fee charged to the owner or agent for
monthly monitoring inspections or any inspection caused by the owner or
agent's failure to comply with the maintenance and security duties set forth
in this subchapter.



      (5)   Administrative charges charged to the owner or agent for
excessive notifications of violations, processing orders for boarding,
landscaping, removal of rubbish and debris, and preparation for prosecution.



   (B)   If an owner or agent fails to pay fees or charges due under
the terms of this subchapter within 30 days of being invoiced, the cost
reflected on the invoice may be assessed against the property, and the city
may institute action against the owner or agent for collection of the costs
in any court of competent jurisdiction. The city's attempt to collect such
costs shall not invalidate or waive any lien filed against the property.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.013  NUISANCE PER SE.



   A foreclosed, vacant or abandoned structure or unit in violation of
this subchapter is considered to be a nuisance per se and is subject to
abatement in any manner prescribed by law.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 96.014  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The city shall not be liable to any person or entity by reason of this
chapter or the issuance of a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property
registration. A property registration is not a warranty or guarantee that
there are no defects in or on any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)



RE-OCCUPANCY OF VACANT, ABANDONED, FORECLOSED PROPERTY



§ 96.025  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a program for inspection
and certification of properties that have been deemed to be vacant, abandoned
or foreclosed. Such properties are found to be in declining conditions and
often inhabitable. To protect the health, safety and welfare of new occupants
of properties found to be vacant, abandoned or foreclosed within the
provisions of this chapter will be required to pass inspection and receive a
certificate of occupancy before being occupied.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)



§ 96.026  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON. A property that is vacant as a result of the relinquishment of
possession or control by a mortgager or the mortgager’s assigns whether or
not the mortgager or mortgager’s assigns have relinquished equity and title.



   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly authorized agent.



   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any dwelling or structure that is in violation of
any condition referenced in § 92.001 of this code.



   FORECLOSURE. The process by which a lien, mortgage or security interest
is enforced against a parcel of real property. A parcel of real property for
which there is any of the following shall constitute a foreclosed property:



      (1)   A notice of foreclosure;



      (2)   A notice of trustee’s sale;



      (3)   A foreclosure sale of the real property where the title
to the real property was retained by the beneficiary of the mortgage;



      (4)   A pending tax sale;



      (5)   Any transfer of title under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure or deed in lieu of sale;



   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any dwelling or structure intended to be
occupied, in whole or part, for any use other than a home, living space,
residing place or sleeping space, either permanently or transiently.



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local
agent stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the
subchapter or any other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations
concerning the premises.



   OCCUPANCY. Any property occupied as either a residential property or
non-residential property.



   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the premises.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A dwelling or structure intended to be occupied,
in whole or part, for use as a home, living space, residing place or sleeping
space, either permanently or transiently.



   RESPONSIBLE AGENT. A representative of a corporation, partnership,
firm, joint venture, trust, association, organization, or other entity having
a legal or equitable interest in the property, or designated by the owner as
responsible for maintaining the premises in compliance with all the
provisions of the city codes and ordinances. All official notices and
violations may be issued to the RESPONSIBLE AGENT, and any notice so issued
shall be deemed to have been issued upon the owner of record. The owner of
the premises may act as the RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT.



   VACANT PROPERTY. Any improved property that is not legally occupied or
any unimproved property.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)



§ 96.027  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   The owner or responsible agent of any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned
property that will become occupied shall apply at the Department of Public
Services for a certificate of occupancy, before the property is occupied, and
shall also be responsible for providing access to the premises for making the
inspections necessary to ensure compliance with terms of all applicable codes
and ordinances adopted by the city.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.028  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any property that has been foreclosed, vacant or abandoned
which meets one or more of the following conditions, whether or not the
property has been registered with the City of Hamtramck Vacant Property
Registry shall be required to obtain a certificate of pccupancy before the
property can be occupied:



      (1)   Any vacant or abandoned residential property that has
been unoccupied for a period of 180 or longer.



      (2)   Any vacant or abandoned non-residential property that
has been unoccupied for a period of 90 days or longer.



      (3)   Any property that has been foreclosed by any bank,
county, financial entity, or any other person, firm or corporation holding
interest in the property, regardless of period of vacancy.



   (B)   No person shall rent, lease, or occupy any foreclosed, vacant
or abandoned property referenced in this section unless a certificate of
occupancy has been obtained.



   (C)   The certificate of occupancy issued to a residential property
shall remain valid and is transferrable until such time as the property
becomes foreclosed, vacant or abandoned. There is no annual renewal for a
certificate of occupancy issued to a residential property.



   (D)   The certificate of occupancy issued to a non-residential
property shall remain valid for the current use of the property. A
non-residential certificate of occupancy is not transferable, and is subject
to reinspection with every new use or business license issued.



   (E)   A certificate of occupancy is not to replace a non-owner
occupied certificate of compliance. Any non-owner occupied property shall be
required to comply with the provisions of §§ 150.080 through 150.096 and
150.180 through 150.196 and obtain a certificate of compliance.



   (F)   A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Department
of Public Services if the applicant meets the following requirements:



      (1)   Application form submitted.



      (2)   The required inspection(s) have been performed at the
premises and all violations disclosed have been corrected.



      (3)   All reinspections have been performed to confirm the
correction of violations.



      (4)   All the following fees and debts to the city have been
paid in full:



         (a)   All previously billed property taxes;



         (b)   All current or past due special assessments;



         (c)   Water or sewer bills outstanding;



         (d)   All charges against the property for mowing,
cleanup, debris removal or similar charges by the city;



         (e)   Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort
arising from provisions of property maintenance, including blight violations.



   (G)   Failure to make application, schedule the required inspection
or reinspection, or to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this
subchapter may subject the applicant to late fees.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.029  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Access of code official/inspector. The code official/building
inspector(s) shall be granted access by the owner or responsible agent at the
date and time schedule for the inspection(s), for the purpose of conducting a
compliance inspection. If any owner or responsible agent refuses to provide
access to the premises for a compliance inspection, or fails to show up for
the inspection, a code official may issue a ticket for fail to obtain entry
to the premises. All properties inspected shall comply with the minimum
standards set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted
by reference in § 150.010.



   (B)   Inspection required. All foreclosed, vacant or abandoned
properties which are required by this subchapter shall have an inspection to
ensure compliance with all the requirements of the International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in § 150.010. The following
inspections are required: electrical, mechanical, plumbing, building, and
ordinance enforcement.



   (C)   Reinspection required. Reinspection shall be required when
violations are found to exist during a prior inspection. Before a certificate
of occupancy is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The
violations shall be corrected and a reinspection scheduled within 90 days
after the initial inspection, except in dangerous conditions which must be
remedied immediately.



   (D)   Extension for Compliance. Upon request and submission of proof
of extenuating circumstances, the code official may grant an extension to
make the repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance.



   (E)   Inspection fees. Inspection fees, reinspection fees and late
fees as well as any other charges in connection with this subchapter shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.030  DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   Should the code official, upon inspection, determine that there are
conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may
order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where
appropriate.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.031  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this subchapter is determined to be unenforceable
by a court, the remainder of this subchapter shall be deemed severable and is
to remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)



§ 96.032  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The city shall not be liable to any person or entity by reason of this
subchapter or the issuance of a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property
certificate.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)



§ 96.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who
violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§ 96.004
through 96.012 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction for the first
and second offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. The
City Council shall establish a fine structure for a first and second offense
municipal civil infraction.



      (2)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who
violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§ 96.004
through 96.012 is responsible for a misdemeanor for the third and any
subsequent offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. Upon
conviction, the person, agent, corporation, or other entity may be fined up
to $500, sentenced to 90 days in jail, community service for a time
determined by the judge, or any combination of the above.



      (3)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in
§§ 96.004 through 96.012, the court may require the defendant to pay any
unpaid fees and charges arising from the provisions of §§ 96.001 through
96.015.



      (4)   Each day that a violation of §§ 96.004 through 96.012
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



(Ord. 2013-17, passed 3-26-2013)



   (B)   (1)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who
violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§ 96.027
through 96.030 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction for the first
and second offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. The
City Council shall establish a fine structure for a first and second offense
municipal civil infraction.



      (2)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who
violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§ 96.027
through 96.030 is responsible for a misdemeanor for the third and any
subsequent offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. Upon
conviction, the person, agent, corporation, or other entity may be fined up
to $500, sentenced to 90 days in jail, community service for a time
determined by the judge, or any combination of the above.



      (3)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in
§§ 96.027 through 96.030, the court may require the defendant to pay any
unpaid fees and charges arising from the provisions of §§ 96.025 through
96.032.



      (4)   Each day that a violation of §§ 96.027 through 96.030
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



      112.   TRANSPORTATION



      113.   ALCOHOL



      114.   PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS



      115.   METAL AND GEM DEALERS



      116.   HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      117.   PUBLIC SALES



      118.   AMUSEMENTS



      119.   RESTAURANTS AND FOOD-RELATED SERVICES AND PRODUCTS



      120.   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS AND HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SOLICITORS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Business Licenses



   110.001   Title



   110.002   Scope



   110.003   Definitions



   110.004   Application of regulations



   110.005   City Clerk



   110.006   Qualifications of applicants



   110.007   Procedure for issuance of license



   110.008   Determination of license fee



   110.009   Contents of license; information required



   110.010   Duties of licensee



   110.011   Transfer of license



   110.012   Enforcement



Conduct of Vendors of Goods, Wares or Merchandise



   110.025   Amplified sounds



 



   110.999   Penalty




BUSINESS LICENSES




§ 110.001  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the General
Licensing Subchapter of the city.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



§ 110.002  SCOPE.



   It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this subchapter. Where this
subchapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal
property than is imposed or required by an existing provisions of law,
ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this subchapter shall control.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



§ 110.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word SHALL is always
mandatory and not merely directory.



   BUSINESS.  Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein,
any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, on any premises in this city, or anywhere else within its
jurisdiction.



   CITY.  The City of Hamtramck.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Hamtramck.



   CITY CLERK or DEPUTY CITY CLERK.  The license officer of the city.



   INSIGNIA or INSIGNE.  Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or any
other kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any
license.



   LICENSE or LICENSEE.  As used generally herein, shall include
respectively the words PERMIT or PERMITTEE or the holder for any use or
period of time of any similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision
of this subchapter or other law or subchapter.



   PERSON.  To include individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations
or any officers agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself,
herself or for any other person, under either personal appointment or
pursuant to law.



   PREMISES.  To include all lands, structures, places, and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used
in connection with any business conducted on the premises.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



§ 110.004  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance required.  It shall be unlawful for any person,
either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or non-profit
enterprise, or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine
or device, in whole or in part, for which a license or permit, is required by
any law or ordinance of this city, without a license or permit therefor being
first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by this subchapter
or other law or ordinance of this city.



   (B)   Special sales.  This subchapter shall apply to all business
in the nature of special sales for which a license is required by any law or
ordinance of this city and it shall be unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct any sale except in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter.



      (1)   One act constitutes doing business.  For the purpose of
this subchapter, any person shall be deemed to be in business or engaging in
nonprofit enterprise, and thus subject to the requirements of divisions (A)
and (B) of this section, when he or she does one act of:



         (a)   Selling any goods or service;



         (b)   Soliciting business or offering goods or services
for sale or hire; or



         (c)   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in
the city for business purposes.



      (2)   Agents responsible for obtaining license.  The agents
or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this city
shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of
the businesses they represent with this subchapter.



      (3)   Separate license for branch establishments.



         (a)   Generally.  A license shall be obtained in the
manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of the
business engaged in, as if each branch establishment or location were a
separate business; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of
this subchapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or
branch establishments.



         (b)   Rental real property.  Each rental real property
shall be deemed a branch establishment or separate place of business for the
purposes of this subchapter when there is a representative of the owner or
the owner’s agent on the premises who is authorized to transact business
for the owner or owner’s agent or there is a regular employee of the owner
or of the owner’s agent working on the premises.



      (4)   Joint license.  A person engaged in two or more
businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain separate
licenses for conduction each of the businesses but, when eligible, shall be
issued one license which shall specify on its face all the businesses.



      (5)   No license required for mere delivery.  No license
shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the city of any
property purchases or acquired in good faith from the person at his or her
regular place of business outside the city where no intent by the person is
shown to exist to evade the provisions of this subchapter.



      (6)   Special permits to nonprofit enterprise.  The City
Clerk shall issue special permits, without the payment of any license fees or
other charges therefor, to any person or organization for the conduct or
operation of a non-profit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when
he or she finds that the applicant operates without private profit for a
public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose.



         (a)   Application for special permit.  An applicant for
a special permit shall submit an application therefor to the City Clerk, upon
forms prescribed by the City Clerk, and shall furnish  additional
information and make affidavits as the City Clerk shall require.



         (b)   Special permittees must conform.  A person or
organization operating under a special permit shall operate his or her
nonprofit enterprise in compliance with this subchapter and all other
applicable rules and regulations except as provided herein.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.005  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Issue licenses.  The City Treasurer shall collect all license
fees and the City Clerk shall issue licenses in the name of the city after
all applicable fees have been paid to all persons qualified under the
provisions of this subchapter and are as follows:



      (1)   Make rules.  Promulgate and enforce all reasonable
rules and regulations necessary to operation and enforcement of this
subchapter;



      (2)   Adopt forms.  Adopt all forms and prescribe the
information to be given therein as to character and other relevant matter for
all necessary papers;



      (3)   Require affidavits.  Require applicants to submit all
affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this subchapter;



       (4)   Obtain endorsement.  Submit all applications, in a
proper case, to interested city officials for their endorsements thereon as
to compliance by the applicant with all city regulations which they have the
duty of enforcing;



      (5)   Investigate.  Investigate and determine the eligibility
of any applicant for a license as prescribed herein;



      (6)   Examine records.  Examine the books and records of any
applicant or licensee when  reasonably necessary to the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter; and



      (7)   Give notice.  Notify any applicant of the acceptance or
rejection of his or her application and shall, upon his or her refusal of any
license or permit at the applicant’s request, state in writing the reasons
therefor and deliver them to the applicant.



   (B)   Information confidential.  The City Clerk shall keep all
information furnished or secured under the authority of this subchapter, in
strict confidence. The information shall not be subject to public inspection
and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except
to the persons charged with the administration of this subchapter.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



§ 110.006  QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.



   (A)   General standards to be applied.  The general standards
herein set out relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a city
license shall be considered and applied by the City Clerk.



   (B)   Proof of qualifications.  The applicant shall provide proof
of qualifications as follows:



      (1)   Citizenship.  Be a citizen or legal resident of the
United States or a declarant therefor as authorized by law;



      (2)   Loyalty.  Not, either individually or as a member of
any party, group or organization, at the time of any application for a
license or special permit, advocate or resort to any practices subversive of
or designed for the overthrow, destruction or sabotage of the government of
the United States;



      (3)   Good moral character.  Be of good moral character. In
making this determination the City Clerk shall consider the following:



         (a)   Penal history.  All convictions, the reasons
therefore, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release;



         (b)   License history.  The license history of the
applicant; whether the person, in previously operating in this or another
state under a license, has had a license revoked or suspended, the reasons
therefor and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to the action; and



         (c)   General personal history.  Other facts relevant
to the general, personal and business history of the applicant, as he or she
shall find necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the
applicant.



      (4)   No obligations to city.  Not be in default under the
provisions of this subchapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the
city except for current taxes; and



      (5)   Compliance with zoning regulations.  Present a
certificate of occupancy furnished by the Superintendent of Building and
Engineering the effect that the proposed use of any premises in not a
violation of city zoning regulations.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.007  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   License year.  Except as otherwise herein provided as to
certain licenses, the license year shall begin May 1 of each year and shall
terminate at midnight on April 30 of the following year. Original licenses
shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee.
License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses
issued for a period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all
cases where the provisions of this subchapter permit the issuance licenses
for periods of less than one year, the effective date of the licenses shall
commence with the date of issuance thereof.



   (B)   Formal application required.  Every person required to
procure a license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city
shall submit an application for the license to the City  Clerk. The
application shall:



      (1)   Form of application.  Be a written statement upon forms
provided by the City Clerk; the form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn,
to by the applicant before a notary public of this state;



      (2)   Contents of application.  Require the disclosure of all
information necessary to compliance with § 110.006 and of any other
information, which the City Clerk shall find to be reasonably necessary to
the fair administration of this subchapter;



      (3)   Payment of fees.  Be accompanied by the full amount of
the fees chargeable for the license; and



      (4)   Issuance fee.  Be accompanied by the payment of an
issuance fee to be set from time to time by proper resolution of the City
Council.



   (C)   Issuance of receipts.  Whenever a license cannot be issued at
the time the application for the same is made, the City Treasurer shall issue
a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance, subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   The receipt shall not be construed as the approval of
the City Clerk for the issuance of a license; and



      (2)   Nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open
or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   Renewal license procedure.  The applicant for the renewal of
a license shall submit an application for the license to the City Clerk. The
application shall:



      (1)   Form of application.  Be a written statement upon forms
provided by the City Clerk; the form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn
to by the applicant before a notary public of this state; and



      (2)   Contents.  Require the disclosure of any information
concerning the applicant’s demeanor and the conduct and operation of
applicant’s business during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably
necessary to, the determination by the City Clerk of the applicant’s
eligibility for a renewal license and to a possible adjustment of license fee.



   (E)   Duplicate license procedure.  A duplicate license or special
permit shall be issued by the City Clerk to replace any license previously
issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any willful
conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an
affidavit sworn to before a notary public of this state attesting to the fact
and the paying to the Treasurer of a fee to be set from time to time by
proper resolution of the City Council.



   (F)   Supplemental license procedure.  When a licensee places
himself or herself in a new status as provided in § 110.008(B) of this
subchapter, the City Clerk shall issue a supplemental license and an
additional insignia as may be required.



   (G)   Non-approval of license.



      (1)   Non-approval.  The City Clerk shall, upon disapproving,
any application submitted under the provisions of this subchapter, request
from the City Council authorization to refund all fees paid in advance to the
applicant, provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city.



      (2)   Compliance pending legal action.  When the issuance of
a license is denied and any action instituted by the applicant to compel, its
issuance, the applicant shall not engage in the business for which the
license was refused unless a license be issued to him or her pursuant to a
judgement ordering the same.



   (H)   Late renewals.  All fees for the renewal of any license which
are not paid at the time the fees shall be due, shall be paid as late fees
with an additional 25% of the license fee required for the license under the
subchapter for the first 15 days that the license fee remains unpaid and
thereafter, the license fee shall be that stipulated for the licenses plus
50% of the fee.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.008  DETERMINATION OF LICENSE FEE.



   License fees shall be set from time to time by the proper resolution of
the City Council and as further determined by this section.



   (A)   Unexpired previous license.  The following rules shall apply
to a person who, on the effective date of this subchapter, holds a valid
unexpired license from the city for any business required to be licensed
hereunder.



      (1)   Credit less than fee.  In the event that the amount of
the prorata of the license fee previously paid, based upon the unexpired
portion of the period for which the previous license was issued, is less that
the amount of free imposed hereunder, the applicant shall receive credit on
the new fee to the extent of the prorated amount.



      (2)   Credit exceeds fee.  In the event that the prorata
credit as computed in division (A)(1) above is greater than the amount of fee
imposed hereunder, the amount of license fee imposed by this subchapter shall
be the amount of the prorated credit.



      (3)   Where applicant indebted.  In no case is an applicant
who is indebted in any manner to the city entitled to a credit or rebate.



   (B)   Adjustment of fee.  The City Clerk shall:



      (1)   Change in license status.  Require the payment of an
additional or higher license fee, to be prorated for the balance of the
license period, when a licensee places himself or herself in a status under
this subchapter by:



         (a)   Increasing the number of his or her employees;



         (b)   Augmenting the volume of business done by him or
her;



         (c)   Expanding the size of business, plant or premises;



         (d)   Increasing the number or size of his or her
vehicles; or



         (e)   Making any other lawful and material change of any
kind in his or her business;



      (2)   Prorated fee on voluntary retirement.  Refund a
proportion of the amount of fee already paid, prorated for the balance of the
license period, upon notification by a license of his or her voluntary
retirement from business; and



      (3)   Prorated fee for new business.  Prorate for the balance
of any license period the license fee of any business commenced after the
beginning of the license period.



   (C)   Rebate of fee.



      (1)   General prohibition.  Except as herein provided, no
rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by reason
of the non-use of the license or by reason of a change of location or
business rendering the use of it ineffective.



      (2)   Authorization in special cases.  The City Clerk shall
have the authority to refund a license fee or prorated portion thereof where:



         (a)   The license fee was collected through an error;



         (b)   Some particular hardship might be involved;



         (c)   The licensee has been prevented from enjoying the
full license privilege due to his or her death or incapacity to engage in a
business;



         (d)   The licensee has entered the armed services of the
United States through induction or enlistment and is thereby rendered unable
to conduct a business;



         (e)   The licensed business is forced to close before
the expiration of the license period by reason of the taking over of the
business or licensed premises by the United State government, the state or
this city; or



         (f)   The licensed business was destroyed by fire or
other casualty through no fault of the licensee.



      (3)   Basis of rebate.  A rebate or refund as provided herein
shall be based upon the number of days in the license period remaining after
the occurrence of the event relied upon for rebate.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



§ 110.009  CONTENTS OF LICENSE; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:



   (A)   The name of the licensee and, any other name under which the
business is to be conducted;



   (B)   The kind and address of each business so licensed;



   (C)   The amount of license fee therefore;



   (D)   The dates of issuance and expiration; and



   (E)   Any other information as the City Clerk shall determine.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



§ 110.010  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.



   (A)   General standards of conduct.  Every licensee under this
subchapter shall:



      (1)   Permit inspection.  Permit all reasonable inspections
of his or her business and examinations of his or her books by public
authorities so authorized by law;



      (2)   Comply with governing law.  Ascertain and at all times
comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the licensed business;



      (3)   Operate properly.  Avoid all forbidden, improper or
unnecessary practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health,
morals or welfare; and



      (4)   Cease business.  Refrain from operating the licensed
businesses on premises after expiration of his or her license and during the
period his or her license is revoked or suspended.



   (B)   Display of license and insignia.  Every licensee under this
subchapter shall do the following.



      (1)   Premises.



         (a)   Licenses.  Post and maintain the license upon the
licensed premises in a place where it may be seen at all times.



         (b)   Insignia.



            1.   Affix any insignia delivered for use in
connection with business premises on the inside glass part of the window of
the establishment, facing the public way or on the inside glass part of the
door opening on the public way.



            2.   The insignia shall be placed and maintained
so as to be plainly visible from the public way.



               a.   Premises not fronting on public way. 
Where the licensed premises does not have a window facing a public way at
street level or a glass door opening upon the public way, the insignia shall
be affixed to the glass in the door, window or other prominent place in the
nearest proximity to the principal public entrance to the establishment.



               b.   The insignia shall be placed and
maintained so as to be plainly visible from the public entrance.



      (2)   Vehicles.



         (a)   Effect of this subchapter.  Any general or
special license fees required for any kind of vehicle, for the privilege of
being operated upon the public highways, by any statute or ordinance, shall
not abrogate, limit or affect any further requirements of this subchapter or
of other ordinances or laws, for additional and separate licenses, permits
and insignia and fees for vehicles, or other uses, for and relating to the
privilege of using the same in the business so licensed.



         (b)   Motor vehicles.  Affix any insignia delivered for
use in connection with a licensed motor vehicle on the inside of the
windshield of the vehicle or as may be otherwise prescribed by the City Clerk
or by law.



         (c)   Motor-less vehicles.  Affix any metal or other
durable type of insignia delivered for use in connection with a wagon or
other vehicle not operated by motor power securely on the outside of the
vehicle.



      (3)   Persons.  Carry the license on his or her person when
he or she has no licensed business premises.



      (4)   Machines.  Affix any insignia delivered for use in
connection therewith upon the outside. of any coin, vending or other business
machine or device, so that it may be seen at all times.



      (5)   Inoperative licenses, special permits and insignia. 
Not allow any license, special permit or insignia to remain posted or
displayed or used, after the period for which it was issued has expired. or
when it has been suspended or revoked, or for any other reason become
ineffective. The licensee shall promptly return the inoperative license,
special permit or insignia to the City Clerk.



      (6)   Unlawful possession.  Not loan, sell, give or assign,
to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to
destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his or her possession, except as
authorized by the City Clerk or by law, any license or insignia which has
been issued to the licensee.



   (C)   New location desired.  A licensee shall have the right to
change the location of the licensed business provided he or she shall do the
following.



      (1)   Approval of City Clerk.  Obtain written permission from
the City Clerk for the change of location.



      (2)   Payment of fee.  Pay a removal fee to be set from time
to time by the proper resolution of the City Council and paid to the City
Treasurer.



   (D)   Keep records.



      (1)   Keep all records and books necessary to the computation
of his or her license fee and to the enforcement of this subchapter.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall make his or her own determination
as to the financial statement for any business where the licensee has failed
to keep books and records as required herein.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.011  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   When authorized.  A licensee hereunder shall have the right
to transfer his or her license to another person provided he or she does the
following.



      (1)   Approval of Clerk.  Obtain written permission from the
City Clerk for the transfer.



      (2)   Method of transfer.  Execute the transfer in the form
and under the conditions required by law and as prescribed by the City Clerk.



      (3)   Notification.  Promptly report the completed act of
transfer to the City Clerk.



      (4)   Surrender license.  Promptly surrender any license
certificate and, when required by the City Clerk, all licensing insignia.



   (B)   New license issued.  Upon the completion of a transfer of
license in compliance with division (A) above, the City Clerk shall issue a
new license and insignia to the transferee for the unexpired term of the old
license.



      (1)   Effect of new license.  The new license issued
hereunder shall authorize the transferee to engage in the same business at
the same location or at another place as shall be approved by the City Clerk
and named in the new license.



      (2)   Transfer fee.  The City Clerk shall collect a transfer
fee of $70 from the transferee prior to the issuance of the new license.
Transfer fee shall be established from time to time by proper resolution of
the City Council.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.012  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Inspections.



      (1)   Persons authorized.  The following persons are
authorized to conduct inspections in the manner prescribed herein.



         (a)   City Clerk.  The City Clerk shall make all
investigations reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.



         (b)   Officials having duties.  The City Clerk shall
have the authority to order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and
premises by all city officials having duties to perform with reference to the
licensees or businesses.



         (c)   Police officers.  All police officers shall
inspect and examine businesses located within their respective jurisdictions
or beats to enforce compliance with this subchapter.



      (2)   Authority of inspectors.  All persons authorized herein
to inspect licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with
or without search warrant, at all reasonable times the following premises:



         (a)   Those for which a license is required;



         (b)   Those for which a license was issued and which, at
the time of inspection, are operating under the license; or



         (c)   Those for which the license has been revoked or
suspended.



      (3)   Reports by inspectors.  Persons inspecting licensees,
their businesses or premises as herein authorized shall, report all
violations of this subchapter or of other laws or ordinances to the City
Clerk and shall submit any other reports as the City Clerk shall order.



   (B)   Provisional order.  When an inspector has reported the
violation of this subchapter or of any law or ordinance, the City Clerk shall
issue to the affected person a provisional order to comply.



      (1)   Nature of notice.  The provisional order, and all other
notices issued in compliance with this subchapter, shall be in writing, shall
be personally served and shall apprise the person affected of his or her
specific violations. In the absence of the person affected or his or her
agent or employee a  copy of the notice shall be affixed to some structure
on the premises. Depositing the notice in the United States mail shall
constitute service thereof.



      (2)   Period for compliance.  The provisional order shall
require compliance within 20 days of personal service on the affected person,
or upon written agreement authorized by the City Clerk.



      (3)   Hearing.  Upon written application by the person
affected before the expiration of the 20- day period for compliance, the City
Clerk shall order a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given the
affected person in the manner prescribed herein.



   (C)   Modifying authority of City Clerk.  Upon written application,
or on his or her own motion, the



City Clerk shall have the authority, in proper case, to extend the time for
compliance, to grant a new hearing date and to change, modify or rescind any
recommendation or order.



   (D)   Final order.  Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to
comply with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing, the
City Clerk shall then declare and make the provisional order final.



      (1)   Authority of City Clerk.  The City Clerk shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke licenses upon making and declaring a
provisional order final.



      (2)   Effect of revocation or suspension.  Upon revocation or
suspension, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the
licensee and he or she shall immediately cease all business at all places
under the license.



   (E)   Summary action.



      (1)   Generally.  When the conduct of any licensee, agent or
employee is so inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare as
to constitute a nuisance and thus give rise to emergency, the City Clerk
shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the
close of premises or to suspend or revoke the license.



      (2)   Special hearing.  Unless waived in writing, within 20
days after he or she has acted summarily, the City Clerk shall conduct a
special hearing for the action in respect to the summary order as may be
therein determined. Notice of the hearing shall be given the affected person
in the manner prescribed herein.



   (F)   Right of appeal.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
City Clerk after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the City Council
by filing a written appeal with an officer within ten days following the
effective date of the action or decision complained of.



      (1)   Contents of appeal.  The appeal shall set out a copy of
the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the
facts relied upon to avoid the order.



      (2)   Notification of City Clerk.  At the same time of filing
any appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the City
Clerk.



      (3)   Hearing.  The City Council shall fix a time and place
for hearing the appeal and shall personally serve a written notice, as
provided herein, upon the appellant informing him or her thereof. The City
Council shall also give the notice to the City Clerk and any officer shall be
entitled to appear and defend the order.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)




CONDUCT OF VENDORS OF GOODS, WARES OR MERCHANDISE




§ 110.025  AMPLIFIED SOUNDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any vendor of goods, wares or merchandise to
cause amplified sounds of any kind to be emitted within the city to make
known the presence of the vendor or the availability for sale any product
between the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of each day.



(Ord. 457, passed 6-20-1996)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Business licenses.



      (1)   Any person, persons, firm, partnership, association or
corporation of anyone acting in behalf of the person, persons, firm,
partnership, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of
§§ 110.001 through 110.012 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not more than $500, or to imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a
period of not more than 90 days, or to both a fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.



      (2)   Each day that a violation of §§ 110.001 through
110.012 is continued or permitted to exist without compliance shall
constitute a separate offense punishable upon conviction in the manner
prescribed in this section.



(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981)



   (B)   Conduct of vendors of goods, wares or merchandise.  Any
person violating any of the provisions of § 110.025 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or to imprisonment for a
period of not more than 90 days, or to both a fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.



(Ord. 457, passed 6-20-1996)



CHAPTER 111:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



   111.001   Purpose



   111.002   Conflict



   111.003   Definitions



   111.004   Permit required



   111.005   Issuance of permit



   111.006   Construction/engineering permit



   111.007   Conduit or utility poles



   111.008   Route maps



   111.009   Repair of damage



   111.010   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee



   111.011   Modification of existing fees



   111.012   Use of funds



   111.013   Annual report



   111.014   Cable television operators



   111.015   Existing rights



   111.016   Compliance



   111.017   Reservation of police powers



   111.018   Authorized city officials



 



   111.999   Penalty



§ 111.001  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 through
484.3120) (“Act”) and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city
qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to
providers and complying with the Act.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.002  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.003  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT.  The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§
484.3101 through 484.3120), as amended from time to time.



      CITY.  The City of Hamtramck.



      CITY CLERK.  The Clerk of the city or his or her designee.



      CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council or its designee. This section
does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by
law to be made by the City Council.



      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and
this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the city for its telecommunications facilities.



   (B)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation
the following.



      AUTHORITY.  The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002,
§ 3, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 through 484.3120.



      MPSC.  The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the
term COMMISSION in the Act.



      PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.



      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES.  The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive,
transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
licensed commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title
III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R.
Part 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES.  Those terms as defined in the State Telecommunications Act,
Public Act 179 of 1991, § 102, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATION
PROVIDER does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when
providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in
§ 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat.
1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service
in 47 C.F.R. Part 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a
PROVIDER also includes all of the following:



         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service;



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person
who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way;
and



         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport
access service.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.004  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in
the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Application.  Telecommunications providers shall apply for a
permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1)
of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk and one copy with the City Attorney.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the
Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the
provider’s existing and proposed facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of
the Act.



   (C)   Confidential information.  If a telecommunications provider
claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its
application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information,
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act,
the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of
each map.



   (D)   Application fee.  Except as otherwise provided by the Act,
the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application
fee in the amount of $500.



   (E)   Additional information.  The Clerk may request an applicant
to submit any additional information which the Clerk deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for additional information established
by the Clerk. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement
of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant
shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act.



   (F)   Previously issued permits.  Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of the
State Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. §
484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the
State Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter.



   (G)   Existing providers.  Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within
180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way
in the city as of that date, that has not previously obtained authorization
or a permit under § 251 of the State Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179
of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application
for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to
§ 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application
under this division is not required to pay the $500 application fee required
under division (D) above. A provider under this division shall be given up to
an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the
authority, as provided in § 5(4) of the Act.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.005  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Approval or denial.  Approval or denial of an application for
a permit will be by City Council. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, approval
or denial of an application for a permit shall be within 45 days from the
date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under
§  4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the
city. Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, the Clerk shall notify the MPSC when
the City Council has granted or denied a permit, including information
regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which
permit was granted or denied. The City Council shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.



   (B)   Form of permit.  If an application for permit is approved,
the city shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1),
6(2) and 15 of the Act.



   (C)   Conditions.  Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the Council may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way.



   (D)   Bond requirement.  Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, and
without limitation on division (C) above, the Clerk may require that a bond
be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If
a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that
the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and
after the telecommunications provider’s access and use.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.006  CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.



   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under city
regulations, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No
fee shall be charged for a construction or engineering permit.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.007  CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.008  ROUTE MAPS.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
city.



   (B)   The route maps should be in (paper or electronic) format
unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of
the Act.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.009  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair
all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over,
below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.010  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set
forth in § 111.004(D) above, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the city’s public rights-of-way shall pay
an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.011  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the city
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of
§ 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees
of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within
the city’s boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required
under § 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications
provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with
the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged
telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the
Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, the imposition is
hereby declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and intent, and upon
application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly
refunded as having been charged in error.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.012  USE OF FUNDS.



   Pursuant § 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the
authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.013  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, the city shall file an annual report
with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed
by the authority.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.014  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy
an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.015  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that
a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by
the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications
provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.016  COMPLIANCE.



   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in a manner as to achieve that purpose.
The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act,
including but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information
Act, Public Act 442, of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246, as
provided in § 111.004(C) of this chapter;



   (B)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the
permit requirements hereof, in accordance with § 111.004(F) of this chapter;



   (C)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit
an application for a permit, and excusing the providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with § 111.004(G) of this chapter;



   (D)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45
days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a
permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in
accordance with § 111.005(A) of this chapter;



   (E)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a
permit, in accordance with § 111.005(A) of this chapter;



   (F)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with § 111.005(A) of this chapter;



   (G)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 111.005(B) of
this chapter;



   (H)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to
the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with § 111.005(C) of this chapter;



   (I)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which
exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication
provider’s access and use, in accordance with § 111.005(D) of this chapter;



   (J)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional
fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 111.006
of this chapter;



   (K)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the
city’s right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
111.011 of this chapter;



   (L)   Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance
with § 111.013 of this chapter; and



   (M)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a
failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 111.014 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.017  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
city’s right to review and approve a telecommunication provider’s access
to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city’s authority
to ensure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.018  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The Clerk or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized
city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing
alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation
notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter
violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the city
regulations.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 111.999  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and
shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $500. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event
of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.



(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)



CHAPTER 112:  TRANSPORTATION



Section




Motorcycles




   112.001   Definition



   112.002   License required for business of renting or selling



   112.003   Restriction on location of business



   112.004   License applicant requirements



   112.005   Application forms



   112.006   Licenses



   112.007   License fee



 



   112.999   Penalty



MOTORCYCLES



§ 112.001  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than
three wheels it contact with the ground and includes motor scooters and
bicycles with motor attached.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)



§ 112.002  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR BUSINESS OF RENTING OR SELLING.



   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of renting or selling of
motorcycles without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk and subject
to the approval of the City Council.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 112.999



§ 112.003  RESTRICTION ON LOCATION OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of renting or
selling of motorcycles within 1,000 feet of any residential building.



   (B)   This requirement may be waived if the applicant for a license
secures in writing the consent of 65% of the persons residing or doing,
business on property within 1,000 feet of the applicant’s proposed location.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 112.999



§ 112.004  LICENSE APPLICANT REQUIREMENTS.



   An applicant for a license shall be 21 years of age and shall possess a
license as provided for in Public Act 300 of 1949, § 25, being M.C.L.A. §
257.25.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)



§ 112.005  APPLICATION FORMS.



   Application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the city
and shall contain the following:



   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant; and



   (B)   The location where the business of renting or selling of
motorcycles will be conducted and the number of motorcycles that will be
maintained on the premises.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)



§ 112.006  LICENSES.



   Licenses under this chapter shall:



   (A)   Maintain precise records of vehicle rental indicating the name
of the person to whom the rental was made, his or her address, driver’s
license number, what vehicle was rented, the date and hour of its rental and
the time returned to the possession of the licensee;



   (B)   Rent vehicles only to persons who have and can show a valid
motor vehicle operator’s license;



   (C)   No motorcycle, shall be rented to any person under 21 years of
age unless accompanied by his or her parents or guardian;



   (D)   Any person renting a motorcycle must sign application showing
he or she is 21 years of age, provided, however, if he or she is not 21 years
of age both he or she and the parent or guardian of the person shall sign the
application and acknowledging that he or she has read, knows and is familiar
with this chapter and the rules and regulations concerning the renting and
operation of a motorcycle;



   (E)   Rent motor vehicles only if the driver and his or her
passengers are wearing safety helmets;



   (F)   Maintain all motorcycles in a safe manner and provide each
with all equipment required by law;



   (G)   Operate the business between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
6:00p.m. There shall be no rental or the returning of sales of motorcycles
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.;



   (H)   Purchase a policy of insurance for every motorcycle owned or
rented on the premises. The policy shall have a minimum coverage of $10,000
for only one person injured and $20,000 for two or more persons injured as
the result of any one occurrence or accident, and coverage of $5,000 property
damage insurance for each property damage accident;



   (I)   Have only the number of motorcycles on the premises as
provided for in his or her application;



   (J)   The motorcycles shall not be operated on residential streets
unless taking the shortest and most direct route to the driver’s residence
from the nearest state trunkline;



   (K)   The speed limit on all residential streets for motorcycles
shall be 15 mph;



   (L)   Comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city; and



   (M)   Furnish a $10,000 performance bond and the licensee will
comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 112.999



§ 112.007  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee shall be $300 annually for each location that sells
motorcycles, and 1,000 annually for each location that rents motorcycles and
that the license shall be revocable upon proper complaints and the court
determining it to be a nuisance to the neighborhood.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 112.999



§ 112.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Motorcycles.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by
the ordinances of this governmental unit, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of §§ 112.001 through 112.007 shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days
or by both the fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967; Am. Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-25-2017)



CHAPTER 113:  ALCOHOL



Section



Possession and Consumption in Public Places



   113.001   Purpose



   113.002   Definition



   113.003   Possession and consumption



   113.004   Festivals, special events and city-approved sidewalk cafés



 



   113.999   Penalty




POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES




§ 113.001  PURPOSE.



   To control the possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor in public
places within the city and to provide penalties for the violation.



(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)



§ 113.002  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing one-half of 1% of alcohol by weight, which is fit for beverage.
The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with
the provisions of Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L.A.§§ 436.1101 through
436.2303, as the same may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)



§ 113.003  POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   Public property.  No person shall consume alcoholic liquor,
nor transport nor possess any alcoholic liquor in a container that is open,
uncapped or on which the seal is broken, on any thoroughfare, street,
sidewalk, alley, parking lot, public way, public park, parkland, playground,
baseball field or land operated, leased or owned by the city.



   (B)   Public buildings.  No person shall consume alcoholic liquor,
nor transport nor possess any alcoholic liquor in a container that is open,
uncapped or on which the seal is broken, in any public building operated,
leased or owned by the city.



   (C)   Motor vehicles.  No person shall transport nor possess any
alcoholic liquor in a container that is open, uncapped or on which the seal
is broken, within the passenger compartment of a vehicle, whether the vehicle
is publicly owned or privately owned on the streets of the city. If the
vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger
compartment, a container that is open, uncapped or on which the seal is
broken shall be encased or enclosed.



(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)  Penalty, see § 113.999



§ 113.004  FESTIVALS, SPECIAL EVENTS AND CITY-APPROVED SIDEWALK CAFÉS.



   No person shall possess or consume alcoholic liquor in an area
designated for a festival, special event or city-approved sidewalk café
unless the beverages are purchased from, and dispensed by, an individual or
entity licensed to sell beverages, which has permission from the State Liquor
Control Commission for outdoor sales if applicable; and the entity is
approved by the City Council to sell the beverages for consumption in the
area designated for the festival, special event or city-approved sidewalk
café subject to those restrictions as to times, dates and locations as the
Council may impose.



(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)  Penalty, see § 113.999



§ 113.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Possession and consumption.  Any person or persons, firm or
corporation violating or failing to comply with the provisions of § 113.003
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, nor more than 90 days imprisonment in the Wayne
County Jail, or both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court,
for each violation.



(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)



CHAPTER 114:  PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS



Section



   114.001   Short title



   114.002   Definitions



   114.003   License required



   114.004   License application



   114.005   Investigations and inspections



   114.006   License issuance; conditions for denial



   114.007   Hearings on appeals



   114.008   Inspections of business premises



   114.009   License fees; expirations; transfers



   114.010   Procedures and forms for fingerprinting, statements and
recording of transactions; inspection of records



   114.011   Restrictions on sales



   114.012   Sunday operation prohibited



   114.013   Sales prohibited during certain hours



   114.014   Prohibited sale or possession of items with serial numbers
altered, removed



   114.015   Merchandise displays



   114.016   Police order to hold property



   114.017   Retention of articles for specified periods



   114.018   Prohibited purchases



   114.019   Premises, enclosures and restrictions



   114.020   Premises condition



   114.021   Storage of scrap tires



   114.022   Bonds



   114.023   Compliance with state laws



   114.024   Compliance with zoning ordinances



   114.025   Purchases from minors prohibited



 



   114.999   Penalty



§ 114.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Pawnbroker, Secondhand
Dealer and Junk Dealer Ordinance of the City of Hamtramck and will be
referred to herein as this chapter.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTO SALVAGE DEALER. Any junk dealer engaged substantially in the
business of purchasing or receiving, wrecking or dismantling, and the sale or
exchange of motor vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts or materials
therefrom.



   AUTO SALVAGE YARD OR SHOP. Any place where an auto salvage dealer
purchases, receives, wrecks, dismantles, sells, or exchanges used motor
vehicles, or parts, or materials salvaged therefrom. 



   CERTAIN REGULATED BUSINESSES EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS.  Any
owner, person, corporation, limited liability company, member of a
co-partnership, or firm which is regulated pursuant to state law and which is
required to maintain and report transactions pursuant to state law on the
recommendation of the Police Chief shall be permitted to be exempt from
sections of this chapter requiring recording and registration of transactions.



   COLLECTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the collection, transportation,
or handling of junk, or secondhand property, except not including a towing
vehicle used to transport automobiles substantially used other than in
transportation of motor vehicles as part of an auto salvage dealer business.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person 18 years of age, or older, who renders any
services in connection with the operation of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
or junk dealer business and who receives compensation from the business, or
patrons thereof.



   GOOD MORAL CHARACTER. The propensity on the part of the person to serve
the public in a licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner.



   GOODS. Any item not specifically covered by other definitions contained
in this section.



   JUNK. Any personal property which is, or may be salvaged for reuse,
resale, reduction, or similar disposition, or which is possessed,
transported, owned, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted for any
of the aforesaid purposes. Without limiting the aforesaid definition of JUNK,
terms shall include used, or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber,
wood pellets, and similar articles of property and used motor vehicles,
machinery, or parts thereof which are used, owned, or possessed for the
purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts of materials therefrom. Metals
available or used for as scrap, shall be considered as JUNK.



   JUNK DEALER. Any person whose substantial business is buying,
exchanging, collecting, receiving, storing, accumulating, selling, or
otherwise handling junk.



   JUNK YARD or JUNK SHOP. Any place at which a junk dealer buys,
exchanges, collects, receives, stores, accumulates, sells, or otherwise
handles junk.



   OWNER or OPERATOR. Any person who owns, or controls a pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business. This includes individuals,
licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships, corporations,
societies, organizations, associations, limited liability companies, or any
combination of individuals, of whatever form or character.



   PATRON. Any person 18 years of age, or older, who does business in any
form with a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business.



   PAWN SHOP. Any place where a pawnbroker regularly conducts the business
of being a pawnbroker.



   PAWNBROKER. Any person, corporation, member of a limited liability
company, member of a partnership, or firm who loans money on deposit, or
pledge personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities, or
printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property, or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back
again as stipulated price.



   SCRAP IRON AND METAL PROCESSOR OR RECYCLER. Any junk dealer engaged
substantially in the business of purchasing or receiving scrap iron and metal
(except scrap motor vehicles not purchased from a licensed auto salvage
dealer, or junk dealer) and the storing, processing, recycling, and sale or
exchange thereof.



   SCRAP YARD. Any place where a scrap iron and metal processor, or
recycler engages in the business or receiving, storing, processing or
recycling scrap iron or metal.



   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person, corporation, member of a co-partnership,
or firm, or limited liability company whose principal business is that of
purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging, and receiving secondhand personal
property of any kind, or description.  Excluded from the procedures for
fingerprinting and recording transactions and inspection records shall be any
business, whose primary business is the purchase and resale of clothing.
PRIMARY BUSINESS means more than 90% of revenues derived.



   SECONDHAND STORE. Any place at which a second dealer buys, exchanges,
collects, receives, stores, or sells secondhand property.  Excluded from the
procedures for fingerprinting and recording transactions and inspection
records shall be any business, whose primary business is the purchase and
resale of clothing. PRIMARY BUSINESS means more than 90% of revenues derived.



(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.003  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No owner, or operator shall engage in or carry on the operation of a
pawnbroker without first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license
issued by the city pursuant to this chapter for each separate office, or
place of business conducted by such owner or operator. There will be six
licenses available for establishments within the primary business district,
defined as along Joseph Campau, and four licenses available for the other
retail districts within the city.



(Ord. 77, passed 7-26-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.004  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Any owner or operator desiring a pawnbroker business license shall file
a written application with the city on a form to be furnished by the city.
The applicant shall accompany the application with the correct license fee,
which fee shall not be refundable, and shall furnish the following
information:



   (A)   Type of ownership of the business, i.e. whether individual,
partnership, corporation, or otherwise, including copies of the most recent
annual statement and most recent articles of incorporation, partnership
agreement, articles of organization, or other applicable document.



   (B)   The name, style and designation under which the business or
practice is to be conducted, including each address at which the business is
to be conducted.



   (C)   A complete list of the names, residential addresses, birth
dates, and driver license numbers, if applicable, of all owners and employees
in the business, identifying where applicable, any employees who will manage,
or be in charge of the operation of the business at any time.



   (D)   The following personal information concerning the applicant
and owners, if an individual; concerning each stockholder, officer, or
director if a corporation; concerning each member, if a limited liability
company; concerning the partners, including general and limited partners, if
a partnership and concerning the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number, date of birth and
driver license number, if applicable;



      (2)   Two previous addresses prior to the present address of
the applicant;



      (3)   Written proof showing date of birth;



      (4)   Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and gender;



      (5)   Two front faced portrait photographs taken within 30
days of the date of application, at least two inches by two inches in size;



      (6)   A full accurate and complete business history detailing
experience, including, but not limited, whether or not such person has
previously had any ownership interest in, or worked at, in this or another
city or state, the same or similar business, including whether any license or
permit issued, whether any such license or permit was ever denied, revoked,
or suspended, the reason thereof and business activities, or occupations
including the full name and address of the business and the name and phone
number of any contact persons;



      (7)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which such conviction
occurred, the offense for which conviction, or such conviction and the
circumstances thereof;



      (8)   Complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on
file by the Chief of Police, or his or her authorized representative;



   (E)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation to the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and qualifications of the applicant.



   (F)   The names and addresses of three adult residents in the county
who will serve as character references, who must be persons other than
relatives and business associates.



   (G)   A written declaration by the applicant under penalty of
perjury that the information contained in this application is true and
correct with such declaration dated and signed in the city.



   (H)   Execution of any and all necessary documents and a statement
indicating that proper equipment will be installed for the direct electronic
entry into the City of Hamtramck’s computerized system, transaction
information, or recording by electronic transmission pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.005  INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer, or junk dealer business license, the city shall refer the application
to the Chief of Police, or his or her designee who shall conduct an
investigation into the applicant’s moral character, personal and criminal
history. A personal interview may be required and such further information,
identification and physical examination of the person and proposed business
premises and records of the applicant as shall bear on the investigation. 



   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall cause to be
conducted an investigation of the premises where the business is to be
carried on for the purpose of insuring that the premises comply with all
requirements set forth in this chapter and with ordinances of the city
relating to public, health, safety and welfare. Additionally, no
applicant’s license shall be considered as issued until all equipment is
installed and demonstrated to be operating for the electronic transmission of
information relating to transactions as required pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   An applicant shall submit to lawful inspections by the city
and any of its departments, as well as the county and any other governmental
agencies as necessary to ensure that the proposed business and applicant
comply with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the city. An
application may be refused for submission for approval to the City Council
until a report form applicable departments is received and information
furnished such that the applicant or proposed premises comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.



   (D)   Before issuance of any license, the Chief of Police, or his or
her designee shall submit within 45 days of receipt of an application and
report of investigations, inspections and a recommendation for approval or
denial.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.006  LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS FOR DENIAL.



   (A)   The city upon receipt of an application for a license required
by this chapter, and reports and recommendations of the Chief of Police, or
his or her designee, shall place the application upon the agenda for the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting, provided that such meeting date is not
less than seven days from the date of receipt of such application by the City
Clerk. If it is less than seven days from such receipt, such application
shall be placed upon the agenda for the following regular meeting of the City
Council. The Council shall determine whether or not such license shall issue,
after reviewing the reports of investigation and inspection and
recommendation by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, and other
employees of the Council shall direct that a license be issued within 14 days
provided in addition electronic transmission is demonstrated to be capable
unless it finds that:



      (1)   The correct fee has not been tendered or any fee in the
form of check or draft has been dishonored.



      (2)   The operation as proposed is not compliant with the
applicable laws including but not limited to the city’s building, fire,
zoning and health ordinances.



      (3)   The applicant or any person having an ownership interest
in any entity which is the applicant, or a manager, has been convicted of any
crime involving moral turpitude, including but not limited to prostitution
and pandering, gambling, extortion, fraud, criminal usury, controlled
substances, weapons, assault, theft unless such conviction occurred at least
15 years prior to the date of application.



      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made any false misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application, or in any document
required by the city.



      (5)   The applicant has had a similar business license, or
other similar permit, or license denied, revoked, or suspended for any of the
causes set forth here and above in this chapter, or any other state or local
agency within the prior 15 years to the date of application.



      (6)   The applicant or any owner is not 18 years of age or
older.



   (B)   The Council, if it denies an application, shall specify the
grounds for denial, notifying the applicant by regular mail, addressed to the
addressed furnished in the application which notice shall specify the grounds
for denial. 



(Ord. 77, passed 7-26-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.007  HEARINGS ON APPEALS.



   (A)   Within 20 days of the date of denial of an application, the
applicant may request in the form of a written application to the city,
furnished to the City Clerk, a hearing before the City Council for
reconsideration of the license application denial.  Such hearings shall be
conducted as follows:



      (1)   The applicant and his or her attorney, may present and
submit evidence on the applicant’s behalf to show that the grounds for the
original denial do not exist, or are inaccurate.



      (2)   After reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall
determine whether to uphold the denial, or grant the application.



      (3)   The applicant and his or her attorney, may present a
statement and adequate evidence, demonstrating that:



         (a)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances, or
conditions apply to the business referred to in the appeal submitted which
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to any proposed business
which warrant the issuance of the application notwithstanding conformity with
this chapter.



         (b)   That the granting of such license will not
materially affect the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood, patrons, or the public at large and that such
issuance shall not be a material detriment, or injurious to public welfare.



   (B)   In all cases where an appeal is granted, City Council shall
find:



      (1)   That the grant of the appeal will be in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter; and



      (2)   That the grant of the appeal will not be detrimental or
injurious to the neighborhood or the city at large.



      (3)   The City Council may impose reasonable conditions, if
the license is approved for issuance.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.008  INSPECTIONS OF BUSINESS PREMISES.



   (A)   Every licensee shall permit all reasonable inspections of the
business premise, including during regular business hours and otherwise after
regular business hours and shall at all times comply with all applicable
laws, including after expiration of any license and during any period the
license may be revoked or suspended.



   (B)   Any licensee shall display the license in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises visible to the patrons of the premises.



   (C)   During the pendency of any application, or during the term of
any license, if any information provided in the application changes, such
change of information shall be furnished in writing to the Chief of Police,
or his or her designee within 72 hours after such change.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.009  LICENSE FEES; EXPIRATIONS; TRANSFERS.



   (A)   Fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.



   (B)   License granted shall expire on June 30 of each year and shall
require payment of a renewal fee for the ensuing year.



   (C)   No license shall be deemed transferable, separable, or
divisible.



(Ord. 77, passed 7-26-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.010  PROCEDURES AND FORMS FOR FINGERPRINTING, STATEMENTS AND
RECORDING OF TRANSACTIONS; INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   (A)   The city shall furnish forms for the taking of fingerprints
and furnishing additional information as required by regulations of the City
Police Department. Every person licensed to conduct, maintain, or engage in a
business of pawnbrokers, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer, shall maintain in
a form provided by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, records in
the manner and form as provided herein, which shall be subject to inspection
by the City Police Department upon request.



   (B)   Every licensee, owner and employee, shall keep a record of all
persons and/or entities with whom business has transacted and all property
coming into their possession. Reports must be electronically transmitted to
the Chief of Police or his or her designee. Within 48 hours a report must be
transmitted by means of electronic transmission through a modem, or similar
device in a format that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into
the Hamtramck Police Department’s computerized system, as approved by the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee for identifying property coming into
the possession of a licensor, including but not limited to all pawn property,
all transactions in which used goods have been received the preceding day by
pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment and items received by junk dealers. A
transaction report by electronic transmission under this division (B) shall
not be reported on paper forms, unless the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee so requires. All secondhand dealers, junk dealers, and pawnbrokers
must have the equipment installed in their place of business no later than
November 1, 2012. Information must be reported electronically beginning
November 1, 2012.



   (C)   A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by the
City Council shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the
property registration fee for each transaction, the licensee reports either
through batch file upload, or directly using the vendor’s business
interface, or on the vendor’s automated reported service that involves
transactions subject to the provision of this chapter.



   (D)   TRANSACTION is defined as a single buy, or may involve one or
more items and does not include contract extensions, or claims. The per
transaction registration fee is not a per item fee, included in the
transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer
whether to recover the fee from their customers for registering a transaction.



   (E)   The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The city’s
vendor automated reporting service isolates and generates a list of the
billable transactions will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above
fees are assessed for the use of the standard vendor’s automated recording
service. Any custom programming completed for the secondhand dealer will be
negotiated on a contract basis and may result in additional licensing
arrangements between the vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to
the above amounts where applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty,
see § 114.999



§ 114.011  RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.



   No entity or person who is not a licensed pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer, or junk dealer shall sell, offer for sale, advertise for sale, or
represent any article, personal property, or other valuable thing for sale
which is subject to the provisions of this chapter unless the proper license
is in effect. No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer, shall purchase,
or receive in pawn, any item, or other articles, or keep for sale any such
articles, or items unless a current effective license is in effect.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.012  SUNDAY OPERATION PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this
chapter as a pawnbroker,  pursuant to state law to transact business, or to
open, or keep open, the place or room where such business is conducted on any
Sunday.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.013  SALES PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



   No licensee, employee, or agent of a licensee shall sell or purchase by
sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise any item under a license issued pursuant
to this chapter from or to any person, or entity between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. In addition, no person or entity
shall or purchase by sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise any junk between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.014  PROHIBITED SALE OR POSSESSION OF ITEMS WITH SERIAL NUMBERS
ALTERED, REMOVED.



   (A)   No licensee, or agent, or employee shall conceal or
misrepresent the identity by removing, concealing, defacing, adding to,
substituting, or altering, the serial number or manufacturer’s number on
any motor vehicle, motor, appliance, mechanical device, watch, clock, camera,
precision instrument, outboard motor, radio, shotgun, or any other article or
thing where the manufacturer has placed numbers for the purpose of
identification; by altering or replacing any part of such article, or thing,
baring the serial or manufacturer’s number with a new or replaced part upon
which the proper serial number, or manufacturer’s number has not been
stamped or placed.



   (B)   No person licensed under this chapter, or employee of such
licensed person, shall deal in, or possess, any item as described herein
above from which the serial numbers have been removed, concealed, defaced,
added, substituted, altered, or replaced.



   (C)   In all prosecutions under this section, possession by any
dealer, licensor, person, or entity of an item from which the serial numbers,
or manufacturer’s number, or identification number has been removed,
concealed, defaced, added, substituted, altered, or replaced shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.015  MERCHANDISE DISPLAYS.



   No licensee under this chapter shall display merchandise or articles
outside of the building, or fail to change a window display at least twice
monthly.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.016  POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.



   Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies an auto
salvage dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or owner or
employee of any of the foregoing, the item must not be sold, or removed from
the premises. If the hold was conveyed verbally, the hold shall be confirmed
by the investigating agency within 72 hours either in writing, or by
electronic transmission. The order to hold the item shall expire 60 days from
the date is placed, unless the holding agency seizes the item of evidence, or
obtain other court order to hold the item, or determines that the hold is
still necessary and notifies the business in writing, or by electronic
transmission to continue to hold the item for an additional 60 days. Each
licensee and owner shall be jointly and severally liable for holding such
property.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.017  RETENTION OF ARTICLES FOR SPECIFIED PERIODS.



   (A)   Items, goods, articles and junk purchased or exchanged, shall
be retained for not less than 15 days before disposal in an accessible place
in the building where licensed activity occurs. A tag shall be attached to
such item in some visible and conspicuous place with a number corresponding
to the entry in the electronic record, or other record provided.



   (B)   Any person engaged in the business of buying, exchanging,
collecting, receiving, storing, or selling any used motor vehicles for the
purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts there from, shall report each such
transaction to the Chief of Police, or his or her designee within five
business days, excluding Saturday and Sunday, from the date of the
transaction. The report shall contain a description of each such motor
vehicle inquired, including vehicle identification number, hour and date when
purchased, a description of the person, including a copy of photo
identification from whom it was acquired and a photo of the vehicle. Such
reports shall be on forms approved by the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee and made under oath. Such vehicles shall not be disposed of, or
altered in any manner for a period of five days from the time the report is
received by the city.



(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty,
see § 114.999



§ 114.018  PROHIBITED PURCHASES.



   No licensee, owner, or employee shall receive any item, goods, or junk
from any person who at the time is intoxicated, or appears to be under the
influence of a controlled substance, or is known to be a thief, or receiver
of stolen property, or from any person who is suspected not to be the owner
of the property, or from any minor under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty,
see § 114.999



§ 114.019  PREMISES, ENCLOSURES AND RESTRICTIONS.



   No licensee shall maintain a junk yard, junk shop, auto salvage yard,
or scrap metal yard, or any other business unless the business is carried on
entirely inside a building, or unless the premise is conducted within an
enclosed area, except for gates, or doors for ingress and egress by a
suitable enclosure such as a fence, or wall as approved by the Planning
Commission for the City of Hamtramck.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.020  PREMISES CONDITION.



   (A)   All fences and enclosures shall be maintained in a neat and
substantial manner, including but not limited to painting, removal, or
replacement of dilapidated areas and maintenance of a continuous
uninterrupted even perimeter of the same materials.



   (B)   No items, goods, or junk shall be permitted to lean on or
touch any such enclosure, or be in front of or suspended on any such
enclosure. Items may not be piled higher than two feet below the top of such
enclosure and items must be arranged so that safety aisles, driveways and
uniformed passage ways are provided, allowing reasonable access to all parts
of the premises by law enforcement and fire fighting operations.



   (C)   All premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and neat
condition and no fire shall be permitted unless a permit from the Fire
Marshal and any other regulatory agency has been obtained and is in full
force.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.021  STORAGE OF SCRAP TIRES.



   Scrap tires may only be stored after special land use approval by the
Planning Commission under the standards for special land use approval and the
zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.022  BONDS.



   (A)   Prior to any pawnbroker license being issued, the applicant
shall furnish a corporate security bond, best A Rated, or better and the
penal sum of $10,000 with sufficient sureties to be approved by the city
which bond shall be conditioned that the owner, operator shall during the
time of the license comply with all the laws of the state of Michigan and the
city pursuant to this chapter and in regard to pawnbrokers, secondhand
dealers, junk dealers, Precious Metal and Gem Dealers Act of the state, as
set forth, and the sale of secondhand watches act of the state as set forth,
including any amendments to the foregoing state laws. Any person aggrieved by
the action of the licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for
recovery of money damages. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect
for 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any license, or after the
termination of any action upon such bond. 



   (B)   On the recommendation of the Building Inspector, City Manager,
or Hamtramck City Police Department, an additional bond may be required in
order to assure that the conditions at the site of the business are
maintained from which the costs of any enforcement action shall be repaid to
the city in the event of any enforcement action for compliance with this
chapter.



(Ord. 77, passed 7-28-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.023  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS.



   Each licensee and employees must comply with the terms of state laws
including but not limited to M.C.L.A. §§ 445.471 through 445.476 and any
amendments thereto, the state act regulating pawnbrokers where applicable
M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 through 446.219 and any amendments thereto.  Full
compliance with the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act as set forth in
M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 through 445.492 and any amendments thereto is
required.  Compliance with the Sale of Secondhand Watches Act M.C.L.A. §§
445.551 through 445.555 and any amendments thereto is required.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.024  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCES.



   Every licensee and employee shall comply with all requirements for
business location at which work, pursuant to any license issued under this
chapter, occurs as provided in any applicable zoning ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 114.025  PURCHASES FROM MINORS PROHIBITED.



   No licensee, dealer, employee, person or entity shall purchase or
receive any item or property on the premises or otherwise off premises
associated with the business conducted on the premises, from any person under
the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty,
see § 114.999



§ 114.999  PENALTY.



   Any licensee, dealer, employee, person, or entity who violates the
terms and provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more
than $500, or both, plus costs. Any violation may also result in a suspension
or revocation of such license as prescribed by statute and as otherwise
imposed by the Hamtramck City Police Department after notice of such proposed
action at least seven days beforehand. The licensee shall be permitted a
hearing before the Chief of Police and a right of appeal as prescribed for
denial of the issuance of a license.



(Ord. 77, passed 7-28-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)



CHAPTER 115:  METAL AND GEM DEALERS



Section



   115.001   Definitions



   115.002   Registration and transaction fee



   115.003   Records of transactions



   115.004   Retention of transaction and transmittal to Police
Department



   115.005   Certificate of registration



   115.006   Application; prerequisites



   115.007   Police Department review



   115.008   Review by Building Inspector



   115.009   Certificate of registration: duration; renewal; changes



   115.010   Display of certificate of registration



   115.011   Precious item retention; alteration or defacing unlawful



   115.012   Precious items: acceptance prohibited and unlawful



   115.013   License revocation



 



   115.999   Penalty



§ 115.001  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions utilized under this chapter shall be the same definitions
as provided in the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act M.C.L.A. § 445.482 as
amended.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 115.002  REGISTRATION AND TRANSACTION FEE.



   A registration fee and renewal fee shall be assessed from each licensee
in a manner and amount as set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. The license fee shall be waived in the event the proposed licensee
has a valid and updated pawn license.  A transaction fee per transaction
shall be payable in an amount as set from time to time by the City Council.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 115.003  RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each
transaction, on record of transaction forms provided for in Act 95 of 1981
and shall provide the records online in accordance with the policies of the
Hamtramck Police Department.



   (B)   At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item,
the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer shall ensure that the
following information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form:



      (1)    The dealer certificate of registration number.



      (2)    A general description of the precious item or precious
items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In
the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and
the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all
letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the
description.



      (3)    The date of the transaction.



      (4)    The name of the person conducting the transaction.



      (5)    The name, date of birth, driver’s license number or
State of Michigan personal identification card number, and street and house
number of the customer, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb
and photograph of the customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb
or a finger of the customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall
only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer.
The thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to a police agency
during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item or
items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one year from
the date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation concerning a
precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not
occurred, the dealer and any police agency or sheriff’s department holding
a copy of the record of transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent
record of, the record of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or
changes his or her business address to another local jurisdiction either
within or out of this state shall transmit the records of all transactions
made by the dealer within one year before his or her closing or moving, to
the local police agency.



      (6)    The price paid by the dealer for the precious item or
precious items.



      (7)    The form of payment to the customer; check, money
order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank
draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or
bank draft.



      (8)    The customer’s signature.



   (C)   The record of each transaction shall be numbered
consecutively, commencing with the number 1 and the calendar year (example,
01-2012).



   (D)   The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious
item received shall be open to an inspection by the county prosecuting
attorney, the local police agency, the police agency or sheriff’s
department of the local governmental unit in which the customer resides, and
the Michigan State Police, at all times during the ordinary business hours of
the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is considered to have
given consent to the inspection prescribed by this division (D). The record
of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the
general public.



   (E)   The items shall be photographed and any serial number or other
markings provided, as well as any other information as required pursuant to
the electronic transaction reporting processes utilized by the city. 
Additionally, the driver license, state identification, passport, or other
photographic identification of a customer shall be photographed.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.004  RETENTION OF TRANSACTION AND TRANSMITTAL TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, each record of a
transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after
the transaction to which the record pertains.



   (B)   Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item,
the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the
Hamtramck Police Department and, if the record of transaction form indicates
that the customer resides outside the jurisdiction of the city, the dealer
shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police agency of
the city, village, or township in which the customer resides as set forth on
the record of transaction, or, if that city, village, or township does not
have a police agency, to the sheriff’s department of the county in which
the customer resides as set forth on the record of transaction.



      (1)   Every licensee, owner and employee, shall keep a record
of all persons and/or entities with whom business has transacted and all
property coming into their possession.  Reports must be electronically
transmitted to the Police Chief or his or her designee. Within 48 hours of
receipt by purchase, or otherwise of a precious item, a report must be
transmitted by means of electronic transmission through a modem, or similar
device in a format that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into
the Hamtramck Police Department’s computerized system, as approved by the
Police Chief, or his or her designee for identifying property coming into the
possession of a licensor. A transaction report by electronic transmission
under this division (B) shall not be reported on paper forms, unless the
Police Chief, or his or her designee so requires. All dealers must have the
equipment installed in their place of business no later than January 1,
2013.  Information must be reported electronically beginning February 1,
2012.



      (2)   A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by
the City Council shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess
the property registration fee for each transaction, the licensee reports
either through batch file upload, or directly using the vendor’s business
interface or on the vendor’s automated reported service that involves
transactions subject to the provision of this chapter.



      (3)   Transaction is defined as a single buy, or which may
involve one or more items and does not include contract extension, or claims.
The per transaction registration fee is not a per item fee, included in the
transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer
whether to recover the fee from their customers for registering a transaction.



      (4)   The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The
city’s vendor automated reporting service isolates and generates a list of
the billable transactions will be used for deriving invoiced amounts.  The
above fees are assessed for the use of the standard vendor’s automated
recording service. Any custom programming completed for the secondhand dealer
will be negotiated on a contract basis and may result in additional licensing
arrangements between the vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to
the above amounts where applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a
violation of this chapter.



   (C)   The record of transaction forms received by a police agency or
sheriff’s department shall not be open to inspection by the general public.
Each police agency or sheriff’s department holding record of transaction
forms shall be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of
transaction forms and ensuring that the record of transaction forms are used
only for the purpose for which they were received.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.005  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   No person shall carry on the business of a precious metal or gem dealer
in the city without first having a business license issued from the City
Clerk authorizing such person or entity to carry on such business subject to
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.006  APPLICATION; PREREQUISITES.



   A dealer shall apply to the city for a certificate of registration, and
pay a fee prescribed by the City Council to cover the cost of processing and
issuing the certificate of registration, by disclosing the following
information:



   (A)   The name, address, photograph and thumbprint of the
applicant(s).



   (B)   The name and address under which the applicant does business.



   (C)   The name, address, photograph and thumbprint of all agents or
employees of the dealer. Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the
dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address, and
thumbprint of the new employee.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.007  POLICE DEPARTMENT REVIEW.



   The Hamtramck Police Department shall review the application and
determine whether the application complies with the provisions of this
chapter and the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act (Act 95 of 1981, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq). The dealer shall complete his or her
examination and issue a determination within 30 days upon receipt of the
application described herein.



(Ord. 21013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.008  REVIEW BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector shall within 15 days of the submittal of an
application review the premises in order to determine whether the precious
metal and gem dealer activities are compliant with the zoning ordinance. Such
determination shall be issued to the Police Department.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.009  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION: DURATION; RENEWAL; CHANGES.



   Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address
under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the Police
Department in writing of the change.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.010  DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the local police
agency, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer’s
place of business.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.011  PRECIOUS ITEM RETENTION; ALTERATION OR DEFACING UNLAWFUL.



   A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer
for nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration
other than that required for an accurate appraisal of its value.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.012  PRECIOUS ITEMS:  ACCEPTANCE PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL.



   A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not:



   (A)   Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person
who is less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent
or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of
stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting
in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another.



   (B)   Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person
unless that person presents a valid driver’s license or a valid State of
Michigan personal identification card.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.013  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   Any dealer, agent, or employee of a dealer who is convicted of any
misdemeanor pursuant to this act, or under section 535 of the Michigan Penal
Code, 1931, Public Act 328, M.C.L.A. § 750.535, or of the Precious Metal and
Gem Dealer Act M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq., shall not be permitted to
operate as a dealer within this state for a period of one year after
conviction. A dealer, or an agent, or employee of a dealer who is convicted
of a felony under M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq. (Precious Metal and Gem
Dealer Act), or under Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 Public Act
328, M.C.L.A. § 750.535, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer
within this state for a period of five years after conviction.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 115.999  PENALTY.



   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment of not more than 90 days and/or a fine of $500, or
both in addition to any other penalty provisions provided for violation of a
misdemeanor as set forth in the general penalty provisions of this Code of
Ordinances.



(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)



CHAPTER 116:  HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section



Hawkers and Peddlers



   116.001   License required



   116.002   City Clerk authorization



   116.003   License fee



   116.004   Exemptions



   116.005   Prohibitions



   116.006   Location restrictions



   116.007   Restrictions and enforcement



   116.008   Request to refrain from exercising occupation



   116.009   Revocation; blocking traffic prohibited



Transient Merchants



   116.020   License required



   116.021   Definitions



   116.022   Application requirements



   116.023   License approval and fee



   116.024   Deposits



   116.025   License void



   116.026   License revocable



 



   116.999   Penalty




HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS




§ 116.001  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall follow or engage in the business or
occupation of a hawker or peddler, or the helper of a hawker or peddler,
within the city without first securing a license from the City Clerk.



   (B)   No more than two persons, including the owner, shall sell or
operate on or in connection with any hawker or peddler’s vehicle.  The
owner or person in charge of the vehicle shall have a proper hawker and
peddler’s license and the other person, if any, shall have a helper’s
license.



   (C)   Upon the issuance of a license to a hawker or peddler, there
shall be delivered to each licensee using a wagon or other vehicle in
peddling, one license plate which shall be furnished free of charge by the
city. The license plate shall be made of some durable material of a design to
be determined by the City Clerk and shall contain the number of the license,
the year issued and the words “Peddler, City of Hamtramck.” The licensee
shall affix the license plate to the right side of his or her vehicle in a
conspicuous place.  No person shall use a wagon or other vehicle peddling or
vending on which the license plate is not so displayed.  No licensee shall
transfer the license plate from one vehicle to another. Licenses issued under
this subchapter are neither assignable or transferable.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934; Am. Ord. 133,
passed 1-17-1935)



§ 116.002  CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The Clerk of the city is hereby authorized to license any
person or persons of good character who desire to follow or engage in the
business or occupation of a hawker or peddler in the city upon the payment by
the persons and each of them, of the sum prescribed in § 116.003.



   (B)   No person can take out more than one license in his or her
name, or authorize any person to operate under a license issued to him or
her. All licenses granted under this subchapter shall be deemed as granted
for the terms of one year commencing May 1 unless some other period of time
should be expressly stated in the section.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934; Am. Ord. 375,
passed 3-22-1977)



§ 116.003  LICENSE FEE.



   Any person or persons soliciting a license as provided for in this
subchapter shall pay therefor to the City Treasurer of the city the amount of
$50 for a license for hawking or peddling with any conveyance or motor
vehicle.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934; Am. Ord. 375,
passed 3-22-1977)



§ 116.004  EXEMPTIONS.



   This subchapter is not intended to apply to any mechanic of this state
selling or offering for sale, any article of his or her own manufacture or
construction, or to any farmer selling or offering for sale the products of
his or her own farm.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929)



§ 116.005  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No licensee shall shout or call out in a loud, boisterous or
unseemly manner or to the disturbance of the citizens or dwellers of the
city, nor shall any licensee use any horn or bell or other noise-making
device to call attention to his or her wares.



   (B)   Hawking or peddling on foot or from hand-carts or portable
stands on public streets in the city is hereby expressly prohibited.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934)  Penalty, see §
116.999



§ 116.006  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   No hawker or peddler within the limits of the city shall pursue his or
her vocation of hawking or peddling upon Bismark Avenue, or upon Joseph
Campau Avenue between the south line of Newton Avenue and the Michigan
Central Belt Line Railroad in the city, or upon any other street in the city
where congested traffic conditions exist, if requested by any police officer,
or other duly authorized officer of the city, to refrain from pursuing his or
her vocation on account of the congested traffic conditions.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934)  Penalty, see §
116.999



§ 116.007  RESTRICTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No licensee shall sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in
or about his or her cart, wagon, or other vehicle, any fruits, vegetables or
foodstuffs unless the same is covered and free from exposure to animals,
flies, insects, dust, dirt, the elements and from handling by persons, except
as shall be necessary in the vending and delivery to the purchaser, provided
that the provision of this section shall not apply to fruits, nuts or other
articles of food having a natural covering protecting them from infection or
contamination and which must be removed before consumption.



   (B)   The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution,
designate streets or portions of the city within which hawking and peddling
shall be prohibited and the Police Department of the city shall have power
and authority to enforce the provisions of the resolution.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934)  Penalty, see §
116.999



§ 116.008  REQUEST TO REFRAIN FROM EXERCISING OCCUPATION.



   The Police Department of the city shall have power and authority to
require any hawker or peddler to refrain from exercising his or her
occupation within the limits of any street or alley, or part thereof, where
congested traffic conditions exist and the refusal of any hawker or peddler
to refrain from exercising the business within the limits of the street or
alley, or part thereof, when so requested by a member of the Police
Department shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.009  REVOCATION; BLOCKING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   No hawker or peddler shall operate or maintain any vehicle in a manner
that the customers or traders with the hawker or peddler occupy or congregate
within the limits of the city in a manner as to block traffic and travel and
no hawker or peddler shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys or other
public places of the city for the service of customers or for the transaction
of business in a manner as to block traffic or travel.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934)  Penalty, see §
116.999




TRANSIENT MERCHANTS




§ 116.020  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to
engage in business as a transient merchant in the city without first securing
a license from the City Council.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.021  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  Any corporation, partnership, individual or two or more
persons having a joint and common interest.



   TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS.  As defined in § 116.001 by any person for a
period of less than six months consecutively shall be prima facie evidence
that the person was a transient merchant with the intent and meaning hereof.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Any person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation engaging temporarily in a retail sale of goods, wares or
merchandise within the city and who for the purpose of conducting the
business occupies any lot, building, room or structure of any kind. The term
shall not be construed to apply to any person selling goods, wares or
merchandise of any description raised, produced or manufactured by the
individual offering the same for sale nor to persons handling vegetables,
fruits or perishable farm products at any established city market.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.022  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   An application for a license shall be made in writing and
filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   The application shall give the age and full name the
applicant; the names and addresses of all persons interested in the issuing
of the license; if the applicant be a corporation or the names and addresses
of the officers; if the applicant be a partnership, the names and addresses
of the partners and in addition stating where the person intends to do
business, the kind of business and the length of time for which a license is
desired.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.023  LICENSE APPROVAL AND FEE.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall then refer the matter to the City Council
for the city. Upon receipt of the application, the City Council, before
acting upon it, may refer the same for investigation to any office or
officers of the city, who shall report to the Council their finding within a
reasonable time. If upon receiving the application, or if referred as above
provided, upon receipt of the report, the City Council is satisfied that the
business to be conducted by the applicant is not intended to cheat or defraud
the public and the granting of the license will not be detrimental to the
interest of the public nor in violation of any statute or ordinance of the
city, the Council shall authorize the City Clerk to issue the license to the
applicant.



   (B)   Before the license shall be issued the applicant shall deposit
the sum of $500 with the City Treasurer and shall pay to the City Clerk a fee
equal to $100 per month for the length of time for which the license is to be
issued or if for a period of less than one month, then the fee shall be at a
rate of $10 per day for the period of the license. A surety company bond in
like amount may be deposited with the City Treasurer in lieu of a cash
deposit.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)



§ 116.024  DEPOSITS.



   Deposits made with the City Treasurer as required by § 116.023 shall
be subject to claims of creditors in all cases where a judgment has been
obtained against the transient merchant in any court in this state and the
time for appealing the judgment has expired. In the cases garnishment
proceeding may be commenced in a court against the City Treasurer. It shall
thereupon be the duty of the City Treasurer to remit to any court any balance
of the cash deposit remaining in his or her hands not exceeding the amount of
the judgment for the purpose of satisfying the same. Any balance of the cash
deposit remaining in the hands of the City Treasurer four months after the
expiration of the license shall be remitted to the transient merchant,
provided, if at the date, the City Treasurer shall have received notice of
any suit then pending against the transient merchant, the deposit shall not
be returned until 60 days after the termination of the suit.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)



§ 116.025  LICENSE VOID.



   Any license shall be void as soon as the deposit made with the City
Treasurer, as provided in § 116.023 herein, shall have been exhausted,
because of garnishment suits as aforementioned in § 116.024.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)



§ 116.026  LICENSE REVOCABLE.



   Any license granted under this subchapter shall be revocable by the
City Council at any time for a violation of any law of the state or any rule,
regulation or ordinance of the city, or for other cause shown, after giving
the licensee reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)



§ 116.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Hawkers and peddlers.  Every person convicted of violating
any of the provisions of §§ 116.001 through 116.009 shall be punished by a
fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the
payment of the fine and costs, the court may make a further sentence that the
offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of
imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the City Council as a place
of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but not longer than 90
days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause,
both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed.



(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929)



   (B)   Transient merchants.  Every person, firm,  copartnership,
association or corporation convicted of violating or failing to comply with
the provisions of §§ 116.020 through 116.026 shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed
90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court
and when a fine and costs are imposed the court may provide that in default
of the payment thereof, the offender shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 90 days, unless the fine and costs shall be sooner paid; provided, no
person shall be imprisoned for a single violation of §§ 116.020 through
116.026 for a longer period than 90 days. In the event that there shall be
imposed upon any corporation any fine or costs, or either, or both, for the
violation of any terms of §§ 116.020 through 116.026 then it shall be
lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or both, in any action or
assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)



CHAPTER 117:  PUBLIC SALES



Section



Auctions



   117.001   Restrictions on items offered



   117.002   License required



   117.003   City Clerk authorization



   117.004   License fee



   117.005   Application



   117.006   Sales prohibited without license



   117.007   Return of purchased goods



   117.008   Sign posted



   117.009   Induced sales and substitutions prohibited



   117.010   Boosting or capping prohibited



   117.011   False representations prohibited



   117.012   Goods from minor prohibited



   117.013   Down hill selling prohibited



   117.014   Auction location prohibitions



   117.015   Noise restrictions



   117.016   Hours of operation



   117.017   Recordkeeping



   117.018   Refusal to sell



   117.019   Personal taxes to be paid before sale



   117.020   Revocation or suspension of license



Garage Sales



   117.035   Title



   117.036   Definitions



   117.037   Permit required



   117.038   Sale period no longer than three days



   117.039   Number of permits allowed per year



   117.040   Violation



   117.041   Permit to be posted; storage of goods



   117.042   Signs



 



   117.999   Penalty




AUCTIONS




§ 117.001  RESTRICTIONS ON ITEMS OFFERED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to
sell, dispose of, or offer for sale in the city at public auction, or to
cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale in the city at
public auction any gold, silver plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks
or jewelry, whether the same shall be their own property or whether they sell
the same as agents or employees of others. This shall not apply to judicial
sales or sales by executors or administrators or to sales by or on behalf of
licensed pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by law, nor
to the sale at public auction of the stock on hand of any person or persons,
firm or corporation continuously in business in the city as a retail or
wholesale merchant of gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches,
clocks or jewelry. The sale at public auction of the stock on hand of a
merchant or merchants shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal
holidays excepted and shall not continue for more than 30 days in all within
the period of one year.



(Ord. 89, passed 7-23-1929)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.002  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No persons or persons shall follow or engage in the business or
occupation of an auctioneer within the city without first securing a license
from the City Clerk.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.003  CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.



   The Clerk of the city is hereby authorized to license any person or
persons of good character who desire to sell personal property at public
auction in the city at a place to be named in his or her license, upon
application being made in writing to the City Clerk for a license and upon
the payment by the person or persons and each of them, to the City Treasurer
of the city of the sum of $100 and upon the execution of a bond to the city
in the sum of $1,000 with two sureties who shall be freeholders, or a surety
company bond in the sum of $1,000 to be approved by the City Attorney, the
bond to be conditioned for the faithful observance of the regulations of this
city.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.004  LICENSE FEE.



   Every license so granted shall expire on the April 15 following the
date of issue. In no case shall a license be issued for a fee of less than
$100 even though it be wanted for a period of less than one year.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)



§ 117.005  APPLICATION.



   Every person desiring to obtain a license as an auctioneer shall make
an application in writing to the City Clerk, setting forth in the application
his or her name, place of residence, place of business and the name and
address of his or her sureties and thereupon the City Clerk may issue, or
cause to be issued a license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to
act as an auctioneer at the place mentioned in the license in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter for the during the period of the license.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.006  SALES PROHIBITED WITHOUT LICENSE.



   No person or persons shall sell, or attempt to sell at public auction
in the city any personal property (except under and by virtue of legal
process, or under and by virtue of a mortgage) without first having obtained
a license therefor as herein required.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.007  RETURN OF PURCHASED GOODS.



   The purchaser at any auction sale of any personal property shall have
the right to return it to the auctioneer at any time within five days after
the date of the sale if the personal property be not of the quality
represented to him or her, and the auctioneer shall return to the purchaser
the price of the article; and the bondsmen of the auctioneer shall be liable
for the return to the purchaser of the purchase price; and it is hereby
provided that if it shall be made to appear, to the satisfaction of the City
Council, that the place of sale, or the place of business, of any auctioneer
shall have been closed at any time during the five days, for the purpose of
avoiding any offer to return any article so sold, the City Council shall
revoke the license of the auctioneer.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.008  SIGN POSTED.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this
subchapter to post in a conspicuous place so that it can be readily seen a
sign or placard containing the information in § 117.007. The sign shall be
printed in 14-point linwood type and prepared and furnished by the City Clerk
free of cost.



   (B)   The place of posting the sign shall be designated by the Chief
of Police, or some member of the Police Department designated by him or her,
and it shall be the duty of every auctioneer, his or her agents and
employees, to maintain the placard or sign as herein provided in the place
designated.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.009  INDUCED SALES AND SUBSTITUTIONS PROHIBITED.



   No auctioneer, his or her agents or employees, shall offer for sale at
auction any article, and induce its purchase by any bidder, and afterward
substitute any article in lieu of that offered to and purchased by the bidder.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.010  BOOSTING OR CAPPING PROHIBITED.



   No person operating a public auction, by virtue of a license issued as
herein provided, shall permit or allow any person or persons to remain in or
upon the premises wherein the public auction is being conducted to engage in
the practice of boosting or capping, or assist or take part in the practice
of any fraud of any kind, nature or description, or to misrepresent the
quality or description of any article or thing offered to be sold.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.011  FALSE REPRESENTATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No auctioneer or person being present when any personal
property is offered for sale, shall knowingly, with the intent to induce any
person or persons to purchase the same, or any part thereof, make any false
representation or statement as to the ownership of or the character or
quality of the property offered for sale, or as to the property or
circumstances of the owner or pretended owner of the property.



   (B)   No auctioneer or any of his or her agents or employees shall
sell, or attempt to sell by auction, or advertise for sale any goods, wares
or merchandise falsely representing or pretending that the goods, wares, or
merchandise are in whole or in part a bankrupt or insolvent stock, or damaged
goods, or goods saved from fire, or make any false statement as to the
previous history or character of the goods, wares or merchandise. Every
person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall, in
addition to the penalty provided in § 117.999, be liable in an action of
contract to any person purchasing any goods, wares or merchandise because of
the representation or statement, in an amount equal to three times the amount
paid therefor; and if the false prepresentation is made by the auctioneer or
by any person with the auctioneer’s knowledge and consent or connivance,
the license of the auctioneer shall be revoked.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.012  GOODS FROM MINOR PROHIBITED.



   No auctioneer shall receive for sale by auction any goods from a minor.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.013  DOWN HILL SELLING PROHIBITED.



   Selling at auction under this subchapter shall mean the offering for
sale or selling of personal property to the highest bidder; or offering for
sale or selling of the property by the method known as DOWN HILL SELLING. By
DOWN HILL SELLING is meant the first offering of any article at a high price
and then offering the same at successive lower prices until a buyer is
secured.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.014  AUCTION LOCATION PROHIBITIONS.



   No personal property shall be sold at auction, or exposed for sale, by
any auctioneer in any street, avenue, alley or public place in the city.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.015  NOISE RESTRICTIONS.



   No bellman or crier, nor any drum or fife, or other instrument of
music, nor any show signal, or means of attracting the attention of the
public, other than a sign or flag, shall be employed, or suffered or
permitted to be used in connection with any auction sale at or near any place
of the sale, or at or near any auction room.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.016  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No person or persons shall operate a public auction or sell goods at
public auction, within the meaning of this subchapter, except on weekdays
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.017  RECORDKEEPING.



   Every person licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall, at
the place of business named in the license keep a book in which shall be
written in ink at the time of the purchase, or at the time of the selling of
any personal property a description thereof, the name, age, address and
personal description of the person or persons from whom the purchase was
made, and the name and address of the person to whom the sale is made, also
the day and hour of the purchase or sale. The book shall at all times be open
to public inspection. Every licensee shall make out and file with the City
Clerk, before 10:00 a.m. each day, a report of all sales made and the name
and address of the persons to whom the sale was made. The report shall be
made out on a blank form to be furnished by the City Clerk and shall give the
full details in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, of all
transactions the day previous and up to the time of making the report.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.018  REFUSAL TO SELL.



   When any article is advertised or offered for sale at public auction,
no auctioneer shall refuse to sell the same providing there have been two
bids on the article so offered for sale.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.019  PERSONAL TAXES TO BE PAID BEFORE SALE.



   No personal property shall be sold at public auction until a
certificate has been obtained from the City Treasurer of the city that the
personal taxes on the property have been paid.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.020  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   The City Council may at any time suspend or revoke any license granted
under the provisions of this subchapter and order the place of business of
the licensee closed for any infraction of this subchapter or other violation
of the law. All licenses granted hereunder shall be issued and accepted with
the understanding that they are subject to suspension or revocation at the
will of the City Council for cause.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)




GARAGE SALES




§ 117.035  TITLE.



   This subchapter may be cited, pleaded and referred to, and as the short
title of Garage Sales Subchapter of the city.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)



§ 117.036  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE SALE, LAWN SALE, ATTIC SALE, RUMMAGE SALE, YARD SALE, BASEMENT
SALE or FLEA MARKET SALE  or OTHER SIMILARLY TERMED SALES.  Any sale of
tangible personal property not otherwise regulated in the city regulations.



   PERSON.  All individuals, firms, corporations or organizations.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)



§ 117.037  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct a sale within the city limits without having
first procured from the City Clerk a permit therefor. The fee therefor shall
be $5.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.038  SALE PERIOD NO LONGER THAN THREE DAYS.



   Any person conducting the sale may not conduct the sale for a period of
more than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.039  NUMBER OF PERMITS ALLOWED PER YEAR.



   No person, including non-profit organizations, shall be allowed more
than two permits within any 12-month period.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.040  VIOLATION.



   Any person who shall conduct a garage sale or rummage sale without
having procured a permit from the City Clerk shall be considered guilty of
violating this subchapter.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.041  PERMIT TO BE POSTED; STORAGE OF GOODS.



   The permit issued by the City Clerk shall be posted at the location of
sale so as to be visible to the public. There shall be no overnight outside
storage of the goods or merchandise held for purchase in the garage sale.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.042  SIGNS.



   (A)   No signs advertising a garage sale shall be placed upon any
public property. Two signs advertising a garage sale are permitted to be
placed upon private property with the consent of the owner of the property.



   (B)   Within 24 hours of the conclusion of a garage sale, all
advertising signs shall be removed.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)



§ 117.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Restrictions on items offered.  Any person, persons, firm or
corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of § 117.001 shall, upon
conviction thereof, by punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court
may make a further sentence that the offender by imprisoned in the Wayne
County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established
by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be
paid, but no longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having
jurisdiction of the cause; both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In
the event that there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and
costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of §
117.001, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 89, passed 7-23-1929)



   (B)   Auctions - §§ 117.002 through 117.020.  Every person who
shall violate any provision of §§ 117.002 through 117.020, or shall fail to
comply with the same, shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine at
not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of the payment
of the fine and costs, the court may make a further sentence that the
offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of
imprisonment as may be hereafter designated by the City Council as a place of
confinement, until a fine and costs be paid, but not longer than 90 days, or,
in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause, both a fine
and imprisonment may be imposed.



(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)



   (C)   Garage sales.  Any person violating any of the provisions of
§§ 117.035 through 117.042 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a period of not more than five
days, or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)



CHAPTER 118:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Mechanical Games



   118.001   Definitions



   118.002   Licenses required; display



   118.003   Application for license; inspections required



   118.004   Issuance of licenses and related fees



   118.005   Prohibitions and restrictions



Merchandise, Service and Music Vending Machines



   118.020   Definitions



   118.021   License required; display of license



   118.022   Application for license; inspections required



   118.023   Issuance of license; license fee



   118.024   Prohibitions and restrictions



General Provisions for Mechanical Games, Pinball Machines and Music Vending
Machines



   118.035   Revocation of license



   118.036   Seizure and destruction of machines



Billiard Rooms, Pool Halls and Bowling Alleys



   118.050   License required



   118.051   Application



   118.052   License fee



   118.053   Definition



   118.054   Prohibitions regarding minors



   118.055   Intoxicants prohibited



   118.056   Revocation of license



   118.057   Previous revocation of license



   118.058   Hours of operation



   118.059   Window restrictions



Public Shows, Exhibitions and Amusements



   118.070   License required; fee



   118.071   City Clerk authorization



   118.072   Exemptions



   118.073   Disorderly conduct prohibited



   118.074   Nuisance prohibited



   118.075   Bond



   118.076   Grounds to refuse issuance of license



   118.077   Definition



   118.078   Revocation



   118.079   License expiration



Public Dance Hall



   118.095   Definition



   118.096   License required



   118.097   Owner’s duty



   118.098   Right to inspect



   118.099   Proper ventilation, toilets and drinking fountains required



   118.100   Refusal to grant license



   118.101   Chief of Police



   118.102   Disorderly conduct prohibited



   118.103   Marathon dancing prohibited



   118.104   Hours of operation



   118.105   License fee



Gaming Apparatus



   118.120   Search warrants



   118.121   Tabulation of all seized property



   118.122   Seized property to be stored



   118.123   Property to be restored to owner



 



   118.999   Penalty




MECHANICAL GAMES




§ 118.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARCADE HALL.  A commercial establishment where five or more mechanical
games are available on the premises for operation by members of the public.



   DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person who places any mechanical games, as herein
defined, in any place or establishment, for operation and for the purpose of
receiving any type of compensation.



   MECHANICAL GAME.  A pinball machine, a skee ball machine, shuffleboard
or miniature pool table, or any similar machine, instrument, device or
contrivance which is an object of commerce that is operated for a pecuniary
obligation, including but not limited, to those machines activated by the
insertion of United States currency or any tokens.



   OWNER.  Any person who owns, operates or conducts any place or
establishment in which any mechanical game, as herein defined, may be
operated.



   PERSON.  A natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.



   PINBALL MACHINE.  A mechanical, electrical or other device, apparatus,
or machine which, for pecuniary obligation, including, but not limited to,
machines activated by insertion of a United States currency or any token, is
available to play or operate and the play or operation of which, whether by
reason of the skill of the operator or the application of an element of
chance, or both, enables the person playing or operating the machine to score
points as a ball or object propelled or stimulated by an electronic or
mechanical impulse touches pins or targets, or entitles the person playing or
operating the machine to score points as a ball or object propelled or
stimulated by an electronic or mechanical impulse touches pins or targets, or
entitles the person playing or operating the machine to replay it at no
additional cost.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)



§ 118.002  LICENSES REQUIRED; DISPLAY.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor
for any person, in either capacity as a distributor or owner, to allow the
maintenance and/or distribution for the purpose of operation any mechanical
game without having first procured a license for the device pursuant to the
provisions of the City Code of Ordinances.



      (2)   It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner(s)
and/or distributor(s) to post the license or licenses permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated and maintained.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for an
owner to maintain any mechanical game without first obtaining a license for
the commercial  establishment, store, or place where the device is being
maintained or operated.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any
person to act as a distributor of mechanical games without first obtaining a
license as a distributor.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.003  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   License applications for mechanical games shall be made to the
City Clerk in the form and manner required by him or her and in accordance
with the provisions of the City Code of Ordinances, and the application shall
state, among other things:



      (1)   The number of machines or devices intended to be
operated on the premises;



      (2)   The type of machine or device;



      (3)   The name, address and location of the commercial
establishment, store or place where the devices or machines will be located;



      (4)   The name and address of the owner of the commercial
establishment, store or place wherein the devices or machines are located;



      (5)   The name and address of the person(s) responsible for
operating or managing the devices or machines;



      (6)   The name and address of the distributor(s); and



      (7) The location and description of motor vehicle parking
facilities provided for patrons utilizing these devices or machines.



   (B)   If, after the issuance of the license, the licensee desires to
operate other mechanical games, in addition to the number stated in the
application for a license, he or she shall make a new application to the City
Clerk in the same form and manner as the original application for a license.



   (C)   Under this subchapter, the application for a distributor’s
license shall be accompanied by the fingerprints of the applicant, and, in
the event the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be
accompanied by the fingerprints of the officers thereof and the names of the
stockholders thereof.



   (D)   Each and every application under this subchapter shall be in
writing and made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the Chief of
Police and the other copy to the Director of the Department of Public Works.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location
wherein it is proposed to operate the machine to determine whether it
violates any prohibition of the city ordinances, shall ascertain if the owner
and/or distributor is a person of good moral character by an investigation to
determine if he or she was guilty of any criminal activity or offense
involving moral turpitude, and on the basis of aforesaid investigation shall
either approve or disapprove the application.



      (2)   Director of the Department of Public Works shall:



         (a)   Assign an electrical inspector to inspect all
wiring and connections to the devices or machines listed in the application
and determine if the same complies with the city electrical code; and



         (b)   Shall assign a zoning inspector to inspect the
location to see if same complies with the pertinent sections of the city
zoning regulations. Further, the Director of the Department of Public Works
shall determine whether applicant’s designated building has a proper
certificate of occupancy.



      (3)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless
approved by the Chief of Police and the Director of the Department of Public
Works.



   (E)   Within 90 days after receipt of the application and the
related application fees, the Chief of Police and Director of the Department
of Public Works shall approve or disapprove the application.



   (F)   If the Chief of Police and Director of the Department of
Public Works disapproves an application for a license relating to mechanical
games, the reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing. Further,
the Chief of Police and the Director of the Department of Public Works shall
have full and absolute power to disapprove an application for either a new
license or renewal of a previous license for any of the following specified
reasons:



      (1)   Applicant makes a false statement of material fact in
the application;



      (2)   Applicant has been found guilty of criminal conduct or
offense involving moral turpitude;



      (3)   Applicant violates this subchapter; or



      (4)   Applicant is delinquent in taxes owed to a municipality.



   (G)   A person whose application for a license is disapproved shall
not be eligible to reapply for a license until the expiration of one year
after the date of the Chief of Police’s or the Superintendent of Building
and Safety Engineering’s disapproval.



   (H)   A license issued pursuant to this section of the subchapter
shall be valid for one year expiring annually on May 1.



   (I)   A license is not assignable or transferable.



   (J)   A license may be renewed annually upon the submission of an
application provided by the City Clerk and upon the licensee’s payment of
the annual license fee.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.004  ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND RELATED FEES.



   (A)   Upon meeting the above requirements, the City Clerk is
authorized to issue a license upon the payment of the following annual fees.



 

Distributor
 

$200



Owner
 

$50



Each machine or device
 

$25




 



   (B)   The applicant must also pay for any inspections by the
Director of the Department of Public Works which were necessitated in the
processing of the application.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.005  PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any minor to
operate or play any mechanical game, in violation of the following age
limitations and restrictions.



      (1)   Unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, a minor
prior to his or her fifteenth birthday shall not be allowed to enter, loiter,
remain, congregate or play any mechanical game in an arcade hall.



      (2)   Unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, a minor
between his or her fifteenth and seventeenth birthdays shall not be allowed
to enter, loiter, remain, congregate or play any mechanical game in an arcade
hall on any day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as permitting the
issuance of a license for any slot machine or as legalizing any coin operated
machine or device in which is incorporated any gambling feature, and all use
thereof for gambling of any kind is prohibited.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
association to operate any device regulated by this subchapter which would
display, expose, produce or emit any motion picture, printed matter,
advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech, music or other matter that
is obscene, indecent, pornographic or contrary to good morals.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
association holding a license under this subchapter to permit the operation
of a device, as defined in § 118.001 between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. of any day.



   (E)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting
the keeping and use of pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys, shuffle
boards or other licensed amusements and their usual appurtenances in places
duly licensed and operated under applicable regulations of the city.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for the arcade owners and/or operators to
allow anyone under the age of 17 years to patronize their establishment(s) in
violation of the city curfew regulations.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999




MERCHANDISE, SERVICE AND MUSIC VENDING MACHINES




§ 118.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COIN OPERATED MUSIC DEVICE.  A piano, phonograph, juke box or any
similar machine or contrivance which emits recitations, songs, speeches or
music upon the insertion of a coin.



   MERCHANDISE VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical device which, upon
insertion of a coin, returns the value in merchandise of the sum thus
inserted or renders a service for same.



   PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION or ASSOCIATION.  Any person, firm,
corporation or association which own any machine; the person, firm,
corporation or association in whose place of business any machine is placed
for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association in
whose place of business any machine is placed for use by the public; and the
person, firm, corporation or association having control over the machine.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)



§ 118.021  LICENSE REQUIRED; DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for
public patronage or keeping for operation any merchandise, service, and/or
music vending machine, as herein defined by § 118.020 shall be required to
obtain a license from the city. Application for the license shall be made to
the City Clerk upon a form to be supplied for that purpose.



   (B)   The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.



   (C)   The license may be transferred from one machine or device to
another similar machine upon application to the City Clerk to the effect and
the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or
device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license and the
applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and
every machine displayed or operated by him or her.



   (D)   A license shall not be transferrable from person to person,
and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the
license. However, if the licensee shall move his or her place of business to
another location within the city, the license may be transferred to a new
location upon application to the City Clerk, giving the street and number of
the new location. The new location shall be approved by the Chief of Police
and the Director of the Department of Public Works in the same manner as
provided in § 118.022 of this subchapter.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.022  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   The application for a merchandise, service or music vending
machine license shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place
of birth;



      (2)   Prior criminal convictions of applicant, if any;



      (3)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place; and



      (4)   Description of machine to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer, serial number.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she
shall be over 18 years of age and a citizen or permanent resident of the
United States.



   (C)   Application for a merchandise service or music vending machine
license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the Chief
of Police and the other copy to the Director of the Department of Public
Works.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall ascertain if the vending
machine applicant is a person of good moral character, by an investigation to
determine if he or she was guilty of any criminal offense and based on the
investigation either approve or disapprove the application.



      (2)   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall
inspect his or her files to see if the commercial establishment wherein the
licensed machine is located complies with the municipal ordinances of the
city, and has a valid certificate of occupancy, and based upon this
investigation either approve or disapprove the application.



   (D)   A license issued under §§ 118.020 through 118.024 of the
subchapter shall be valid for one year expiring annually on June 30.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)    Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.023  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Every applicant, before being issued a license shall pay an
annual license fee, pursuant to the city licensing ordinances, for the
privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each machine, as defined
in §§ 118.001 and 118.020.



   (B)   No license issued under this subchapter shall be issued to any
applicant unless approved by the Chief of Police and the Director of the
Department of Public Works.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.024  PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
association holding a license under this subchapter to operate any machine as
defined § 118.020, of this subchapter which has not been approved and/or
listed by a recognized testing laboratory such as Underwriters Laboratory
(U.L.) and Factory Mutual Research Corporation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a coin operated
music device any day from 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., except when the Liquor
Control Commission permits extension of its normal hours beyond 2:00 a.m.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to electrically connect food and beverage
vending machines by the use of extension cords.



   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any way be construed to
authorized license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any
mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in
any way contrary law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state.



   (E)   All electrical connections made by the flexible cord that
supplies the machine shall be of the three-wire grounding type. Vending
machines shall be so as not to overload any existing circuit that it may be
attached to.



   (F)   For the installation of these vending machines that require
the installation of an electrical circuit or the extending of a circuit, an
electrical permit and inspection is required.



   (G)   The installation of electrical circuits shall be made by an
electrical contractor and an electrical permit secured from the city offices.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999




GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR MECHANICAL GAMES, PINBALL MACHINES AND MUSIC VENDING
MACHINES




§ 118.035  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Every person licensed under §§ 118.001 through 118.005 and
§§ 118.020 through 118.024 is subject to the right, which is hereby
expressly reserved, to revoke or suspend the license should the license,
directly or indirectly permit the operation of any mechanical game, coin
operated merchandise, service or music vending device contrary to the
provisions of the city, or the law of the state.



   (B)   The license may be suspended or revoked if the licensee is
found guilty of any criminal offense or offense involving moral turpitude.



   (C)   (1)   The license may be suspended or revoked by the
municipal court judge after written notice to the licensee by the court
clerk, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which
the licensee is charged and if, after a hearing, the licensee is found to be
guilty of the violation, ten days notice of hearing shall be given the
licensee.



      (2)   At the hearing the licensee and his or her attorney may
present and submit evidence of witnesses in his or her defense.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of police officers to make routine
inspections of all devices, and if any unlawful practices are observed in
connection therewith, they shall report the same to the Chief of Police for
the action as he or she may deem proper, and the Chief of Police may
recommend the immediate revocation or suspension of the license.



   (E)   A licensee whose license is revoked as a consequence of a
violation of this subchapter shall be ineligible to apply for a license for a
period of one year after the revocation.



   (F)   A suspended or revoked license shall be returned immediately
to the office of the City Clerk by the licensee.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.036  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINES.



   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, the machine may be seized by
the police and impounded, and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it
to be used as a device, the exhibitor be found guilty, then the machine shall
be destroyed by the police.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)




BILLIARD ROOMS, POOL HALLS AND BOWLING ALLEYS




§ 118.050  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall operate, conduct or
maintain a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, or any combination of
them, within the city without having first obtained from the City Clerk of
the city a license therefor.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.051  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring to open or
establish a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, or any combination of
them, within the city shall first make application for a license therefor to
the City Clerk of the city, setting forth in the application his or her age
and correct name, post office address and residence, the length of time he or
she has resided within this state, and where, and his or her place of
residence for the past five years immediately before the time of the
application.



   (B)   In case the applicant for a license is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state, the application shall be made by the
agent of the corporation who will have principal charge of the place proposed
to be established, and the application shall contain all of the statements
and furnish all the facts in respect to the agent as are required in the case
of a private individual herein. In case of a partnership, each active partner
in the business shall join in the application for the permit and shall
furnish all of the information required of an individual applicant. The
application shall also set forth the street and number of the place where the
business is proposed to be conducted, together with the description of the
property as to lot number and subdivision. No license shall be granted to any
person under the age of 21 years, nor to any person who has been convicted of
a felony, nor to any firm or corporation or copartnership, of which any
number has been convicted of a felony. No license shall be granted to any
person, firm, corporation or copartnership, to operate, conduct, or maintain
a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, or any combination of them,
within a radius of 1,000 feet of any other billiard room, pool room or
bowling alley, provided, however, that the provision shall not apply to the
renewal of licenses for business places operated and licensed prior to 1933.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 97, passed 7-21-1931)



§ 118.052  LICENSE FEE.



   The sum of $5 shall accompany the application as a license fee, and the
license shall entitle the holder thereof to conduct the business until May 1
following the issuance of the license, unless sooner revoked by the City
Council.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 116, passed 7-6-1933)  Penalty, see §
118.999



§ 118.053  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   POOL ROOM or BILLIARD ROOM.  Any room, place or premises in which
persons are permitted to play billiards or pocket billiards, (commonly known
as POOL) and for which pay, money, or its equivalent, or any check or
counter, or ticket, in lieu of money, is paid or received,



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)



§ 118.054  PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS.



   (A)   No person or persons, firm or corporation licensed as
prescribed in this subchapter shall permit or suffer any gambling to be
carried on in the licensed premises, nor knowingly employ in carrying on the
business any person, who has been convicted of a felony, nor permit or suffer
any child, actually or apparently under the age of 14 years, to play
billiards or pool or to bowl on the licensed premises, or to be or remain in
or upon the premises unless accompanied by the parents or guardian of the
child, and it is hereby made the duty of all proprietors, owners or managers,
licensees or anyone connected with the licensed premises of operating or
maintaining any commercial billiard parlor to ascertain the correct age of
any person subject to the regulation by this section. A violation by a
licensee of this requirement shall be the basis for a suspension and
revocation of his or her license.



   (B)   A person less than 14 years of age may be permitted to play in
the bowling alley between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 318, passed 7-14-1969)  Penalty, see §
118.999



§ 118.055  INTOXICANTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person or persons, firm or corporation licensed as
prescribed in this subchapter shall permit or suffer the sale or possession
within the billiard room, pool room or bowling alley of any habit-forming
drugs or any appliances for administering the same, nor permit nor suffer the
sale or possession in the aforesaid rooms or places of any intoxicating
liquors.



   (B)   The phrase “intoxicating liquor” shall be construed to
include alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, beer, ale, porter and wine, and,
in addition thereto, any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquors,
liquids and compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, or by
whatever name called, containing one-half of 1%, or more, of alcohol by
volume, which are fit for beverage purposes.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.056  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Every license issued hereunder shall be revoked for any of the
following causes:



      (1)   Intoxicating liquors are herewith sold or drunk on the
premises, or that persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor are
permitted to frequently be in or remain on the premises;



      (2)   Gambling in any form is permitted in or about the
premises;



      (3)   The licensee conducts the place in a manner as to permit
the same to become a public nuisance; and



      (4)   Fights, brawls, or other indecent and immoral practices
are permitted therein to an extent as to break the public peace or disturb
the good order of the community.



   (B)   In any of the foregoing cases the Council of the city shall
revoke the license and give notice of the revocation to the holder.



   (C)   (1)   For the purpose of enforcing these provisions for
revocation the Council may act on its own initiative or on complaint of any
resident. When the revocation is sought the City Clerk shall, at the request
of the Council, give a written notice to the licensee personally, or by
leaving the same with his or her agent or employee at his or her place of
business, in which notice shall be stated the charge made against him or her
for which revocation of his or her license is sought, the time and place at
which he or she may appear to defend against the charges, which time shall be
not sooner than three full days from the serving of the notice.



      (2)   For the hearing, the Council may subpoena witnesses in
the same manner as witnesses are now subpoenaed in criminal cases in District
Court. The hearing need not follow the strict legal requirement of court
trials. If, after the investigation the Council is convinced that the charges
have been sustained, it shall revoke the license. If the Council shall
determine that the license shall be revoked, the City Clerk shall personally
notify the licensee, or his or her agent or employee in charge of his or her
place, in writing, and the license shall be revoked from and after midnight
of the day.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.057  PREVIOUS REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   No license shall be issued to any person who has been previously
licensed to conduct a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, whose
license shall have been revoked during the year immediately preceding the
time of making an application, as herein mentioned, nor to any firm or
corporation, any member of which has been licensed to conduct a billiard
room, pool room or bowling alley, whose license has been revoked during the
year immediately preceding the time of the making of the application therefor.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.058  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   All billiard rooms, pool rooms and bowling alleys within the city shall
be closed not later than 12 midnight, Eastern Standard Time, of each day and
kept closed until 7:00 a.m. of the following day.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.059  WINDOW RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Where there is a window, or windows, in the room or
place, at least the lower one-third part of the window or windows shall be of
clear glass, and shall not be screened or curtained at any time of the day or
night, nor shall there be any article or thing in the rear of the window or
windows its to prevent a full, clear and unobstructed view of the room or
place.



      (2)   No enclosed box or stall or private room and no
partitions forming boxes or stalls or private rooms shall be permitted.



      (3)   There shall be no interior door or entrance and the door
or other doors entering the rooms or places shall have therein a section of
clear glass sufficient to afford a clear view of the room or places from the
outside.



      (4)   All billiard rooms or pool rooms or bowling alleys shall
have a floor space of at least 400 square feet, and shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary manner.



   (B)   None of these provisions, however, shall be construed to
prevent the maintenance of wash rooms or toilet rooms for proper purposes, or
the maintaining of closets for store purposes exclusively.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999




PUBLIC SHOWS, EXHIBITIONS AND AMUSEMENTS




§ 118.070  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   No person or persons, company or companies, shall exhibit or maintain
in the city, any circus, menagerie, carnival, play, game or theatrical
exhibition, or give any concert, vocal or instrumental or exhibit any natural
or artificial curiosity, or give a show of any kind for which pay is demanded
or received, without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk of the
city, and for any license granted for any business, purpose or object herein
specified there shall be collected in advance from the person or persons,
firm or corporation receiving the same the following fee.



   (A)   The license fee for a circus or menagerie, or both, where an
admission fee is charged, shall be $150 for the first day upon which an
exhibition shall occur and $100 for each subsequent day.



   (B)   (1)   The license fee for a carnival or open-air exhibition
which consists of or comprises an aggregation of amusements, exhibitions,
shows, games and like amusements, shall be the sum of $25 per day, to be paid
in advance; and, before the granting of a permit for the exhibition or
carnival, the management thereof shall submit to the Director of Public Works
of the city a schedule or list of the amusements, exhibitions, shows, games
and like amusements comprising the carnival or exhibition, and the Director
of Public Works shall examine the same and make investigation thereabout and
if satisfied that the amusement, exhibitions, shows, games and like
amusements are proper, shall endorse the application with his or her
approval, but unless the approval be endorsed upon the application no license
for the carnival or open air exhibition shall be issued by the City Clerk.
The payment of the sum of $25, as aforesaid, shall be held to cover and
include the license fee otherwise chargeable for each amusement, exhibition,
show, game and like amusement operated in connection with the carnival or
open air exhibition.



      (2)   Provided, that before any license shall be granted under
divisions (A) or (B) of this section there shall be deposited by the
applicant for the license, with the City Clerk, a cash bond of not more than
$500 conditioned that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or
adjoining property, and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be
permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by the
licensee, and containing other conditions as the City Clerk may require. The
City Clerk shall fix the amount of the bond up to $500 depending upon the
nature and size of the property equipment of the applicant, the length of
haul and other pertinent facts.



   (C)   The license fee for a zoological garden, permanently located
and established in the city shall be the sum of $25 annually.



   (D)   The license fee for all baseball parks or grounds, where
professional baseball is played, shall be the sum of $25 annually.



   (E)   The license fee for a play or theatrical exhibition, except as
hereinafter specified, shall be the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for
each subsequent day.



   (F)   The license fee for a concert, vocal or instrumental or
operatic performance, shall be $10 for the first day and $5 for each
succeeding day.



   (G)   The license fee for concert, vocal or instrumental or operatic
performances, moving pictures, vaudeville acts, minstrel show or other form
of entertainment given in the open air or in a tent within the limits of the
city shall be $15 a month, the sum payable in advance and the license to be
granted for the term of four months only; provided, that during the
performance of any of the above enumerated entertainments, no articles,
souvenirs or prizes shall be sold, donated or given away for advertising
purposes; and provided further, that during the rendition of any show as
above enumerated it shall be unlawful to advertise, give away or sell any
medicine, salve, lineament or other ingredient for the cure of the ailment of
man or beast.



   (H)   The license fee for a museum permanently located and
established in the city shall be the sum of $50 annually in advance.



   (I)   The license fee for a museum temporarily located in the city
shall be the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.



   (J)   The license fee for a whirligig, merry-go-round, shooting
gallery or games of like character, permanently located in the city shall be
the sum of $50 annually in advance.



   (K)   The license fee for a whirligig, shooting gallery or games of
like character, temporarily located in the city, shall be the sum of $10 for
the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.



   (L)   The license fee for the exhibition of any natural or
artificial curiosity shall be the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for
each succeeding day.



   (M)   The license fee for all observation stands shall be the sum of
$100 annually, payable in advance.



   (N)   The license fee for roller and ice skating rinks, penny
exhibits and phonographic exhibits, permanently located in the city, shall be
the sum of $50 annually, payable in advance.



   (O)   The license fee for roller and ice skating rinks, penny
exhibits and phonographic exhibits, temporarily, located in the city, shall
be the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.



   (P)   The license fee for all concert, musical and lecture halls
shall be the sum of $50 annually, payable in advance; provided, that the sum
so paid shall be in lieu of any other sum required to be paid for a license,
for any performance, theatrical, musical or otherwise, that may occur therein.



   (Q)   The license fee for moving picture shows and all shows of a
like character, permanently located with the city, shall be the sum of $25
per show for shows having a capacity of not more than 500 persons.  The
license fee for all shows with a larger seating capacity than 500 persons
shall be $25 per annum plus $5 for each additional 100 seats, or fraction
thereof, over 500. Provided, however, that the maximum license fee for the
shows shall be $50 per annum. All applications for licenses for moving
picture shows and all shows of like character shall specify the number of
seats in each show for which a license is desired and all statements
contained in the application shall be subscribed and sworn by the applicant
before a notary public.



   (R)   The license fee for all opera houses and play houses where
theatrical, dramatic and operatic, or so-called vaudeville or burlesque shows
are given, shall be the sum of $100 annually, payable in advance. Provided,
that the sum so paid shall be in lieu of any other sum or sums of money
required to be paid for a license, for any performance, theatrical, musical
or otherwise that may occur therein.



   (S)   The license fee for all amusement parks or amusement places,
maintaining and operating six or more than six kinds or variety of exhibits,
shows or amusements, shall be the sum of $1,000 annually, payable in advance.



   (T)   The license fee for any public entertainment or amusement not
already designated, and for which pay is demanded or received, shall be the
sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 147, passed 8-29-1935)  Penalty, see §
118.999



§ 118.071  CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.



   The City Clerk of the city is hereby authorized to issue, to the person
or persons entitled to the same under the provisions of this subchapter, a
proper license for the purposes specified, upon the payment of the amount of
the license fee therefor to the City Treasurer of the city and upon the
continuation of any license fee from day to day. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police of the city, or his or her subordinates to see that the
proper license fee for the continuance is paid in advance and a receipt
therefor, countersigned by the City Clerk, delivered to the person properly
entitled to the license.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)



§ 118.072  EXEMPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not extend to any exhibition by the pupils of any
private or public school, or to any musical entertainment given by the
members and for the benefit of any resident musical society, or to any
exhibition of painting, engraving, sculpture of fine art displayed by any
citizen of the city in the course of his or her ordinary business, or to any
concert or musical entertainment, fair, festival or lecture for the benefit
of any church or benevolent object where the entire proceeds of the concert,
musical entertainment, fair, festival or lecture shall be given to the church
or other benevolent object, or to any game of baseball, cricket, lacrosse,
football, tennis or other games or amusements managed and given by any
resident association, club or company where the entire proceeds of the game,
amusement, entertainment or exhibition shall be wholly received and given for
the benefit of the resident association, club or company.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)



§ 118.073  DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   No person or persons, firm or corporation receiving a license under
this subchapter shall permit in, or about, his, her, or their, place of
amusement or exhibition any disorderly conduct, or the use of any language
inciting disorderly conduct, or permit the sale, giving away, delivering,
drinking, or use of any beer, wine, malt, or intoxicating liquor or beverage
of any description, or have connected with the place of amusement or
exhibition, by side entrances or otherwise, any bar, saloon, or place where
malt or intoxicating liquors are sold or given away, or permit the place of
amusement or exhibition to become and be a place for the resort of thieves,
prostitutes or other disorderly persons.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.074  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No licensee shall permit the exhibition or public entertainment for
which he or she has received the license to become a public nuisance, and
shall, in the carrying on of the same, observe ordinances of the city and
laws of the state. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section
shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license by the City
Council.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.075  BOND.



   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue licenses to the parties
and for the purposes aforesaid upon the person, persons, company or companies
executing a bond to the city in the penal sum of $1,000 with two sufficient
sureties, conditioned for the faithful observance of this subchapter and the
Charter and ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.076  GROUNDS TO REFUSE ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   The City Clerk may refuse to issue licenses when the purpose for which
the license is requested shall be so notoriously indecent, filthy, vile or
blasphemous as to be subversive of public morals and a reproach to the
community; provided, however, that in case the City Clerk of the city shall
refuse to issue a license as hereinbefore provided, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the City Clerk to the City Council, which may, upon
hearing of the facts, order the license to be issued.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)



§ 118.077  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TEMPORARILY LOCATED.  The continuous location and operation of an
amusement or public entertainment at any one place for a period of less than
six months.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)



§ 118.078  REVOCATION.



   The City Council may revoke any license granted under this subchapter
upon proof submitted to the City Council of the violation of, or failure to
comply with, the statutes of the state or any ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)



§ 118.079  LICENSE EXPIRATION.



   All licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter for
amusements or exhibitions permanently located in the city shall expire on
September 15 following the issuance of the license unless sooner revoked by
the City Council for cause.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)  Penalty, see § 118.999




PUBLIC DANCE HALL




§ 118.095  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC DANCE HALL.  Any room, place or space in which a public dance
or public ball shall be held, or hall or academy in which classes in dancing
are held and instructions in dancing are given for hire, or where admission
can be had by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation
of a ticket or token, or in which a charge is made for care of clothing or
property, or where the public generally may gain admission with or without
payment of a fee.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)



§ 118.096  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall hold any public dance
or public ball, or hold classes in dancing, or give instructions in dancing
for hire in any hall or academy in the city until the operation and
maintenance of the hall shall have been licensed according to the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.097  OWNER’S DUTY.



   No owner, proprietor, lessee, manager or other person shall allow any
hall or academy to be used for the purposes stated in § 118.095 without
having obtained the license for the purpose from the City Clerk.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.098  RIGHT TO INSPECT.



   Whenever an application shall have been filed with the City Clerk of
the city for a license to operate and maintain a public dance hall, it shall
be the duty of the City Clerk and the Chief of Police, respectively, to make
inspection of the place to be used as a public dance hall and, upon full
compliance with the rules and regulations of the respective departments
relative to the safety, health, convenience and comfort of the public, the
City Clerk shall issue a certificate of inspection and recommendation of
permission, which shall be approved by  and the Chief of Police which
certificate approved as aforesaid, shall thereupon bring the matter of
application before the City Council for its approval or rejecting and, if the
application shall be favorably passed upon by the City Council, by resolution
duly adopted, the City Clerk shall forthwith issue the license to operate the
public dance hall upon the payment to the City Treasurer by the applicant of
the license fee hereinafter provided for.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.099  PROPER VENTILATION, TOILETS AND DRINKING FOUNTAINS REQUIRED.



   It shall be the duty of the health officer, before approving of the
certificate of inspection provided for in § 118.098, to require the hall or
academy to have proper provisions made for ventilation and to be supplied
with sufficient toilet conveniences and with a sanitary drinking fountain or
fountains, the number to be regulated by the Board of Health.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.100  REFUSAL TO GRANT LICENSE.



   The City Council may refuse to grant a license to any applicant and may
revoke any license already issued to any owner, proprietor, lessee or manager
of any public dance upon proof submitted to the City Council of the violation
by the applicant or owner, proprietor, lessee or manager of any public dance
hall, of any statute of the state for which violation a fine may be imposed
or a sentence of imprisonment in the state prison, the Wayne County Jail may
attach or be imposed, and the Council may revoke any license already issued
to any owner, proprietor, lessee or manager of any public dance hall upon
proof submitted to the City Council of the violation of any regulation of the
city regulating, controlling or in any way relating to health, sanitation,
fire protection or the public peace, or for the violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.101  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   Any proprietor, lessee, owner or manager operating a public dance hall
or academy under the provisions of this subchapter, and in whose place there
shall be held any public dance of any character, kind or description, shall
at all times open the dance hall for inspection by the Chief of Police or any
member of the Police Department. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized,
and it is hereby made his or her duty, to inspect or cause to inspected, all
licensed dance halls.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.102  DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   No owner, proprietor, lessee or manager of any public dance hall
receiving a license under this subchapter  shall permit any disorderly
conduct or the use of any immoral, profane or indecent language, or permit
the hall or place of amusement to become a place of resort of thieves,
prostitutes or other disorderly persons.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 154, passed 12-17-1935)  Penalty, see §
118.999



§ 118.103  MARATHON DANCING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, lessee, operator or manager of
any dance hall or academy, or any other place of public assemblage, or any
other person, firm or corporation for gain or profit to permit marathon
and/or endurance dancing, running, walking or any other endurance contest, in
any public dance hall or academy or any other place of public assemblage in
the city.



(Ord. 127, passed 6-28-1934)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.104  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No public dance hall shall be kept open, nor shall any dancing or
amusement of any kind be allowed therein between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 154, passed 12-17-1935)  Penalty, see §
118.999



§ 118.105  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee for all public dance halls shall be the sum of $1 and
the license when issued shall entitle the holder thereof to operate and
maintain a public dance hall until May 20 next following the issuance of the
license, unless sooner revoked by the City Council for cause.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 118.999




GAMING APPARATUS




§ 118.120  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   The Chief of Police or his or her designee, may, upon complaint made
under oath, request a search warrant, when satisfied that there is a
reasonable cause to search for and seize any gaming apparatus or implements
used or kept and provided to be used in unlawful gaming in any gaming house
or place resorted to for unlawful gaming, or any articles, equipment,
furniture, loud speakers and amplifying apparatus, adding machines,
calculators, money changers and boxes and money found therein or in or on
gambling apparatus or material used in connection with or promotion of
gambling or gambling places.



(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)



§ 118.121  TABULATION OF ALL SEIZED PROPERTY.



   When any member of the Police Department, or any other officer, in the
execution of a search warrant issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall find any stolen or embezzled property or shall seize any of the other
things for which a search warrant is allowed, the officer shall make a
complete and accurate tabulation of all property and money so seized and
shall file a copy of the tabulation forthwith with the court or magistrate
and the property and money so seized shall be suppressed by order of the
court until the final disposition of the case, unless otherwise ordered.



(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)



§ 118.122  SEIZED PROPERTY TO BE STORED.



   All the property and things so seized under this subchapter shall be
safely kept by the direction of the court or magistrate, issuing a search
warrant so long as shall be necessary for the purpose of being produced or
used as evidence during any trial.



(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)



§ 118.123  PROPERTY TO BE RESTORED TO OWNER.



   All stolen or embezzled property shall be restored to the owner thereof
as soon as may be afterwards, and all other things seized by virtue of any
warrant shall be, upon conviction, destroyed under the discretion of the
court, providing, however, that pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 122,
being M.C.L.A. § 205.13, as amended by Public Act 615 of 2006, being
M.C.L.A. § 445.2001, any monies and other useful property lawfully seized
and not stolen or embezzled, shall be, upon conviction, turned over to the
city if the same was seized by its officers under a search warrant duly
issued, and all monies shall be credited to the General Fund of the city.



(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)



§ 118.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Mechanical games and music vending machines.  Any person
convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§ 118.001 through 118.036
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed
90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)



   (C)   Billiard rooms, pool halls and bowling alleys.  Every person,
firm or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
118.050 through 118.059 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs,
the court may make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the
Wayne County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter
established by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and
costs be paid, but not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the
court having jurisdiction of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. In the event that there shall be imposed upon any corporation any
fine and costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of
§§ 118.050 through 118.059, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and
costs, or either, or both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)



   (D)   Public shows, exhibitions and amusements.  In addition to any
other penalty or punishment hereinbefore provided, every person or persons,
firm or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
118.070 through 118.079 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs,
the court may make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the
Wayne County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter
established by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and
costs be paid, but not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the
court having jurisdiction of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. In the event that there shall be imposed upon any corporation any
fine and costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of
§§ 118.070 through 118.079, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and
costs, or either, or both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)



   (E)   Public dance hall.  Each and every violation, or failure to
comply with the provisions of §§ 118.095 through 118.105 shall be cause for
revocation of the license issued hereunder and shall also be punished by a
fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the
payment of the fine and costs, the court may make a further sentence that the
offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of
imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the City Council as a place
of confinement, until the fine and a costs be paid, but not longer than 90
days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause,
both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed, in the event that there shall be
imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or both, for the
violation of any of the terms of §§ 118.095 through 118.105, then it shall
be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or both, in an action of
assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)



CHAPTER 119:  RESTAURANTS AND FOOD-RELATED SERVICES AND PRODUCTS



Section



Restaurants



   119.001   License required



   119.002   License fee



   119.003   Inspections



   119.004   Building and equipment to conform



   119.005   Conduct of business



   119.006   Hours of operation



   119.007   Fees to be deposited in General Fund



   119.008   Revocation or suspension of license



Public Markets



   119.020   Definitions



   119.021   Public market; license required



   119.022   Producer or huckster; license required



   119.023   Restriction for huckster



   119.024   Articles allowed to be sold in public markets



   119.025   Inspection



   119.026   Products unlawful to sell



   119.027   Garbage and rubbish receptacles



   119.028   Sanitation requirements



   119.029   Unlawful to rent to unlicensed person



   119.030   Revocation of license



   119.031   Licenses and receipts to be displayed and furnished



   119.032   Health officer supervision



   119.033   Expiration of license



   119.034   Building and equipment requirements



   119.035   Hours of operation



Sale of Tainted Meat, Vegetables and Other Foodstuffs



   119.050   Prohibiting the sale or offering for sale, or having in
possession for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, of any decayed,
tainted or spoiled meats, vegetables or other food stuffs



   119.051   Violation



   119.052   Keeping tainted food near good food prima facie evidence
of violation



   119.053   Inspection



Sale of Fresh or Smoked Meat



   119.065   License required



   119.066   City Clerk authorization



   119.067   Restricting handling by public



   119.068   Sanitary conditions required



   119.069   Sanitary transport of goods



   119.070   Meat from unfit animals



   119.071   Meat from calf less than four weeks old



   119.072   Meat purchased from source other than a United States
inspected establishment



   119.073   Personal hygiene



   119.074   Sanitary refrigerators, meat counters, blocks, tools,
utensils and apparatus required



   119.075   Forfeiture of license



Sale of Food to the Public in Bulk



   119.090   Permanent structure or building required



   119.091   Definition



   119.092   City Clerk authorization



   119.093   Certificate from Health Department



   119.094   Application for certificate



   119.095   Refusal to issue or revocation of license



   119.096   Violation



   119.097   Garbage and refuse



   119.098   License required for each business



   119.099   Compliance required



Sale of Food Supplies and Food Product at Retail



   119.110   License required



   119.111   Application for license



   119.112   Application and City Clerk



   119.113   License fee



   119.114   Parties covered by these provisions



Poultry



   119.155   License required



   119.156   Fee



   119.157   Definitions



   119.158   Diseased poultry



   119.159   Conformance to sanitary requirements



   119.160   Regulations governing poultry slaughterhouses



   119.161   Floor space



   119.162   Plans and specifications



   119.163   Construction and maintenance of poultry slaughterhouse



   119.164   Permit



   119.165   Maintenance



   119.166   Structural changes



   119.167   Deviation from subchapter



   119.168   Permits; renewal annually



   119.169   New permit



   119.170   Basements



   119.171   Not applicable to butcher



   119.172   Enforcement



Bakery



   119.185   License required



   119.186   Application



   119.187   Certificate required



   119.188   Sanitary conditions required



Food Handler Card



   119.200   Definitions



   119.201   Card required



   119.202   Application



   119.203   Annual fee



Mobile Food Vehicle Vendors



   119.220   Short title



   119.221   Definitions



   119.222   Scope



   119.223   License required



   119.224   Regulations



   119.225   Enforcement



 



   119.999   Penalty




RESTAURANTS




§ 119.001  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CLASS A RESTAURANT, BUFFET, LUNCH ROOM, LUNCH COUNTER, PUBLIC
DINING HALL OR PLACE WHERE VICTUALS AND FOOD ARE PREPARED OR MANUFACTURED. 
Every restaurant, buffet, lunch room, lunch counter, dining room of hotel and
every other place where food is served, sold or consumed on the premises and
where beer, whiskey, wine, or other spiritous and/or intoxicating liquor is
served with the food and shall include restaurants as defined in Public Act 8
of 1933 (Extra Session), § 1, being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1801 through 426.1815.



      CLASS D RESTAURANT, BUFFET, LUNCH ROOM, LUNCH COUNTER, PUBLIC
DINING HALL OR PLACE WHERE VICTUALS AND FOOD ARE PREPARED OR MANUFACTURED. 
Every restaurant, buffet, lunch room, lunch counter, dining room of hotel and
every other place where food is served, sold or consumed on the premises and
where no beer, whiskey, wine or other spiritous and/or intoxicating liquor is
served, sold or consumed in the premises.



   (B)   License for Class A establishment required.  No person, firm
or corporation shall keep, maintain or operate a Class A restaurant, buffet,
lunch room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the victuals and
food are prepared or manufactured in the city without first having obtained a
license from the City Clerk.



   (C)   License for Class D establishment required.  No person, firm
or corporation shall keep, maintain or operate a Class D restaurant, buffet,
lunch room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the victuals and
food are prepared or manufactured in the city, without first having obtained
a license from the City Clerk.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 121, passed 12-28-1933; Am. Ord. 138,
passed 2-7-1935)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.002  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The license fee for businesses herein designated as Class A
shall be $10. The license fee for businesses herein designated as Class D
shall be $5. Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
cover but one place of business, which shall be stated therein, and shall not
be assignable except by resolution of the City Council. Every license shall
expire on May 1 of each year, unless sooner revoked by the City Council for
cause. In case the time intervening between the date of application and the
date of expiration shall be three months or less, the City Treasurer shall
collect only one-half of the license fee herein prescribed.



   (B)    Application for the license shall be made in writing and
shall be upon printed blanks to be furnished by the City Clerk, and shall set
forth, among other things, the place where the business is to be conducted,
the name of the person, firm or corporation by whom the business is to be
carried on and the place of residence of the applicant. The application shall
also contain an agreement by which the applicant consents and agrees that the
inspectors of the Health Department, Fire Department and Police Department
may enter and inspect any part of the premises used in conducting the
business or manufacturing any victuals or food products for the purpose of
analysis. Applications for Class A restaurants, buffets, lunch rooms, lunch
counters, public dining halls or places where the victuals and food are
prepared or manufactured in the city, shall also contain an agreement that
the applicant will abide by and comply with the laws of the Untied States and
the state relative to the sale of alcoholic liquors and the rules and
regulations of the Liquor Commission of the state.



   (C)   No license shall be granted to conduct a Class A restaurant,
buffet, lunch room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the
victuals and food are prepared or manufactured within a radius of 250 feet of
any church or school unless written permission therefor, signed by the priest
or minister of the church or the superintendent of the school, is submitted
with the application.



   (D)   No license shall be granted to conduct a Class A restaurant,
buffet, lunch room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the
victuals and food are prepared or manufactured to any person, firm or
corporation who is delinquent in the payment of personal taxes.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 121, passed 12-28-1933; Am. Ord. 138,
passed 2-7-1935; Am. Ord. 156, passed 3-26-1936)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.003  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Before a license can be issued by the City Clerk on the
application for either a Class A or Class D restaurant, buffet, lunch room,
lunch counter, public dining hall or place where victuals and food are
prepared or manufactured in the city, the application shall be presented to
the health officer and the Chief of the Fire Department as hereinafter
provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall submit to the City Council the
application together with the report of the Chief of Police, health officer
and the Chief of the Fire Department thereon. If the Council shall find, as a
result of its investigation and the reports made to it by the officers
hereinbefore mentioned, that the applicant is of good moral character and is
a suitable person to conduct and operate a restaurant, buffer, lunch room,
lunch counter, public dining hall or place where victuals and food are
prepared or manufactured and, in cases where application is made for a
license to conduct the business herein designated as Class A, that the
applicant is a citizen of the United States, it shall direct the City Clerk
to issue a license therefor, and thereupon, the City Clerk shall issue a
license to conduct and operate the business upon the payment of the license
fee herein prescribed.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.004  BUILDING AND EQUIPMENT TO CONFORM.



   Before the health officer shall approve the application set forth in §
119.001, he or she shall be satisfied that the building and equipment for the
business conforms to the following rules.



   (A)   Floors.  Tight and solid, easily washed.



   (B)   Walls and ceilings.  Constructed of material that will make
tight and smooth surface easily cleanable.



   (C)   Building.  To be properly lighted and ventilated.



   (D)   Equipment.



      (1)   Water running, hot and cold, connected to a three
compartment metal sink, except if a dish washing machine is provided which
has a rinse of 180°F of water.



         (a)   All multi-service, eating and drinking utensils
including all dishes, knives, forks, spoons, cups, glasses and the like,
shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
bactericidal process.



         (b)   All multi-use utensils, including pots, pans,
urns, skillets and the like, used in preparation of food and drink shall be
thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal
process immediately following the day’s operation.



      (2)   Ice box, proper sewerage connections for the ice box and
sink.



      (3)   Adequate toilet facilities for men and women.



      (4)   Garbage containers with covers.



   (E)   Basements.  Not recognized unless built for handling and
preparing foods.



   (F)   Living or sleeping rooms.  No living or sleeping rooms in
direct connection with any part of the restaurant will be tolerated.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 271, passed 7-3-1962)  Penalty, see §
119.999



§ 119.005  CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   No licensee shall permit any disorderly conduct in his or her
place of business, nor shall any licensee permit his or her place of business
to become a resort or meeting place for thieves, prostitutes or other
disorderly persons, nor shall any licensee permit any gambling in his or her
place of business or permit the placing or use of any gambling apparatus or
paraphernalia about his or her premises, nor shall any licensee permit any
lewd, obscene or immoral exhibition or entertainment on his or her premises
or any other conduct likely to corrupt the morals of the youth.



   (B)   Licensees providing entertainment, amusement, exhibitions,
music or places for dancing shall comply with and abide by all rules and
regulations of the Police Department and other proper authorities relating
thereto.



   (C)   All licensees operating under Class A licenses may open their
places of business at 5:00 a.m. and remain open not later than 2:00 a.m. of
the following morning and no longer.



   (D)   No licensee operating under a Class A license shall sell,
procure for, or furnish, directly or indirectly, to any minor under the age
of 21 years, any beer, wine, whiskey or other intoxicating liquor, nor permit
any minor to loiter in or about his or her place of business.



   (E)   No licensee operating under a Class A license shall employ any
person under the age of 21 years to do any work in connection with that place
of business.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 121, passed 12-28-1933)  Penalty, see
§ 119.999



§ 119.006  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Whenever the business shall be carried on in conjunction with some
other form of business which, under a provision of the regulations regulating
the same, shall be required to close at a particular hour or remain closed
until a particular time, then the business herein proposed to be licensed
shall be closed according to the provisions of the regulations covering the
business operated in connection therewith.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.007  FEES TO BE DEPOSITED IN GENERAL FUND.



   The money derived from the issuance of the licenses shall be turned
over to the City Treasurer and deposited in the General Fund of the city.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.008  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Council may, at any time, for sufficient cause proved
to the satisfaction of the Council after notice and hearing, suspend or
revoke any license granted under the provisions of this subchapter and order
the business so licensed to be closed.



   (B)   After the notice closing the business, no business of the
nature herein proposed to be licensed shall be conducted or carried on in the
place until a new license shall have been issued under the provisions of this
subchapter and the issuance thereof approved by the City Council or the
suspension imposed by the City Council be lifted.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923)  Penalty, see § 119.999




PUBLIC MARKETS




§ 119.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HUCKSTER.  Any person who sells food or other products not produced,
manufactured or made by himself or herself, which he or she has purchased for
resale, by virtue of or which have been consigned for him or her for sale.



   MARKET MASTER.  Any person who, by virtue of owning, leasing, or
controlling vacant property, rents or leases, stands, stalls or places the
same thereon for the buying and selling of articles of food.



   PERSON.  All natural persons, firms, partnerships, corporations and
all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether
acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All PERSONS who
violate any of the provisions of this subchapter, whether as owner or as
agent, servant or employee, shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be
equally liable as principals.



   PRODUCER.  Any person who vends in a public market, articles or
products grown or produced by him, her or any member of his or her family
residing with him or her upon property owned, rented or controlled by him or
her. It shall include any person who represents exclusively a non-profit
association of producers of farm products which markets the products produced
by its members.



   PUBLIC MARKET or MARKET PLACE.  A place on vacant property used for
buying and selling farm products and the accommodation of producers’ and
hucksters’ wagons in which the products are brought to or taken from the
place.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 153, passed 11-29-1935; Am. Ord. 158,
passed 10-6-1936)



§ 119.021  PUBLIC MARKET; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall establish or conduct a public market or market place as
herein defined within the corporate limits of the city without first having
obtained a license from the City Clerk. Application for the license shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk and shall be upon printed blanks to be
furnished by the City Clerk, which shall set forth, among other things, the
place where the business is to be conducted, the name, age, residence and
previous experience of the applicant. If the applicant be a partnership, the
names and addresses of all partners and the name under which the business is
to be conducted shall be given. If the applicant is a corporation, the names
and addresses of all the officers and the name of the corporation shall be
given. The application shall, before the issuance of the license, be referred
to the health officer, who shall make an investigation and recommendation to
the City Clerk within a reasonable time after the filing of the application.
If the City Clerk is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to
conduct a public market or market place, has never been convicted of a
felony, that the proposed public market or market place is equipped with one
automatic dial scale of 300 pounds capacity and one computing scale of 100
pounds capacity, sealed by the Sealer of Weights and Measures (the scales to
be located for the convenience of customers in checking the weights of
purchases), then he or she shall grant the license upon the payment to the
City Treasurer of a license fee in the amount of $200 and the filing with the
City Clerk of a surety company bond in the amount of $1,000 conditioned for
the faithful observance of the terms of this subchapter or any ordinance
amendatory thereof or supplemental hereto. Provided, however, that no license
shall be granted to any person, firm, partnership or corporation to operate
or conduct a public market or market place within a radius of 2,000 feet of
any other market or market place licensed under the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 105, passed 8-18-1932; Am. Ord. 150,
passed 10-24-1935)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.022  PRODUCER OR HUCKSTER; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No producer or huckster shall engage in his or her business in
a public market or market place within the corporate limits of the city
without first having obtained a licence therefor from the City Clerk.
Application for a producer’s license to engage in business in a public
market or market place shall be made in writing upon blanks furnished by the
City Clerk, giving the name, age, address and previous experience of the
applicant, the names and kinds of the products he or she produces and intends
to sell at the market, the place where he or she raises the products, the
names of all persons in his or her employ who shall appear at the market to
sell the products the names of all persons employed by him or her at the
premises where he or she raises the products and any other information as may
be deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare and the proper
enforcement of this subchapter, together with an agreement that, if license
is granted to him or her, he or she will not allow or permit anyone to sell
his or her products in a market other than the members of his or her
immediate family or the persons actually employed by him or her in the
raising of produce and that a violation of the agreement shall be sufficient
cause for the revocation of his or her license. The City Clerk may require
all information to be sworn to be the applicant. The application shall be
referred to the health officer who shall make an investigation and
recommendation to the City Clerk within a reasonable time after receiving the
application. If the City Clerk if satisfied that the applicant is a suitable
person to engage in the business, has not been convicted of any felony, or
the offense of short weight, or been barred from any public market, he or she
shall grant the license and issue the same upon the payment to the City
Treasurer of the license fee of $1.



   (B)   Application for huckster’s license shall be made in writing
upon blanks furnished by the City Clerk, giving the name, age, address and
previous experience of the applicant, the names and kinds of the products he
or she intends to sell at the market and any other information as may be
deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare and the proper
enforcement of this subchapter. The City Clerk may require all information to
be sworn to by the applicant. The application shall be referred to the health
officer who shall make an investigation and recommendation to the City Clerk
within a reasonable time after receiving the application. If the City Clerk
is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to engage in the
business, has not been convicted of a felony, or the offense of short weight,
or been barred from any public market, he or she shall grant a license and
issue the same upon the payment to the City Treasurer of the license fee of
$25.



   (C)   At the time of the issuance of the license, the City Clerk
shall give to each producer or huckster a suitable plate to be displayed by
the licensee in a conspicuous place at the stall where he or she engages in
his or her business in the public market. No producer or huckster shall
operate more than one stall under one license.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 105, passed 8-18-1932)  Penalty, see §
119.999



§ 119.023  RESTRICTION FOR HUCKSTER.



   No huckster who has been licensed to peddle on the streets and alleys
of the city shall do business within 500 feet of any public market. The
huckster shall not do business in any public market in the city unless he or
she first obtains the license required by this subchapter. It shall be
unlawful for any producer to sell his or her products on the streets, alleys
or public places of the city without first obtaining a license therefor.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.024  ARTICLES ALLOWED TO BE SOLD IN PUBLIC MARKETS.



   (A)   The following articles are allowed to be sold in public
markets or market places: any article of food or food products of any nature
whatsoever, provided that the handling, sale and storage of same complies
with all sanitary regulations of the Health Department and the regulations of
the city. It shall be unlawful to sell, display, expose or offer for sale any
other articles than food or food products in a public market, or to sell,
display, expose or offer for sale, or demonstrate or solicit patronage for
any business, merchandise, goods or real estate.



   (B)   The term FOOD as used herein, shall include all articles used
for food, drink, confectionery or condiment intended to be eaten or drank by
man or other animals, whether simple, mixed or compound.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 126, passed 7-3-1934)  Penalty, see §
119.999



§ 119.025  INSPECTION.



   All articles of food in a public market shall be subject to the
inspection of the health officer at all reasonable times.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.026  PRODUCTS UNLAWFUL TO SELL.



   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale in any public
market any adulterated, bad, diseased, impure or unwholesome articles of food
or food products. It shall be the duty of the market master to prevent the
display of those articles.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.027  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH RECEPTACLES.



   The market master shall furnish suitable garbage and rubbish
receptacles of a number and type required and approved by the health officer
of the city. It shall be his or her duty to cause producers and hucksters to
deposit all garbage and rubbish in the receptacles.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.028  SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Producers and hucksters are hereby required to thoroughly clean their
stalls, stands or places after market hours and before leaving the same. No
person shall deposit vegetable refuse or other garbage, broken crates, boxes,
barrels or pieces thereof, paper or other rubbish in any place in a public
market except in the proper permanent concrete or iron or steel receptacles
which shall be erected by the market master. It shall be unlawful to burn any
garbage or rubbish in any public market.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.029  UNLAWFUL TO RENT TO UNLICENSED PERSON.



   It shall be unlawful for a market master to rent or allow the use of
any stall stand or place in any public market or market place to any person
who is not licensed under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.030  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A violation of the provisions of this subchapter, a conviction of the
charge of having violated any other ordinance of the city, repeated verified
complaints against any producer or huckster who sells in a public market,
giving reasonable conclusive evidence that the person has practiced deception
in his or her dealings in the market by displaying or selling his or her
produce so packed and faced as to misrepresent the average quality or
condition of the produce in the package, or by knowingly giving false
information regarding the origin, variety, quality, condition or value of the
products which he or she sells, or by similar sharp practices, shall, in
addition to any other penalties which may be inflicted, be cause for the City
Council to bar the person from the privileges and grounds of the public
markets for a period of time as may be deemed advisable by the Council and to
revoke the license issued to the person. The action shall be preceded by a
hearing before the City Council at which the person involved shall have an
opportunity to fully present his or her defense against the charges made
against him or her. It shall be unlawful for the market master to permit any
person barred as aforesaid by the City Council to occupy any place in or do
business in a public market.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.031  LICENSES AND RECEIPTS TO BE DISPLAYED AND FURNISHED.



   All producers and hucksters shall display their licenses and furnish
signed receipts for goods purchased upon request. Stalls, stands or places
occupied by hucksters in a public market shall be plainly designated as that
by appropriate signs furnished by the market master and approved by the
health officer or City Manager’s designee.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.032  HEALTH OFFICER SUPERVISION.



   Public markets and market places shall be under the supervision of the
health officer of the city or any officer so authorized by the City Manager.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)



§ 119.033  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on May 30 each year unless
sooner revoked by the City Council for cause. No license shall be issued for
less than one year, nor shall any license be assigned or transferred to any
other person.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.034  BUILDING AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Before the health officer or City Manager’s designee shall approve
the application for a public market or market place, he or she shall be
satisfied that the building and equipment for the business conform to the
following rules.



   (A)   Floor.  Tight and solid, constructed of concrete or similar
substance, easily washed and flushed.



   (B)   Garbage and rubbish receptacles.  Of a number and type
required by the health officer with covers.



   (C)   Equipment.  Permanent roof over dressed meat, fish and
poultry. Cases and counters containing meat, fish and poultry to be protected
by partitions of glass, wood or metal so erected as to keep the same in a
cleanly and sanitary manner to meet the approval of the food inspector of the
city, the meat, fish and poultry to be kept and displayed so that it shall
not be exposed to the elements.



   (D)   Drainage facilities.  To be approved by the health officer or
City Manager’s designee.



   (E)   Adequate toilet facilities.  For men and women.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.035  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Public markets and market places licensed under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be closed at 6:00 p.m. each day, with the exception
of Thursday of each week, and kept closed until 4:00 a.m. of the following
day; on Thursday of each week the public markets and market places shall be
closed at 8:00 p.m. and kept closed until 4:00 a.m. of the following day.



   (B)   Provided, however, that the markets and market places shall be
closed all day on the first day of each week, commonly called Sunday.



   (C)   After the closing of the public markets and market places, it
shall be the duty of the market master to see that the place is thoroughly
cleaned and the floors flushed.



(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 105, passed 8-18-1932)  Penalty, see §
119.999




SALE OF TAINTED MEAT, VEGETABLES AND OTHER FOODSTUFFS




§ 119.050  PROHIBITING THE SALE OR OFFERING FOR SALE, OR HAVING IN
POSSESSION FOR THE PURPOSE OF SELLING OR OFFERING FOR SALE, OF ANY DECAYED,
TAINTED OR SPOILED MEATS, VEGETABLES OR OTHER FOOD STUFFS.



   No person or firm or corporation shall sell, offer for sale, or have in
possession for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any decayed,
tainted or spoiled meat, vegetables or food stuffs of any kind, within the
city.



(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.051  VIOLATION.



   Each and every person who shall sell, offer for sale, or have in
possession for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any decayed,
tainted or spoiled meat, vegetables, food stuffs of any kind within the city,
either as principal, officer, agent or employee shall be deemed to be
violating the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.052  KEEPING TAINTED FOOD NEAR GOOD FOOD PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF
VIOLATION.



   The having or keeping of any decayed, tainted or spoiled meat,
vegetables or food stuffs of any kind in any refrigerator, ice box or case,
wherein are usually kept good meat, vegetables or other food stuffs to be
sold or offered for sale in the city, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the violation of terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.053  INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the health officer and food inspector of the
city or City Manager’s designee to investigate the premises in every case
where there is reasonable ground to believe that decayed, tainted or spoiled
meat, vegetables or food stuffs of any kind are being sold, offered for sale,
or had in the possession for the purpose of offering for sale, and for that
purpose the officers shall have the right at reasonable hours to enter the
premises of any store, meat market, butcher shop, restaurants or lunch room
where meat, vegetables or any other food stuffs whatsoever are publicly or
offered for sale.



(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999




SALE OF FRESH OR SMOKED MEAT




§ 119.065  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall, own, operate, or
conduct any business consisting, wholly or in part of the sale of fresh or
smoked meats at retail within the city, without first securing from the Clerk
a license therefor, as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.066  CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.



   The City Clerk of the city is hereby authorized and directed to issue
license to any person or persons, firm or corporation to own, operate, or
conduct within the city a business consisting wholly or in part of the sale
of fresh or smoked meats at retail upon filing with the Clerk a bond, to be
approved by the City Council, in the sum of $100, conditioned upon the
faithful compliance by the licensee with all the provisions of the state laws
now or hereafter enacted relating to the business of selling fresh or smoked
meats at retail and all ordinances, or parts of ordinances, of the city now
in effect or which may be hereafter adopted relating in any way to the
business of selling fruit or smoked meats at retail within the city. Before
the license shall be issued there shall be paid to the City Treasurer the
license fee of $1. The license when issued shall entitle the licensee to
conduct business until April 1 next following the issuance of the license,
unless revoked sooner by the City Council for cause.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.067  RESTRICTING HANDLING BY PUBLIC.



   No fresh or smoked meats shall be exposed for sale upon any counter,
block or slab, in any meat market, butcher shop, store, stall or booth in
which fresh or smoked meats are sold at retail in the city in a manner as to
permit handling by the general public, but shall be protected by partitions
of glass, wood or metal, so erected as to keep the same in a clean and
sanitary manner to meet the approval of the food inspector.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.068  SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.



   Every meat market, butcher shop, store, stall or booth in the city in
which fresh or smoked meats are sold at retail shall be kept in a neat,
orderly, clean and sanitary condition, subject  at all reasonable hours to
inspection by the proper officials of the city.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.069  SANITARY TRANSPORT OF GOODS.



   All fresh or smoked meats carried or transported to, or from, any meat
market, butcher shop, store, stall or booth, in the city, where fresh or
smoked meats are sold at retail shall be so carried and transported only in
vehicles that are kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and all fresh meats
carried therein, shall at all times, be kept clean and protected by proper
coverings from dust, flies and filth.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.070  MEAT FROM UNFIT ANIMALS.



   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale, at retail, or barter or
trade, the meat of any animal which is in any way crippled, diseased,
emaciated or otherwise unfit for human food.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.071  MEAT FROM CALF LESS THAN FOUR WEEKS OLD.



   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale at retail, or barter or
trade, the meat of any calf less than four weeks old.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.072  MEAT PURCHASED FROM SOURCE OTHER THAN A UNITED STATES INSPECTED
ESTABLISHMENT.



   Every person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this
subchapter shall report to the food inspector of the city, within 24 hours
thereafter, the matter of the purchase of any fresh meat or meat food
products purchased from any other source than from a United States inspected
establishment or a slaughtering or meat food product manufacturing
establishment, licensed by either the Detroit Board of Health or the City
Council; the report shall give the name and address of the persons from whom
the meat or meat products, are purchased, together with a statement and
description of the articles comprising the purchase.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.073  PERSONAL HYGIENE.



   Each and every person handling fresh meats at retail, either as owner,
butcher, clerk or employee, in any meat market, butcher shop, store, stall or
booth, in  the city, shall at all times keep himself or herself and all
parts of his or her clothing in a clean and sanitary condition, and no person
who shall be affected with any vile, contagious diseases shall be at any time
permitted to handle or sell any fresh meats at retail within the city.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.074  SANITARY REFRIGERATORS, MEAT COUNTERS, BLOCKS, TOOLS, UTENSILS
AND APPARATUS REQUIRED.



   All ice boxes, refrigerators, meat counters, blocks, tools, utensils
and apparatus used in connection with any business of selling fresh meats at
retail within the city shall be kept in a neat, clean and sanitary condition.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.075  FORFEITURE OF LICENSE.



    Any person or persons, firm or corporation, selling fresh or smoked
meats at retail within the city who, or which, shall be convicted of the
violation of any of the terms of this subchapter shall, in addition to all
other penalties prescribed by law or ordinance, as punishment for the
violation, be liable to forfeiture of license granted under the provisions of
this subchapter, upon proper action by the City Council.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)  Penalty, see § 119.999




SALE OF FOOD TO THE PUBLIC IN BULK




§ 119.090  PERMANENT STRUCTURE OR BUILDING REQUIRED.



   No person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation shall, own,
operate or cause to be operated within the city, any business conducted for
the purpose of selling articles of food unless the business is operated in a
permanent structure or building meeting the requirements of the Building
Code, without first obtaining a license therefore from the Clerk and
complying with the terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.091  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   STORE, SHOP AND PLACE OF BUSINESS, WHERE FOOD IS SOLD TO THE PUBLIC. 
Shall not be deemed to include restaurants or meat markets, nor the wagons or
vehicles used by hucksters or peddlers or parks primarily used for amusement
purposes, or markets.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)



§ 119.092  CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to grant a license to any
person of good character, or to any partnership or corporation, to engage in
the business of operating or conducting a store, shop or other place of
business for the sale of food to the public in bulk upon receiving from the
applicant the proper certificate from the Health Department as hereinafter
provided, and upon payment to the City Treasurer of the sum of $1 as a
license fee.



   (B)   The license shall cover but one place of business, which shall
be stated therein. Provided, that the license fees shall not be in lieu of
the license fees required to be paid under the provisions of the regulations
of the city relative to the sale of baked goods or any other specific food
products for the sale of which regulations are now in effect or may be
hereafter adopted providing for the license of the same.



   (C)   Every license shall expire on December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932; Am. Ord. 111, passed 5-2-1933)



§ 119.093  CERTIFICATE FROM HEALTH DEPARTMENT.



   Before the City Clerk shall issue any license provided for in §
119.090, the applicant shall furnish him or her a certificate from the Health
Department stating that the establishment where applicant conducts, or
intends to conduct, the  business is a proper place in which to conduct the
business.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)



§ 119.094  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.



   Blank applications for the certificate shall be issued by the Health
Department. The applications shall contain the information as shall be
required by the Health Department, and shall further contain an agreement by
which the applicants consent to have the inspectors of the Health Department
enter, examine, and inspect any part of the premises used in conducting such
business, or any produce or food sold or for sale therein, and to take
samples of the food for the purpose of analysis. The applications shall
further contain an agreement that the premises occupied by the business shall
be provided with sanitary toilets having at least one stool therein for every
25 persons employed on the premises, and with suitable and sanitary wash
rooms and toilet facilities, and with sanitary refuse receptacles, and with
floors that can be properly cleansed and flushed, and that the applicants
will at all times keep the floors thereof properly cleansed and flushed. The
applications shall further contain an agreement that the applicant agrees to
conform to the rules and regulations of the Health Department relative to the
conduct of the business. The Health Department is authorized to issues
certificates upon application of any person, firm or corporation desirous of
engaging in or continuing to engage in the business, after determining that
the place or establishment where the applicants conduct or intend to conduct
the business is a proper place in which to conduct the business. No
determination shall be made until the Health Department determines by
inspection that the premises meet with all the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.095  REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to refuse to issue a license, or
the Council may revoke a license upon satisfactory proof that the applicant
is not of good character, or is not the proper person to have a license, or
that the applicant conducts the place or establishment in violation of the
rules of the Health Department, or that the place or establishment where he
or she conduct ths business is not a proper place in which to conduct the
business, or that the place or establishment does not comply with all of the
requirements of § 119.094, or that the place or establishment is not kept
and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)



§ 119.096  VIOLATION.



   The conviction of any licensee on the charge of having violated any of
the provisions of this subchapter shall be cause for suspension or revocation
of his or her license.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)



§ 119.097  GARBAGE AND REFUSE.



   No person shall deposit vegetable refuse or other garbage, broken
crates, boxes, barrels, or pieces thereof, paper, or other rubbish on or in
the place or establishment, nor burn any garbage or rubbish in a place or
establishment, except in places which may be provided for that specific
purpose.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.098  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH BUSINESS.



   Where several businesses for selling articles of food are conducted
under one roof by separate individuals, partnerships, associations or
corporations, each owner of the business shall be required to secure a
license in accordance with the provisions herein.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)



§ 119.099  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   Any person, partnership, association or corporation now operating any
business conducted of the purpose of selling articles of food at the present
time in noncompliance with this subchapter shall have 90 days from the date
at which this subchapter becomes effective to comply with the provisions
herein.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)




SALE OF FOOD SUPPLIES AND FOOD PRODUCT AT RETAIL




§ 119.110  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, corporation, association or partnership shall operate,
maintain, open or establish, any business consisting wholly or in part of the
sale of food supplies and food products at retail within the city, without
first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.111  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Every person, firm, corporation, association or partnership desiring to
operate, maintain, open or establish within the city a business consisting
wholly or in part of the sale of food supplies and food products at retail,
shall make application for a license therefor to the City Clerk of the city,
on a form prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk, which application shall
set forth the name of the owner, manager, trustee lessee, receiver or other
person desiring the license, the name of the store, the location, including
the street number of the store, and the other facts as the City Clerk may
require. If the applicant desires to operate, maintain, open or establish
more than one place of business, he or she shall make a separate application
for a license to operate, maintain, open or establish each place of business,
but the respective places for which the applicant desires to secure licenses
may all be listed on one application blank.



(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.112  APPLICATION AND CITY CLERK.



   (A)   As soon as practicable after the receipt of the application,
the City Clerk shall carefully examine the same to ascertain whether it is in
proper form and contains the necessary and requisite information, If, upon
examination, the City Clerk shall find that any application is not in proper
form and does not contain the necessary and requisite information, he or she
shall return the application for correction.



   (B)   If an application is found to be satisfactory, and if the
license fee as herein prescribed shall have been paid, the City Clerk shall
issue to the applicant a license for each place of business for which an
application for license shall been made.



   (C)   Each licensee shall display the license so issued in a
conspicuous place in the place of business for which the license is issued.



(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.113  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Every person, firm, corporation, association or copartnership,
opening, established, operating or maintaining one or more places of business
within the city under the same general management, supervision or ownership,
shall pay the license fees hereinafter prescribed:



      (1)   The license fee for one place of business consisting,
wholly or in part of the sale of food supplies and food products at retail
shall be $25.



      (2)   The license fee for two places for business under the
same general management, supervision or ownership, shall be $50 for each
place of business.



      (3)   The license fee for three places of business under the
same general management, supervision or ownership, shall be $75 for each
place of business.



      (4)   The license for four or more places of business under
the same general management, supervision or owners shall be $1,000 for each
place of business.



   (B)   The license, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to
conduct the business until April 15 next following, the issuance of the
license, unless sooner revoked by the City Council for cause. The license fee
shall be paid to the City Treasurer before the issuance of the license and,
in case the time intervening between the date of application and the date of
expiration shall be less than one year, the City Treasurer shall receive the
prorata amount of the license fee, which however, in no case shall be less
than one-half thereof.



(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.114  PARTIES COVERED BY THESE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to apply to every
person, firm, partnership, corporation or association, either domestic or
foreign, which is controlled on held with others by majority stock ownership,
or ultimately controlled or directed by one management or association of
ultimate management.



(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)  Penalty, see § 119.999




POULTRY




§ 119.155  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of a wholesale
slaughter poultry dealer, wholesale poultry dealer, retail poultry dealer or
retail stand dealer in the city unless he or she shall has obtained a license
therefor from the City Clerk; and no dealer shall vend poultry on or off the
streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city; all sales to be in a building only.



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed:



      (1)   To prevent any farmer from killing, dressing and
selling, in the open market, unless diseased, any poultry intended for food
that he or she has raised, fed or slaughtered, nor any dealer or merchant
from buying or selling the same as provided by, state law;



      (2)   As affecting interstate commerce; or



      (3)   To prevent a hauler from bringing poultry into the city
and to sell or consign same to a licensed wholesale dealer; but the handling,
killing, dressing, sale, purchase or merchandising of the poultry shall be
subject to the terms of this subchapter to the extent that same does not
conflict with any state or federal law.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.156  FEE.



   (A)   Annual licenses of a poultry dealer under this subchapter
shall be issued in the name of the City Clerk to any person who qualifies as
herein provided.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall charge and collect as follows:



 

Wholesale slaughter poultry dealer
 

$25 per year



Wholesale poultry dealer
 

$25 per year



Retail poultry dealer
 

$10 per year



Retail stand of live poultry
 

$5 per year




 



   (C)   All licenses required in this subchapter shall expire on May 1
of each year.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.157  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  Individuals, partnership, firm, association or corporation.



   RETAIL POULTRY DEALER.  Every person, individual, partnership, firm,
association or corporation not a wholesale poultry dealer who deals in and/or
sells poultry at retail.



   VEHICLE.  The conveyance in which the poultry is carried, and includes
automobile, truck, wagon or cart.



   WHOLESALE POULTRY DEALER.  Every person, individual, partnership,
firm, association or corporation:



      (1)   Operating a regularly established store or warehouse for
the purchase, sale or consignment of poultry at wholesale in the city, or who
deals in, purchases, sells or offers for sale or delivery at wholesale any
poultry used or intended for human consumption; or



      (2)   Not operating a regularly established store or warehouse
for the sale of poultry at wholesale in the city who deals in, sells or
offers for sale or delivery at wholesale any poultry used or intended for
human consumption, by traveling from place to place or along or upon the
streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city from one prospective
buyer to consignee to another, and offers to sell or consign, or does sell or
consign and/or delivers from a vehicle poultry to another person, who buys or
receives the poultry for re-sale in some form, and not for personal
consumption.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.158  DISEASED POULTRY.



   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale at retail, wholesale, or
trade, any poultry afflicted with downers, tuberculosis, gaps, swollen heads
or eyes, other disease or defects which render the poultry unfit for human
food. The city veterinarian, or health inspector in consultation with the
city veterinarian, shall have the power to condemn, seize and destroy all
poultry unfit for human consumption, under the rules and regulations as the
Board of Health may adopt.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.159  CONFORMANCE TO SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring within the limits
of the city, to be sold or offered for sale therein at wholesale or retail,
any poultry for any slaughterhouse situated outside its limits, whose owner,
lessee or occupant has not substantially conformed to the sanitary
requirements of the Board of Health.



   (B)   The Board of Health is hereby authorized to require from any
person an affidavit or other satisfactory proof of compliance with this
provision.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.160  REGULATIONS GOVERNING POULTRY SLAUGHTERHOUSES.



   Application for the approval of plans and specifications and for permit
shall be made by the owner of the site to the Department of Health, upon
official blanks furnished for that purpose by the Department. No permit to
conduct a poultry slaughterhouse shall be issued by the Department of Health
unless the, plans and specifications of the proposed slaughterhouse shall
have been approved by the Department.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.161  FLOOR SPACE.



   The floor space of the building used as a poultry slaughterhouse shall
cover an area of at least 550 square feet in order to permit the receipt and
delivery of poultry and poultry in crates and the storage of empty crates,
entirely within the premises of the poultry slaughterhouse.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.162  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Application for the approval of the plans and specifications
of the poultry slaughterhouse proposed to be erected shall be made upon
official forms furnished by the Department of Health and duplicate copies of
the plans and specifications shall be submitted with the application.
Specifications shall be submitted with all plans, explaining in detail the
work to be done and the material to be used, and where the work to be done is
shown on the plans and not mentioned in the specifications or where mentioned
in the specifications and not shown on the plans, it shall be taken as
mentioned in both.



   (B)   Duplicate copies of the plans and specifications shall be
submitted and when the plans and specifications are approved, construction
work must be started within 90 days thereafter, and the work shall be
continuous until completed in a thorough, workmanlike manner.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.163  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF POULTRY SLAUGHTERHOUSE.



   No permit to conduct a poultry slaughterhouse will be issued by the
Department of Health unless, the following  minimum requirements as to
construction shall have been in each instance fully complied with in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications.



   (A)   Floors, construction.  The floors shall be constructed of
cement, concrete or other approved water-tight, non-absorbent material, so
graded and drained as to discharge all liquid matter in properly trapped
sewer in compliance with the Building Code.



   (B)   Ceilings and walls.  The ceilings shall be of a smooth, hard
impervious material free from crevices, cracks, ledges or projections. The
walls shall be of cement, concrete or other approved water-tight,
non-absorbent material with a smooth finish to the entire height of the
ceiling and shall be painted. The junctions with the ceilings and floors
shall be maintained in a tight and sanitary manner.



   (C)   Height of ceilings.  All ceilings shall be at least ten feet
in height, measured from the surface of the floor to the ceiling.



   (D)   Ventilation.  Adequate ventilation to extend ten feet above
adjacent properties to the external air by natural means shall be provided
for every room in which poultry is stored, killed or which is used in
connection with the slaughterhouse, and in compliance with the Building Code
of the city.



   (E)   Lights. Adequate natural or artificial light approved by the
Department of Health shall be provided in every room in which poultry is
stored or killed.



   (F)   Killing room.  A separate room shall be provided which shall
be used as a killing room, which shall have an area of at least 80 square
feet. The width or length of this room shall not be less than eight feet. A
bleeding trough must be provided; it shall be of adequate capacity and be
approved by the Department of Health. The walls and face of the trough must
be of cement, concrete or other approved water-tight, non-absorbent material
with a smooth finish and shall discharge over properly trapped and sewer
connected drains. A proper metal receptacle shall be provided to hold each
bird after being slaughtered, the receptacle shall be placed where the
poultry may be disposed of in a sanitary manner. The provisions of this
regulation shall not apply to a poultry slaughterhouse in which a wholesale
business is carried on principally, except that poultry shall be killed in
places in receptacles approved by the Department of Health.



   (G)   Dry plucking rooms.  Where dry plucking is the method always
employed, a separate room shall be provided, which shall be used exclusively
for the dry plucking of poultry killed at the premises. The area of this room
shall be at least 100 square feet. The width or length of this room shall not
be less than eight feet. The walls shall be constructed of approved
water-tight, nonabsorbent tile or brick, and the floor and ceiling shall be
constructed of non-absorbent, water-proof material; floor to be graded and
drained. Proper receptacles shall be provided for the holding, storing or
keeping of all feathers.



   (H)   Waiting room.  A separate room shall be provided as a waiting
room for the customers. The area of this room shall be at least 550 square
feet.



   (I)   Storage; crates or batteries.  A separate room shall be
provided for the storage of live poultry in crates or batteries. The area of
this room shall be at least 270 square feet. Cages or batteries shall be
elevated at least one foot above the floor level and shall not be placed
nearer than two feet from the side walls of the building.



   (J)   Water supply.  Permanent fixtures shall be provided for the
furnishing of an adequate supply of fresh water for flushing all parts of the
premises.



   (K)   Rat-proofing.  The room or receptacle for the storage of food
for the poultry shall be constructed rat-proof.



   (L)   Toilet facilities.  Adequate water-closet accommodation for
male and female persons shall be provided, and sufficient fixtures with hot
and cold running water for washing purposes shall be provided at all times;
the toilet room or rooms shall be ventilated to the outside air by a direct
or an approved indirect method.



   (M)   Screening.  All doors, windows and other openings to the
outer air shall be properly and adequately screened. All doors shall be
equipped with self closing devices.



   (N)   Hot water.  Adequate facilities shall be provided to ensure a
sufficient supply of running hot water at all times.



   (O)   Odors.  Suitable and adequate means shall be provided for the
disposal of offensive odors.



   (P)   Empty crates.  A separate room shall be provided for the
storage of empty crates.



   (Q)   Garbage disposal.  All garbage shall be disposed by Saturday,
midnight, by the operators of the poultry business. It shall be unlawful for
the operators or their employees to deposit the garbage in the alleys or
other public places. The garbage shall be burned in incinerators or carried
out beyond the confines of the city.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.164  PERMIT.



   The application for the permit to conduct a poultry slaughterhouse
shall be made upon official forms furnished by the Department of Health. No
permit will be unless the plans and specifications of the proposed poultry
slaughterhouse shall have first been approved by the Department in accordance
with the provisions of these regulations.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.165  MAINTENANCE.



   Every poultry slaughterhouse shall be conducted in strict compliance
with the following rules which shall govern the maintenance and operation.



   (A)   Cleanliness.  Every poultry slaughterhouse, the yard
adjoining same and all air shafts, courts and open places connected therewith
shall be at all times kept in a clean, sanitary condition, free from
accumulation of refuse, garbage and offensive material and nuisances of all
kinds.



   (B)   Floors; washing.  All floors shall be kept and maintained in
a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair and free from rubbish and
offensive material.



   (C)   Walls; cleaning.  The side walls of all rooms used for the
storage or killing of poultry shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition
and in good repair. Walls and ceilings shall be cleaned and painted whenever
required by the Department of Health.



   (D)   Ventilation.  All parts of every poultry slaughterhouse shall
be properly ventilated and adequately lighted at all times.



   (E)   Plumbing.  All plumbing fixtures and toilet facilities shall
be kept and maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair.



   (F)   Plucking room.  All plucking of poultry shall be done
exclusively in the plucking room.



   (G)   Feather receptacles.  Plucking of poultry shall be performed
in a manner that all feathers shall be thrown or placed in the receptacles
provided for the purpose.



   (H)   Storage of empty crates.  All empty crates shall be kept and
stored exclusively in the storage room. The area of this room shall be at
least 150 square feet. No empty crates shall be kept or permitted to remain
outside of the poultry slaughterhouse.



   (I)   Poultry at large; prohibited.  No poultry shall be allowed or
permitted at large upon the premises but shall be kept at all times in the
batteries or crates provided for that purpose.



   (J)   Screens.  The screens, windows, doors and other openings to
the outer air shall be kept clean and in good and repair.



   (K)   Doors not to be left open.  All doors shall be half-closing
and not permitted to remain open except for ingress or egress.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.166  STRUCTURAL CHANGES.



   No structural change or alterations shall be made in any poultry
slaughterhouse building unless the same shall have first been approved or
ordered by the Department of Building or the Department of Health.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.167  DEVIATION FROM SUBCHAPTER.



   In existing poultry slaughterhouses, where it would be impracticable or
unreasonable to require strict compliance with this subchapter, the health
officer with the approval of the City Council may permit deviation therefrom.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.168  PERMITS; RENEWAL ANNUALLY.



   Permits to carry on or conduct a poultry slaughterhouse in the city
shall be granted by the Department of Health of the city for each poultry
slaughterhouse conducted or maintained in the city and each permit shall
expire on May 1 of the calendar year following the issue thereof, and shall
be renewed annually before the expiration thereof.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.169  NEW PERMIT.



   Upon proof by report from the Inspector of the Department of Health
that the premises on which a poultry slaughterhouse permit has been issued by
the Department of Health has become vacant or has not been used or is
discontinued for use as a slaughterhouse for the period of six months or
more, or where the permittee has died, or where the premises has been
destroyed by fire, a new permit must be obtained and new plans and
specifications filed, passed upon and approved by the Department of Health,
as herein provided.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.170  BASEMENTS.



   No poultry shall be killed in any basement.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.171  NOT APPLICABLE TO BUTCHER.



   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to a
regular licensed butcher who slaughters 50 or less fowl per week upon his or
her own premises.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



§ 119.172  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Department of Health shall be charged with the enforcement of this
subchapter, and the Department of Health is hereby authorized to adopt the
rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)




BAKERY




§ 119.185  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall not be lawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on
or conduct the trade or business of a baker, either in person or by employing
any other person to carry on the trade or business under his, her or its
direction within the city, without having obtained from the Clerk a license
for that purpose.



(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.186  APPLICATION.



   Every person, firm or corporation desirous of carrying on or conducting
the trade or business shall make application in writing to the Clerk of the
city for a license, setting forth the street number of the place of business
in which the trade or business is intended to be carried on. The Clerk shall
have power to grant the license upon the payment of $5. All licenses shall
expire upon May 1 next following the issuance of the same. The Clerk shall
record in a book, to be kept in his or her office for public inspection, the
name, street and number of the place of business of each person, firm or
corporation to whom the license shall be issued.



(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.187  CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   Before the Clerk shall issue any license, the applicant shall furnish
to him or her a certificate from the Board of Health stating that the
establishment where the applicant conducts or is about to conduct the
business is a proper place in which to conduct the business. The Board of
Health is hereby authorized to issue the certificate upon application of any
person, firm or corporation desirous of engaging in or of continuing to
engage in the business. Blank applications for the purpose shall be issued by
the Board of Health. Applications shall contain the information, having
relation to the health of the city, as shall be required by the Board of
Health; and shall further contain an agreement by which the applicant
consents to the inspectors of the Board of Health having the right to enter
the premises where the business is conducted for the purpose of examining or
inspecting same, or any bread or other baked goods manufactured or kept
therein. The application shall further contain an agreement on the part of
the applicant that he or she will conform to the rules and regulations of the
Board of Health relative to the conduct of the business.



(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.188  SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every licensee shall conduct his or her establishment in a
cleanly and sanitary manner.



   (B)   No licensee shall sell or offer for sale or manufacture any
bread or other goods baked or prepared by him or her which are not clean and
wholesome and which would be deleterious to health.



(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925)  Penalty, see § 119.999




FOOD HANDLER CARD




§ 119.200  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place in the city in which food or beverage
is served or sold for human consumption on the premises or elsewhere. The
establishments shall include, but not be limited to, restaurants, cafeterias,
coffee shops, taverns, soda foundations, itinerant restaurants, bakeries and
grocery stores.



   VENDOR.  Anyone who transports, distributes  or operates equipment to
transport or distribute food for human consumption in the city.



(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)



§ 119.201  CARD REQUIRED.



   No person shall be employed or shall work in a food handling
establishment in the city or be employed as a vendor unless he or she has a
food handler’s card from the Board of Health of the city as hereinafter set
forth.



(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)  Penalty, see § 119.999



§ 119.202  APPLICATION.



   Applicants for the food handlers cards in the city shall file an
application for the card with the Board of Health of city on forms approved
by the Board of Health, which shall issue the food handlers card to the
applicant, when a negative chest x-ray report has been approved and filed by
the Board of Health.



(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)



§ 119.203  ANNUAL FEE.



   Before the food handlers’ card is issued to any applicant by the
Board of Health, the applicant shall pay to the City Treasurer an annual fee
of $2, and the food handlers’ card issued to the applicant shall be
effective from the date of the issue until April 30 next following. Providing
however, that person handling food for fraternal, religious, educational,
social or civic organizations and not in their employ shall not required to
pay the fee. Cards issued without payment of fee shall be effective only in
conjunction with food handling in the fraternal, religious, educational,
social or civic organizations.



(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)  Penalty, see § 119.999



MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDORS



§ 119.220  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter may be referred to as the City of Hamtramck Mobile Food
Vehicle Ordinance.



(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 119.221  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A motorized vehicle which may upon issuance of a
license by the City Clerk and conformance with the regulations established by
this subchapter may temporarily park upon a public street and engage in the
service, sale or distribution of ready to eat food for individual portion
service to the general public directly from the vehicle.



   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDOR. The registered owner or a mobile food
vehicle or the owner’s agent or employee; and referred to in this
subchapter as “vendor.”



(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 119.222  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter apply to mobile food vehicles engaged
in the business of cooking, preparing and distributing food or beverage with
or without charge upon or in public and private restricted spaces. This
subchapter does not apply to vehicles which disperse food and that move from
place to place and are stationary in the same location for no more than 15
minutes at a time, such as ice cream trucks. This subchapter does not apply
to mobile food vehicles participating in special events sponsored or approved
by the city.



(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 119.223  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any religious,
charitable or nonprofit organization, to operate within the city a mobile
food vehicle without having obtained from the City Clerk a current and valid
license for that purpose.



   (B)   A person or organization desiring to operate a mobile food
vehicle shall make written application for such license to the City Clerk and
shall include the following:



      (1)   Name, signature, phone number, email contact and
business address of the applicant.



      (2)   A description of the preparation methods and food
product offered for sale including the intended menu.



      (3)   Information on the mobile food vehicle to include year,
make, and model of the vehicle and dimensions, which shall not exceed 36 feet
in length or nine feet in width.



      (4)   Information setting forth the proposed hours of
operation, area of operations, plans for power access, water supply and
wastewater disposal.



      (5)   Copies of all necessary license or permits issued by the
Wayne County Health Department.



      (6)   Insurance coverage:



         (a)   Proof of general comprehensive liability policy
with limits of no less than $1,000,000 combined single limit coverage issued
by an insurer licensed to do business in the State of Michigan and which
names the city as an additional insured.



         (b)   Proof of public liability and property damage
motor vehicle policy with limits of no less than $1,000,000 issued by an
insurer licensed to do business in the State of Michigan.



   (C)   All vendors receiving a license under this subchapter shall
pay the annual fee as set from time to time by the City Council.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall issue no more than ten active mobile food
vehicle licenses for any calendar year. Each mobile food vehicle license
shall expire on June 30 of each year.



   (E)   A license issued under this subchapter shall not be
transferable from person to person.



   (F)   A license is valid for one vehicle only and shall not be
transferred between vehicles.



(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 119.224  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No operator of a mobile food vehicle shall park, stand, or
move a vehicle and conduct business in areas of the city where the license
holder has not been authorized to operate. Mobile food vehicles are permitted
in the following locations: public parking spaces and commercial alleyways
fronting and adjacent to Joseph Campau, Conant, Caniff and Holbrook; public
parks as approved by the Department of Community and Economic Development.
Special locations may be authorized from time to time as approved by the
Department of Community and Economic Development after consultation and
approval from the Fire Chief and Police Chief.



   (B)   The customer service area for mobile food vehicles shall be on
the side of the truck that faces a curb, lawn, or sidewalk when parked. No
food service shall be provided on the driving lane side of the truck. No food
shall be prepared, sold, or displayed outside of mobile food vehicles.



   (C)   No mobile food vehicle vendor shall provide or allow any
dining area within ten feet of the mobile food vehicle, including but not
limited to tables and chairs, booths, stools, benches or stand up counters.



   (D)   Customers shall be provided with single service articles such
as plastic utensils and paper plates and a waste container for disposal. All
mobile food vehicle vendors shall offer a waste container for public use
which the vendor shall empty at its own expense. All trash and garbage
originating from the operation of mobile food vehicles shall be collected and
disposed of off-site by the operator(s) each day. Spills of food or food
by-products shall be cleaned up forthwith. No dumping of gray, or waste water
on the streets is permitted.



   (E)   No mobile food vehicle shall make or cause to be made any
unreasonable or excessive noise. The operation of all mobile food vehicles
shall be in compliance with the city noise ordinance, including generators.
No loud music, other high-decibel sounds, horns, or amplified announcements
are permitted.



   (F)   Signage is only allowed when placed on the mobile food
vehicles. No separate freestanding signs are permitted.



   (G)   No flashing or blinking lights, or strobe lights are allowed
on mobile food vehicles or related signage when the vehicle is parked and
engaged in serving customers. All exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain
opaque, hood shields to direct the illumination downward.



   (H)   Mobile food vehicles when parked on public streets shall be
parked in conformance with all applicable parking restrictions, and shall not
hinder the lawful parking or operation of other vehicles.



   (I)   A mobile food vehicle shall not be parked on the street
overnight or left unattended or unsecured at any time food is in the vehicle.
Any mobile food vehicle found to be unattended shall be considered a public
safety hazard and may be ticketed, towed and/or impounded.



   (J)   A vendor shall not operate a mobile food vehicle within 500
feet of any fair, festival, special event or civic event that is licensed and
sanctioned by the city unless the vendor has obtained permission from both
the city and event coordinator.



   (K)   The issuance of a mobile food vehicle license does not grant
or entitle the vendor to the exclusive use of any service route or parking
space.



   (L)   A vendor shall not operate on private property without first
obtaining written consent to operate from the affected private property
owner. A private property owner shall not permit parking by a mobile food
vehicle until a special use permit has been obtained to permit such use.



   (M)   No mobile food vehicle shall use external signage, bollards,
seating or other equipment not contained within the vehicle. When extended,
awnings for mobile food vehicles shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet
between the ground level and the lowest point of the awning or support
structure.



   (N)   Any power required for the mobile food vehicle located on a
public way shall be self- contained and a mobile food vehicle shall not use
utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. Mobile food vehicles on private
property may use electrical power from the property being occupied or an
adjacent property, but only when the property owner provides written consent
to do so. All power sources must be self-contained. No power cable or
equipment shall extend at or across any city street, alley, or sidewalk.



   (O)   Mobile food vehicles shall not be parked within 150 feet of an
existing, brick and mortar restaurant during the hours when such restaurant
is open to the public for business unless the owner has provide written
consent to do so. This does not include LCC establishment where the primary
source of revenue is generated from a source other than dining.



(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 119.225  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any license holder operating a mobile food vehicle in
violation of any provision of this subchapter or any rules and regulations
promulgated by the city shall be subject to a civil fine to be set by City
Council ordinance. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.



   (B)   Once a license has been issued it may be revoked, suspended or
not renewed by the City Clerk for failure to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated by the city.



(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 119.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Restaurants.  Any person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of §§ 119.001 through 119.008, or shall
fail to comply with the same, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $100, together with costs of prosecution,
or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period of not more than 90
days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court
trying the offender. In case any corporation shall be fined under the
provisions of §§ 119.001 through 119.008 it shall be lawful to collect the
fine and costs in an action of assumpsit to be brought in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923)



   (C)   Sale of tainted meat, vegetables and other foodstuffs.



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation convicted of violating
the provisions of §§ 119.050 through 119.053 shall be punished by a fine of
not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of the payment
of the fine and costs, the court may make a further sentence that the
offender by imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of
imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the City Council of city as a
place of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but not longer than
90 days, or, in the discretion of the Court having jurisdiction of the cause,
both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed.



      (2)   In the event that there shall be imposed upon a
corporation any fine and costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any
of the terms of §§ 119.050 through 119.053, then it shall be lawful to
collect the fine and costs, or either, or both, in an action of assumpsit
before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928)



   (D)   Sale of fresh meat or smoked meat.  Every person, firm or
corporation convicted of violating the provisions of §§ 119.065 through
119.075 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court
may make a further sentence that the offender by imprisoned in the Wayne
County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established
by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be
paid, but not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the Court having
jurisdiction of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In
the event that there shall be imposed upon a corporation any fine and costs,
or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§ 119.065
through 119.075, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or
either, or both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)



   (E)   Sale of food to the public in bulk.  Any person, firm,
corporation, copartnership or association convicted of violating any of the
provisions of §§ 119.090 through 119.099 shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of confinement as may be hereafter designated by the
City Council, for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the court. In the event that there shall be
imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or both, for the
violation of any of the terms of §§ 119.090 through 119.099, then it shall
be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or both, in an action of
assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)



   (F)   Sale of food supplies and food product at retail.  Every
person, firm, corporation, association or copartnership who or which shall
violate or fail to comply with the provisions of §§ 119.110 through 119.114
shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100
and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and
costs, the court may make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned
in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be
hereafter designated by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the
fine and costs be paid, but not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of
the court having jurisdiction of the cause, both the fine and imprisonment
may be imposed. In the event that there shall be imposed upon a corporation
any fine and costs, or either, or both, for the violation or failure to
comply with the terms of §§ 119.110 through 119.114, it shall be lawful to
collect the fine and costs, or either, or both, in an action of assumpsit
before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)



   (G)   Poultry.  Any violation of or failure to comply with the
provisions of §§ 119.155 through 119.172 shall be punished by a fine of not
to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the city
prison, Wayne County Jail, or any workhouse in the state authorized to
receive prisoners from the city, for not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)



   (H)   Bakery.  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of §§ 119.185  through 119.188 or fail to comply
with the same shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $100 or by imprisonment far not more than 90 days in the Wayne
County Jail, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court. In case of the conviction of any corporation of the violation of the
terms of §§ 119.185 through 119.188, the amount of the fine and costs
imposed upon a conviction, together with the costs of same, may be collected
in an action of assumpsit in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925)



   (I)   Food handler card.  Any person, firm, association or
corporation, who violates any of the provisions of §§ 119.200 through
119.203 shall be prosecuted and upon conviction of the violation shall be
guilty of misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of $100 or
by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of confinement as
may be hereafter, establishment by the City Council, not exceeding 90 days,
or both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court having
jurisdiction of the cause.



(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)



CHAPTER 120:  HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS AND HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SOLICITORS



Section



   120.001   Purpose



   120.002   Definitions



   120.003   License required



   120.004   Application



   120.005   Investigation



   120.006   License fees



   120.007   Identification requirement



   120.008   Transfer of license



   120.009   Revocation of license



   120.010   Appeal



   120.011   Distribution



   120.012   Exemptions



 



   120.999   Penalty



§ 120.001  PURPOSE.



   To protect the people against the nuisance of, and incident to, the
promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial
handbills, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and
safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the
regulation thereof, and to that end the purposes of this chapter are
specifically declared to be as follows:



   (A)   To protect the people against the unlawful activities or
operations of solicitors or handbill distributors, by requiring the
registration of all such solicitors or handbill distributors, together with
the names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and
advertising distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees;



   (B)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors
or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they
have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such
persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter;



   (C)   To protect the people against the health and safety menace and
the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and
commercial handbills;



   (D)   To preserve to the people their constitutional right to
receive and disseminate information by distinguishing between the nuisance
created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial
circulars and the right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are
willing to receive the same.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.002  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   DISTRIBUTE.  The act of handing out or delivering handbills or samples
to any structure within the city limits whether or not the handbill or sample
is affixed to that structure in some way or packaged in some manner in a box,
container, envelop, bag or like covering.



   HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.



   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person engaging or engaged in the business
for hire or gain of distributing samples or handbills, other than newspapers
distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation
directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbill.



   HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SOLICITOR.  Any person, whether a resident of the city
or not, traveling either by foot or any type of conveyance from place to
place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to
take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such
individual is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such
sale or whether such individual is collecting advance payments on such sales
or not.



   NEWSPAPER.  Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law;
and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and
sold to the public.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any dwelling house, building, or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes,
alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
plazas, grounds and buildings.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.003  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
house-to-house solicitor or a handbill distributor, as previously defined
without first having obtained a license therefore; provided, that nothing
contained herein shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or
activity upon his or her own premises, if such business or activity is
regularly established at a definite location in the city, and also if a
license has been obtained therefor, if such license be required under the
terms of any applicable law or ordinance.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 120.004  APPLICATION.



   Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Clerk a
sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Clerk, which
shall provide the following information:



   (A)   Name and description of applicant.



   (B)   Address (legal and local).



   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business.



   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer.



   (E)   The approximate number of employees or agents so to be engaged.



   (F)   Such other information as may be required by the Clerk.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.005  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such application for a license under this
chapter, the original shall be referred to the Police Department for
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as
deemed necessary for the protection of the public good.  GOOD MORAL
CHARACTER shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of the person
to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest, and open manner,
to be determined as provided in Public Act No. 381 of 1974 (M.C.L.A. 338.41
et seq.).



   (B)   If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character
or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application such disapproval and such reasons for the
same, and return the application to the Clerk, who shall notify the applicant
that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.



   (C)   If as a result of such investigation the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall endorse on the application such approval and return the
application so endorsed to the Clerk. If the application shall be the initial
application for a license by the applicant, such application shall be
referred to the City Manager, and if the City Manager shall determine that
such applicant is a suitable, reputable and desirable person to engage in the
business for which the application for a license has been filed, and that the
business to be conducted thereunder is not detrimental to public safety,
health and welfare, the City Manager, by appropriate action, shall approve
such application; otherwise, the application shall be denied.  Reputable and
desirable person to engage in the business for which the application for a
license has been filed, and that the business to be conducted thereunder is
not detrimental to public safety, health and welfare, the City Manager, by
appropriate action, shall approve such application; otherwise, the
application shall be denied.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.006  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Upon approval of any application for a license under this
chapter, the Clerk shall issue the required license.



   (B)   The fees for any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter or any renewal thereof, shall be as currently established or as
hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time.



   (C)   The license fees shall be payable to the City Clerk upon
approval of the license application.



   (D)   For all licenses issued for a handbill distributor or
house-to-house solicitor, such license shall be valid for use from 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m., local time, whichever occurs first, excluding any time on
Sundays and the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of
July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.007  IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the requirement of the licensee to provide each
handbill distributor or house-to-house solicitor or licensed under this
chapter a company identification card of which indicates the year for which
the license was issued. In addition, the full legible name of the handbill
distributor or house-to-house solicitor shall also be present on the company
identification card. The card must be carried and visible at all times upon
the handbill distributor or house-to-house solicitor so licensed.  In
addition, the card must be displayed upon the request of any officer of the
Police Department or customer.



   (B)   Each day, or series of consecutive days limited to a maximum
of five consecutive days, that distribution of handbills is to be made within
the city, the licensee or his or her agent shall first register with the
Police Department and shall provide the Department with the following
information:



      (1)   The name under which the license is issued.



      (2)   The license number.



      (3)   The agent's name.



      (4)   The address and the telephone number at which the
licensee or his or her agent or the person in charge of the distribution may
be reached during the period of distribution.



      (5)   The number of handbill distributors at work in the city
and their respective names and addresses.



      (6)   The length of time required to complete the distribution.



      (7)   Such other information as may be required by the Police
Department from time to time to properly enforce this chapter.



   (C)   Persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the
distributing of handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a
fee, but each person shall comply with each and all of the other provisions
hereof, and be subject thereto.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 120.008  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to or used by
a person other than the one to whom it was issued.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 120.009  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
City Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:



   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.



   (C)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course
of carrying on the business as handbill distributor or house-to-house
solicitor.



   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.



   (F)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.



   (G)   No refund of any license fee shall be made upon the
revocation, cancellation or surrender of a license.



   (H)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at the licensee's last known address at least ten days prior to
the date set for hearing.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.010  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Clerk or the Chief
of Police in the denial of a license applied for under this chapter shall
have the right of appeal to and a hearing before the City Manager.



   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Manager,
within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to
such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal. The City Manager shall set a time and place for a
hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant in the same manner as provided in §120.009(H) for notice of
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the City Manager in such
appeal shall be final and conclusive.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.011  DISTRIBUTION.



   (A)   Distributing in public places.  It shall be unlawful for any
person, house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor to deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any public place within the
city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person,
house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor to hand out or distribute,
without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill in any public place to
any person willing to accept the same.



   (B)   Placing in vehicles.  It shall be unlawful for any person, to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon
any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be
deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill
to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is
willing to accept the same.



   (C)   Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises.  It
shall be unlawful for any person, house-to-house solicitor or handbill
distributor to knowingly distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast
any handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.



   (D)   Distribution on inhabited private premises.  No person,
house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor licensed under the
provisions of this chapter, or any other person, shall distribute, deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises
which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon
such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, the aforesaid
licensed or other person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not
to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited
private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or
prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or
elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by
federal postal laws or regulations.



   (E)   Prohibiting distribution where properly posted.  It shall be
unlawful for any person, house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill upon any
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed
on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign
bearing the words: “No Handbills,” “No Solicitors,” or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have
any such handbills left upon such premises. Signs prohibiting distribution
where properly posted shall be no larger than 12 inches by three inches in
dimension and letters shall not be smaller than one inch.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 120.012  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, nor to
handbills primarily or solely pertaining to religious, social or political
activities, when distributed without monetary charge.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 120.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.999.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      133.   WEAPONS



      134.   MINORS



      135.   PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



Disorderly Conduct



   130.001   Definitions



   130.002   Acts prohibited



   130.003   Authority to question



   130.004   Unauthorized persons on school property



   130.005   Loitering



   130.006   Ticket scalping



   130.007   Conduct in parking areas



   130.008   Domestic violence



   130.009   Solicitation



Nuisances



   130.025   Nuisance defined and prohibited



   130.026   Dangerous structures and premises



   130.027   Graffiti



   130.028   Trash



   130.029   Incomplete construction



   130.030   Animal nuisances



   130.031   Abandoned refrigerators



   130.032   Drive-in restaurants



   130.033   Landfills



Noise Control



   130.050   Applicability



   130.051   Definitions



   130.052   General prohibition



   130.053   Specific prohibitions



   130.054   Maximum permissible sound levels



   130.055   Limited exemptions



   130.056   General exemptions



   130.057   Temporary exemptions



   130.058   Variances



   130.059   Liability of owner, lessee or occupant



Fires



   130.075   False alarm of fire



   130.076   Obstructing and disobeying Fire Department officers in
line of duty



Telephone Harassment



   130.090   Repeated calling prohibited



   130.091   Threatening, vulgar or insulting language over telephone
prohibited



 



   130.999   Penalty



DISORDERLY CONDUCT



§ 130.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LOITER.  To stand or recline in one place or to move slowly about.



   MASCULINE PRONOUNS.  Construed to include both male and female persons.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, alley, park, government-owned or
government-controlled building, common hallway or public room or any dwelling
of greater than two units, or any other place to which the public has lawful
access.



§ 130.002  ACTS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall:



   (A)   Commit an assault, or an assault and battery, upon any person.



   (B)   Be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger directly
the safety of another person or of property.



   (C)   Be present in any public place with his or her ability to
walk, talk or see significantly impaired by the use of any controlled
substance, as defined by Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, provided,
however, that this division shall not be construed to apply to a person whose
faculties have been impaired by medication prescribed by a physician and
taken as directed.



   (D)   Knowingly prowl about premises owned or leased by another in
the nighttime without the express or implied consent of that person.



   (E)   Knowingly go upon property owned or leased by another and peep
through the window of a building on that property at any person without the
express or implied consent of that person.



   (F)    Engage in any fight in a public place.



   (G)   Remain in any public place after its regular closing hours
after being told to leave by one authorized to give such an order.



   (H)   Conduct himself or herself in any public place, or join with
one or more other persons in a public place, if he or she knows or should
know that, singly or together with the others with whom he or she has joined,
he or she is unreasonably obstructing the free and uninterrupted passage of
the public along any street or sidewalk, provided that this division is not
to be interpreted to conflict with the regulations of the National Labor
Relations Board regarding picketing in labor disputes. A violation of this
division shall constitute a civil infraction, which shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $100 and costs.



   (I)    Persist in disturbing the public peace and quiet by loud or
aggressive conduct, having once been clearly informed by persons affected
that he or she is, in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance,
provided, however, that notice need not be given when such persons affected
reasonably believe that to do so would constitute a risk to their personal
safety.



   (J)   Persist in disturbing the peace and orderly conduct of any
meeting of a public body or any meeting open to the general public by any
conduct or communication which, by its very existence, inflicts injury or
tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace or which prevents the
peaceful and orderly conduct of such meeting after having been clearly
informed that he or she is, in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance.



   (K)   Solicit or accost any other person in a public place for the
purpose of inducing participation in an act of prostitution.



   (L)   Transport any person, for consideration, to a place where the
business of prostitution, gambling or the illegal sale of liquor is carried
on, for the purpose of enabling such person to be a customer of any such
business.



   (M)   Knowingly harass any other person. HARASS is defined as any
repeated non-verbal conduct which is specifically intended to frighten,
embarrass or anger the person or persons who are the object of such conduct
or which the person accused has reason to know is likely to produce such
reactions, or as any repeated verbal communications which, by its very
utterance, inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of peace.



   (N)    Knowingly permit a person in any place owned or controlled by
him or her to disturb the public peace by loud or boisterous conduct.



   (O)    Knowingly obstruct or resist any member of the Police force
or Fire Department in the discharge of the officer’s lawful duties or fail
to obey the lawful order of said officer, knowing the officer to be a member
of the Police force or Fire Department.



   (P)   Urinate or defecate on any public street or sidewalk or on the
floor of that part of any building open to the public or any other place in
view of the public not specifically designated for that purpose.



   (Q)   Throw any object from any moving vehicle or toward any person
or moving vehicle if he or she knows or should know that damage to person or
property, or alarm, which may foreseeably produce damage to person or
property, is likely to result.



   (R)   Commit the offense of larceny by taking any property not his
or her own and to which he or she has no claim or right with the intent
permanently to deprive the owner of lawful possession or receive or possess
any such property, knowing the same to be stolen.



   (S)    Knowingly destroy, damage, deface or remove any public
property or other property not his or her own.



   (T)   Summon, without any good reason therefor, by telephone or
otherwise, the Police or Fire Department, any public or private ambulance or
any other service of any kind to go to any address where the service called
for is not needed.



   (U)   Knowingly take possession of and ride or take away any bicycle
without the express or implied permission of the owner.



   (V)   Telephone, visit or otherwise communicate with any person
repeatedly or cause the same to be done for the primary purpose of harassing
such other person or his or her family.



   (W)   Engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place.



   (X)   Make any indecent exposure of his or her person in a public
place. Breastfeeding shall not be considered indecent exposure under this
section.



   (Y)   Make or maintain an operating connection to public utility or
cable television facilities without the permission of the owner of such
facilities.



   (Z)   When in proximity to a fire or other hazard, refuse or
knowingly fail to obey a reasonable official request or order to move for the
purpose of maintaining public safety.



   (AA)    Fail to accurately identify himself or herself when
requested to do so by a police officer after the officer observes that person
commit a civil infraction or when the officer has probable cause to believe
the person has committed a misdemeanor outside the officer’s presence.



   (BB)    While a spectator in a sport stadium, pass or assist in
passing any person, with or without that person’s consent, above spectators
in the stadium.



   (CC)   Maintain a cigarette vending machine at any location which is
open to the public.



   (DD)   While in a store or in its immediate vicinity do any of the
following:



      (1)   While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer,
remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale.



      (2)   While a store is open to the public, steal property of
the store that is offered for sale.



      (3)   With the intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain
money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that
was not paid for and belongs to the store.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.003  AUTHORITY TO QUESTION.



   Under circumstances where a police officer has good reason to believe
that any individual has committed or is about to commit any unlawful act, the
officer may ask the individual to identify himself or herself and explain his
or her presence on the scene, but failure to respond to such questioning
shall not constitute an offense; provided, however, that this section shall
not be construed to affect any obligation to respond which is otherwise
imposed by law.



§ 130.004  UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private,
public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds, or on fields
or recreational areas or other grounds lawfully used for school activities
while such activities are in progress, shall leave immediately when so
directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal.



   (B)   No person shall enter and remain in any public, private or
parochial school building during regular or special sessions or other
authorized activities of such schools, who is not a regularly enrolled
student, teacher, authorized volunteer or other school district employee,
unless he or she shall have first and immediately proceeded to the
administrative offices and identified himself or herself to the principal or
the principal’s designee.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any
public, private or parochial school, or on surrounding school grounds within
250 feet of the school building, after being requested to leave by the
principal or his or her designee.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.005  LOITERING.



   (A)   No person shall loiter on a public street, sidewalk or the
premises of a public building under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety or health of any person or property in the vicinity.



   (B)   The following are circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether alarm is warranted:



      (1)   The person is one of a group of people threatening,
making threatening gestures at or otherwise menacing persons in the area.



      (2)   The person appears to be illegally consuming or using or
concealing illegal consumption or use of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances.



      (3)   The person is one of a group which is blocking the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicle traffic on a street or sidewalk.



   (C)   Prior to arrest for an offense under this section, a police
officer shall afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted by requesting such person to identify himself or
herself and explaining his or her presence and conduct or by requesting him
or her to leave the area.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.006  TICKET SCALPING.



   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale upon a public street or
other public place, a ticket to a theatre, circus, athletic grounds, or place
of public entertainment or amusement, at a price in excess of that demanded
or received from the general public for the same privilege, or in excess of
the advertised or printed rate unless the owner, lessee, operator, or manager
of the place of public entertainment or amusement permits, in writing, a
charge in excess of the box office price.



   (B)   If the owner, lessee, operator, or manager of a circus,
theatre, athletic grounds, or place of public entertainment or amusement has
sold a ticket or admission to a person under restrictive conditions and at a
less rate than the general admission charged, and whose name appears on the
face of the tickets or is registered in the office of the owner, lessee,
operator, or manager as the holder of the ticket and if it is printed on the
face of the ticket that the ticket is nontransferable and sold only to the
person whose name appears on the face of the ticket or whose name is
registered, the holder of the ticket shall not sell the ticket to another
person.



   (C)   A violation of this section shall be a civil infraction
subject to a civil fine of $25.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.007  CONDUCT IN PARKING AREAS.



   No person while within any public parking area or structure shall do
any of the following:



   (A)   Possess liquor in an open or uncapped container.



   (B)   Consume liquor.



   (C)   Start, maintain or assist in starting or maintaining any fire
except as may be necessary to light a cigarette, cigar or pipe.



   (D)   Remain inside or outside a vehicle for more than five minutes
except when going to and from a vehicle located within the public parking
area or structure and used by and for that person for transportation.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.008  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.



   (A)   A police officer shall arrest a person when the officer has
reasonable cause to believe that person has, within the previous 24 hours,
assaulted a spouse, former spouse or other person residing or having resided
in the same household, if the victim has visible signs of injury from the
assault or if the assailant used or threaten to use a dangerous weapon (as
defined in M.C.L.A. § 750.82). The obligation to arrest shall exist only if
the assailant is present or can be readily apprehended. A threat with a
weapon is covered by this section only if it is made at or about the time of
the assault, if the weapon is present and if there is an apparent ability to
use it.



   (B)   When an arrest is made pursuant to division (B), prior to the
release of the assailant, the Police Department shall make a reasonable
effort to notify the victim and shall notify a SAFE House volunteer.



   (C)   When an officer responds to a complaint concerning an assault
by a person having the relationship described in division (A), the officer
shall provide the complainant a written statement indicating the officer’s
name, badge number, report number and follow-up telephone number.



   (D)   When an officer acts in good faith and exercises due care in
making an arrest pursuant to division (A), the city shall indemnify, defend
and hold the officer harmless as to any civil liability.



   (E)   This does not apply to assaults between parents or guardians
and their children or wards who are under 18 years of age.



§ 130.009  SOLICITATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit the immediate payment of
money or goods from another person, whether or not in exchange for goods,
services, or other consideration, under any of the following circumstances:



   (A)   On private property unless the solicitor has permission from
the owner or occupant;



   (B)   In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation
facility;



   (C)   In any public parking structure and within 12 feet of any
entrance or exit to any public parking structure;



   (D)   From a person who is in any vehicle on the street;



   (E)   By obstructing the free passage of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic;



   (F)   Within 12 feet of a bank or automated teller machine;



   (G)   By moving to within two feet of the person solicited, unless
that person has indicated that he/she wishes to be solicited;



   (H)   By following and continuing to solicit a person who walks away
from the solicitor;



   (I)   By knowingly making a false or misleading representation in
the course of a solicitation;



   (J)   In a manner that appears likely to cause a reasonable person
of ordinary sensibilities to feel intimidated, threatened or harassed;



   (K)   Within 12 feet of the entrance to or exit from the Nickels
Arcade, located between State Street and Maynard Street; the Galleria,
located between S. University and the Forest Street parking structure; and
the Pratt Building, located between Main Street and the Ashley parking lot; or



   (L)   From a person who is a patron at any outdoor café or
restaurant.



NUISANCES



§ 130.025  NUISANCE DEFINED AND PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health,
comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with,
obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream;
or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be
limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person
shall commit, create, or maintain any nuisance.



   (B)   Restrictions, prohibitions, and penalties hereunder, may be in
addition to those already provided for under this code.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.026  DANGEROUS STRUCTURES AND PREMISES.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall maintain any structure which is a
menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. No person owning or
occupying any premises shall permit any condition to exist thereon which
endangers the public health or safety.



   (B)   Emergency abatement.  The City Manager may abate any such
public nuisance, if the public safety or health requires immediate action,
without preliminary order of the Council. Thereafter, the cost of abating
such nuisance shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.027  GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and means any mark or
marks on any surface or structure made without the prior permission of the
property owner and made in any manner, including but not limited to, writing,
inscribing, drawing, tagging, sketching, spray-painting, painting, etching,
scratching, carving, engraving, scraping, or attaching. Chalk marks on
sidewalks are not graffiti. Graffiti does not include any posting of posters.



   (B)   No person shall apply graffiti to any surface or structure. 
A violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable by one or more
of the following:



      (1)   Community service that is as relevant and appropriate to
the violation as possible;



      (2)   Restitution; and/or



      (3)   A fine of not more than $500 plus costs.



   (C)   No person who owns or otherwise controls or manages any
property shall permit or allow any graffiti to be or remain on any surface or
structure on the property beyond the time indicated in a notice, which shall
be no less than seven calendar days after the notice is posted on the
property or delivered to the property owner and no less than nine calendar
days if the notice is mailed. If removal of the graffiti by the date set in
the notice is not possible due to weather or other reasonable cause, then on
or before the date set in the notice the person to whom the notice is issued
or his or her agent shall contact the city as indicated in the notice to
request an extension. Removal of graffiti may be by means of actual physical
removal or covering the graffiti over with paint or other similar substance
applied to the surface or structure.  A violation of this division is not a
civil infraction or a misdemeanor.



   (D)   Notice by the city to remove graffiti from a property may be
made by mailing it to the property owner, as shown on assessment records,
delivering it to the owner or posting it at a conspicuous place on the
property.



   (E)   If any graffiti remains on the property beyond the time
indicated in a notice, then the city may remove the graffiti or have it
removed in any reasonable manner. The costs to the city for removal and
administration shall be charged to the owner and, if not paid, assessed
against the property.



   (F)   The victim may proceed with any private right of action
provided under law against a person who has applied graffiti or the parent or
guardian of a minor.



§ 130.028  TRASH.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EXTERIOR.  Any area of property outside a fully enclosed and
covered building, except in refuse containers.



      TRASH.  Refuse, garbage and rubbish, as well as scrap materials,
including, but not limited to, wrecked or scrapped vehicles, rags, paper
products, scrap metal, used appliances, scrap plumbing supplies, or parts of
any of the foregoing or similar property.



   (B)   Prohibition of trash accumulation.  No person owning or
occupying property in the city shall fail to keep the exterior area of that
property free from accumulations of trash. Violation of this section 
constitutes a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $100 for
the first offense, not less than $250 and up to $500 for the second offense,
and not less than $500 and up to $1,000 for each additional or subsequent
offense within a two-year time period, plus costs and all other remedies
available by statute. The maximum fine for any offense shall not exceed
$1,000. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (C)   Removal of trash by city.  If property is not cleared of
trash in violation of § 130.029 within ten days after notice is sent to the
owner as indicated on records of the City Assessor and, if occupied, to the
address of the property, the city may remove or have removed the trash from
the premises. Prior to or during removal of the trash, the items removed
shall be photographed and, to the extent possible, inventoried. All items
having an apparent value of less than $20 may be immediately deposited in the
city landfill. Items having an apparent value of $20 or more each shall be
stored for five days prior to disposal or sale. The reasonable cost of the
removal, storage and disposal of the trash shall be charged to the owner and
assessed against the property.



   (D)   Stored items.  Items removed and stored by the city pursuant
to this chapter will be released to the owner of the premises from which they
were removed upon payment of reasonable storage and removal charges.



   (D)   Court orders.  Upon the request of the City Manager, the City
Attorney or his or her designee may commence suit in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction to obtain an order requiring a property owner or occupant to
comply with this chapter.



§ 130.029  INCOMPLETE CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Incomplete construction is any form of unfinished exterior
construction, including excavations, on which there has been no substantial
construction activity for at least six months.



   (B)   An owner of real estate containing incomplete construction
shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Each day such a nuisance
exists constitutes a separate offense. Each offense is punishable by a fine
of up to $500.



   (C)   An incomplete construction nuisance may be abated pursuant to
an order of the City Council. The cost of such abatement shall be charged
against the property.



   (D)   The City Manager may authorize the continuation of incomplete
construction for an additional period of up to six months. Such permission
shall be conditioned on the posting of a cash bond or letter of credit. The
form of such security must be approved by the City Attorney. The amount of
the security shall not be less than the Building Director’s estimate of the
cost of removal of the construction and restoration of the property.



§ 130.030  ANIMAL NUISANCES.



   No person shall keep, house, or maintain one or more animals that
constitutes a public nuisance as defined in this chapter. A person who
violates this section is subject to prosecution of the violation in the
District Court and/or a civil nuisance action in the County Circuit Court.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.031  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any
building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any
kind which has an air-tight door, or lock which may not be released for
opening from the inside of said ice box, refrigerator or container.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any
building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any
kind which has an air-tight snap-lock or other device thereon without first
removing the snap-lock or doors from the ice box, refrigerator or container.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.032  DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  Any establishment where food, frozen
dessert and/or beverage is sold to the consumer, and where motor vehicle
parking space is provided and where such food, frozen dessert, and/or
beverage is intended to be consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the
premises or anywhere on the premises outside the building as well as inside
the building. 



      WASTE MATERIAL.  Paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage,
beverages, and all other waste matter intended for disposal, which, if not
placed in a proper receptacle, tends to create a public nuisance by rendering
property unclean, unsafe, and unsightly. 



   (B)   Owner not to maintain nuisance.  It shall be unlawful for any
owner, manager or person in charge of any drive-in restaurant to cause,
create, allow or maintain any nuisance on its parking area whereby the peace,
good order, or sanitation of the neighborhood is disturbed, or persons owning
or occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.



   (C)   Premises free from refuse.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or person in
charge of the drive-in restaurant, to keep the premises whereon the drive-in
restaurant is located, together with the parking area and that portion of any
alley adjoining the drive-in restaurant, free from their own waste material.
Each drive-in restaurant shall be provided with a sufficient number of
containers of legal type and size.



      (2)  No person shall place, throw, or deposit any waste material
upon the outside premises or parking lot of a drive-in restaurant or upon any
street, alley, or property adjoining a drive-in restaurant, except in proper
receptacles provided for that purpose.



   (D)   Intoxicating liquors.  No person, on the premises of a
drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of a motor vehicle, shall consume,
knowingly have in his possession or under his control, any beer, wine, or
intoxicating liquor. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or person in
charge of the premises to post a notice of this provision in a conspicuous
place at the entrance of the premises.



   (E)   Noise and disturbances by patrons.  No person or persons on
the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any vehicle,
needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn,
or make or cause to be made any loud or raucous noise, nuisance or
disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the
neighborhood is disturbed.



   (F)   Driving through.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any motor vehicle to drive through or upon any driveway or parking lot used
in conjunction with any drive-in restaurant, without stopping and making, or
attempting to make, a purchase.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.033  LANDFILLS.



   (A)   Private landfills; filling of another’s land.  No person
shall fill any land owned by another person without the permission of the
other person or his or her agent.



   (B)   Condition of landfills.  No person owning or controlling any
land which is open to public view or access, shall fill, or cause or permit
any other to fill, such land unless such owner or person controlling such
land keeps the surface free of litter, refuse, waste, junk or other noxious
or unsightly material. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply to
construction sites where work is progressing under a city building permit.



Penalty, see § 130.999



NOISE CONTROL



§ 130.050  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter apply to all sources of sound except
motor vehicles (as defined in the State Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 P.A. 300
(M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 et seq.) in operation on a public right-of-way; aircraft
in flight or in operation at an airport; and railroad equipment in operation
on railroad rights-of-way.



§ 130.051  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   dB(A).  The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a
calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighting scale and the
fast meter response, as specified in American National Standards Institute
standard S 1.4-1971.



   COMMERCIAL.  A use of the property for purposes other than residential.



   PROPERTY LINE.  The imaginary line which represents the legal limits
of property (including an apartment, condominium, room, or other dwelling
unit) owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation
or institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street
or other public right-of-way, the PROPERTY LINE shall be the nearest boundary
of the public right-of-way.



   RESIDENTIAL.  A legal use of property for temporary or permanent
dwelling purposes.



§ 130.052  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating,
permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud,
disturbing, unusual or unnecessary noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the
limits of the city.



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.053  SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The following activities are prohibited if they produce
clearly audible sound beyond the property line of the property on which they
are conducted:



      (1)   The operation, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of
power tools or equipment.



      (2)   The operation, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any
device for killing, trapping, attracting, or repelling insects or other pests.



      (3)   The sounding, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any
bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, except:



         (a)   To alert persons to the existence of an emergency,
danger or attempted crime; or



         (b)   As provided in § 130.055(E).



      (4)   The operation or playing between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. of any radio, television, phonograph, drum or musical instrument.



      (5)   Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling
or excavation work at any time on Sunday and between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Monday through Saturday, except as permitted by § 130.055(B).



      (6)   The operation or use between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of
any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, public address system or similar device
used to amplify sounds.



      (7)   The creation of a loud, unnecessary noise in connection
with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and closing or
destruction of bales, boxes, crates, or other containers.



      (8)   The use of any drums, loud-speakers, musical devices or
other instruments or devices for the purpose of attracting attention by the
creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise.



      (9)   A noise nuisance after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m.



      (10)   The creation of loud, unnecessary noise by fireworks
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless in conflict with state
laws and statutes. Permissible uses of fireworks are defined by the fireworks
ordinance in Chapter 91 of this Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   The prohibitions of this section apply even if the sound level
produced by a prohibited activity does not exceed the applicable level
specified in § 130.054.



(Ord. 2013-113, passed 5-28-2013)  Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.054  MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS.



   No person shall conduct or permit any activity that produces a dB(A)
beyond his or her property line exceeding the levels specified. Where
property is used for both residential and commercial purposes, the
residential sound levels shall be used only for measurements made on the
portion of the property used solely for residential purposes.



 


Use of Property Receiving the Sound

 

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

 

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



Residential
 

61

 

55



Commercial
 

71

 

61



All limited expressed in dB(A)



 



Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.055  LIMITED EXEMPTIONS.



   The following limited activities are exempted from the sound level
limitations of § 130.054:



   (A)   Operation of power equipment.  Operation, between 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m., of power equipment that does not produce a sound level
exceeding 90 dB(A) beyond the property line of the property on which the
equipment is operated.



   (B)   Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling, wood
cutting or excavation work. Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition,
drilling, wood cutting or excavation work conducted between 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, except legal holidays, which does not
produce a sound level exceeding 105 dB(A) beyond the property line of the
property on which the work is being conducted. Also, a person may engage in
such activities at his residence between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays.



   (C)   Loud speakers, sound amplifiers, public address systems. 
Operation or use, for any noncommercial purpose, of any loud-speaker, sound
amplifier, public address system, or similar device to amplify spoken words
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. This exemption applies to the use or
operation of mechanical loud-speakers on or from motor vehicles only if a
specific permit for the activity has been granted by the City Council. The
City Council shall cause such a permit to issue when it finds the following:



      (1)   The applicant has a noncommercial message that cannot be
effectively communicated to the public by the other means of communication
available.



      (2)   The applicant will limit the use of the loud-speakers to
times, locations and sound levels which will not unreasonably disturb the
public peace.



      (3)   The applicant will not use the equipment in residential
areas between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (D)   Killing, trapping, attracting, or repelling insects or other
pests.  The operation between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any device for
killing, trapping, attracting, or repelling insects or other pests which does
not produce a sound level exceeding 83 dB(A) beyond the property line of the
property on which the device is operated.



   (E)   Bells or chimes.  The use for noncommercial purposes of one
or more bells or chimes which does not exceed 90 seconds in duration in an
hour.



   (F)   Carillon playing.  Carillon playing between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.



   (G)   Musical instruments.  Playing or practicing with a single
musical instrument between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. without electric
amplification for not more than one hour a day that does not produce a sound
level in excess of 67 dB(A) beyond the property line of the property on which
the instrument is used.



   (H)   Call to prayer and church bells.  The city shall permit
“call to prayer,” “church bells” and other reasonable means of
announcing religious meetings to be amplified between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. for duration not to exceed five minutes:



      (1)   The city shall have the sole authority to set the level
of amplification, provided, however, that no such level shall be enforced
until all religious institutions receive notice of the levels; and



      (2)   All complaints regarding alleged violations of this
section shall be filed with the City Clerk and placed on the agenda of the
next regular meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall take all
appropriate action it deems necessary to alleviate the complaints, with the
action to include, but not be limited to, an order to terminate use of
amplification. If the City Council deems that the means of announcing
religious meetings must be reduced, the Council shall amend this section of
the subchapter. The Council may also determine that a complaint is without
justification and choose to take no action on the complaint; if the
determination is made, the decision shall be made by resolution of the City
Council.



(Ord. 2008-2, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 130.056  GENERAL EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following activities are exempted from the sound level
limitations of § 130.054:



      (1)    Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster. To restore public
utilities, or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.



      (2)    Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an
emergency, danger, or attempted crime.



      (3)   Activities or operations of governmental units or
agencies.



      (4)   Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar
activities subject to any sound limits in the approval by the city.



      (5)   Athletic, musical, or cultural activities or events
(including practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of
public or private schools, and public or private colleges or universities.



   (B)   The following activities are exempted from the requirements of
§ 130.053:



      (1)   Regular activities or operations of governmental units
or agencies provided the activity is approved in advance and in writing by
both the department head or agency director and the City Manager.



      (2)    Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster or to restore public
utilities, or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.



      (3)   Devices or activity creating sound made to alert persons
to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime.



      (4)   Equipment and activities creating sound from the
collection of solid waste, within the Downtown District, after 6:00 a.m. and
before 10:00 p.m.



§ 130.057  TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to grant a temporary exemption
from the maximum permissible sound levels established by this subchapter if
such temporary exemption would be in the public interest and there is no
feasible and prudent alternative to the activity, or the method of conducting
the activity, for which the temporary exemption is sought.



   (B)   The following factors shall be considered by the City Manager
in determining whether to grant a temporary exemption:



      (1)   The balance of the hardship to the applicant, the
community and other persons in not granting the variance against the adverse
impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons adversely affected and
any other adverse effects of the granting of the variance.



      (2)   The nearness of any residence or residences, or any
other use which would be adversely affected by sound in excess of the limits
prescribed by this subchapter.



      (3)   The level of the sound to be generated by the event or
activity.



      (4)   Whether the type of sound to be produced by the event or
activity is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the variance
is requested.



      (5)   The density of population of the area in which the event
or activity is to take place.



      (6)   The time of day or night which the activity or event
will take place.



      (7)   The nature of the sound to be produced, including but
not limited to, whether the sound will be steady, intermittent, impulsive, or
repetitive.



   (C)   A temporary exemption must be in writing and signed by the
City Manager or his or her appointed representative and must set forth the
name of the party granted the exemption, the location of the property for
which it is authorized, the date(s) and time(s) for which it is effective and
the dB(A) level(s) authorized.



   (D)   A temporary exemption may be granted only for the period of
time that is reasonably necessary to conduct the activity, which in no case
may exceed 30 days.



§ 130.058  VARIANCES.



   Persons wishing to continue activities which commenced prior to this
subchapter and which create noise in excess of the permitted levels may seek
a variance from the Building Board of Appeals. A variance may be granted if
the Board finds that strict application of this subchapter would cause a
hardship and that there is no reasonable and prudent alternative method of
engaging in the activity.



§ 130.059  LIABILITY OF OWNER, LESSEE, OR OCCUPANT.



   If the person responsible for an activity which violates this
subchapter cannot be determined, the owner, lessee or occupant of the
property on which the activity is located shall be deemed responsible for the
violation. A person found responsible under this section shall be guilty of a
civil infraction punishable by a fine of $50 to $500 plus costs. For a second
offense within a two-year period, the fine shall be $100 to $500 plus costs.
For third and subsequent offenses within a two-year period, the fine shall be
$200 to $500 plus costs.




FIRES




§ 130.075  FALSE ALARM OF FIRE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to knowingly and
wilfully raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place,
or to ring any bell or operate any public or private mechanical, electrical
apparatus or any type or device of communication, or combination thereof for
the purpose of creating a false alarm, or to raise a false alarm of fire
orally, by telephone or any type or device of communication.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 289, passed 3-17-1964)  Penalty, see
§ 130.999



§ 130.076  OBSTRUCTING AND DISOBEYING FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS IN LINE OF
DUTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and
wilfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any Fire Department officers in
the performance of his or her duties, or who shall, while in the vicinity of
any fire, wilfully disobey any reasonable order, rule or regulation of the
officer commanding any Fire Department at a fire, under penalty of not to
exceed $500 fine or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)  Penalty, see § 130.999




TELEPHONE HARASSMENT




§ 130.090  REPEATED CALLING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to telephone any other
person repeatedly or curse any person to be telephoned repeatedly for the
sole purpose of harassing or molesting the other person or his or her family,
whether or not conversation ensues, except for telephone calls made for
legitimate business purposes.



(Ord. 288, passed 3-3-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.091  THREATENING, VULGAR OR INSULTING LANGUAGE OVER TELEPHONE
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use any threatening,
vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting language over any telephone.



(Ord. 288, passed 3-3-1964)  Penalty, see § 130.999



§ 130.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Nuisances.  Except as otherwise specifically provided,
violations of any provision of §§ 130.025 through 130.033 shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500. If the penalty for §§ 130.031
is not paid within 45 days, it may be assessed against the parcel.



   (C)   Noise control. Except as provided in § 130.059, an activity
which violates §§ 130.050 through 130.059 shall be punishable by a fine of
$50 to $500 plus costs. For a second offense within a two-year period, the
fine shall be $100 to $500 plus costs. For third and subsequent offenses
within a two-year period, the penalty shall be $200 to $500 plus costs
and/or, in the discretion of the court, up to 240 hours community service.



   (D)   Fires.  Every person violating the provisions of § 130.075
shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. In addition thereto, the court may in its discretion
require the person so convicted to give bail for good behavior in the sum of
$1,000 with good and sufficient sureties, the bond to run not more than two
years. If any person so ordered to furnish bail fails to do so, he or she
shall be remanded to the Wayne County Jail until further order of the court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 289, passed 3-17-1964)



   (E)   Telephone harassment.  Any person or persons violating any of
the provisions of §§ 130.090 and 130.091 shall upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court.



(Ord. 288, passed 3-3-1964)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



Prostitution and Drug Activity



   131.001   Title



   131.002   Definitions



   131.003   Legislative findings with respect to drug use and
prostitution or soliciting for prostitution



   131.004   Authority for declaration of a public nuisance



   131.005   Procedure for declaration of a public nuisance



   131.006   Declaration of public nuisance by default



   131.007   Abatement of nuisance and costs



   131.008   Presumption of public nuisance - drugs or drug
paraphernalia



   131.009   Presumption of public nuisance - prostitution or
soliciting for prostitution



   131.010   Notification of City Council of violations of drug and
prostitution laws



   131.011   Notification to the property owner



   131.012   Posting and listing of public nuisances



   131.013   Entry into or use of property of which the City Council
had ordered to be vacated and for which the court has prohibited occupancy



Drugs



   131.030   Definition



   131.031   Unlawful to possess



   131.032   Unlawful to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or
manufacture with intent to deliver



   131.033   Unlawful to promote sale of objects designed or intended
for use as drug paraphernalia



   131.034   Confiscation by court



Pornography



   131.050   Definitions



   131.051   Promoting pornography



   131.052   Promoting pornography for minors



   131.053   Affirmative defense



   131.054   Furnishing obscene material



   131.055   Transmission of obscene material



   131.056   Display of obscene material



   131.057   Possession of obscene material



   131.058   Presentation of obscene performance



Clubs



   131.075   Definition



   131.076   Unlawful to open, maintain or operate on Joseph Campau
Avenue



   131.077   Unlawful to assist opening, maintaining or operating on
Joseph Campau Avenue



   131.078   Authority of Police Department to inspect



   131.079   Exemptions



 



   131.999   Penalty




PROSTITUTION AND DRUG ACTIVITY




§ 131.001  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Public Nuisance Abatement
Subchapter Controlling Illegal Acts of Prostitution.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council, or a standing or special committee of
the City Council.



   OWNER.  Any person who possesses or has legal or equitable interest in
a property. OWNER also means any person who has or exercises any control,
custody or dominion over a property whether or not that person has or claims
to have any legal or equitable interest in the property. OWNER also means any
person having an ownership interest in a property as disclosed by the records
referred to in this subchapter.



   PROPERTY.  Any land, structure, house, building, premises or any part
thereof.



   REPEATED AND REPEATEDLY.  Two or more times within one year.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.003  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS WITH RESPECT TO DRUG USE AND PROSTITUTION
OR SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   The City Council determines that whenever the repeated use,
sale, furnishing, giving or possession of controlled substances or drug
paraphernalia occurs on any property, or whenever property is repeatedly used
for violation of the controlled substance or drug paraphernalia laws or for
the purposes of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution, within the city,
a public nuisance may result.



   (B)   A public nuisance results from the increased criminal activity
that occurs in the neighborhood surrounding the property, increased
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic in the neighborhood surrounding the
property, the fear engendered in the minds of neighbors and the peace and
quiet of residents living in the neighborhood surrounding the property being
disturbed.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.004  AUTHORITY FOR DECLARATION OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Whenever the illegal use, sale, furnishing, giving or possession of
controlled substances or drug paraphernalia repeatedly occurs on any property
or when any violation of the controlled substances act or drug paraphernalia
laws or any act of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution repeatedly
occurs on any property, the City Council may declare by resolution that the
property is a public nuisance and seek an order from the court that the
nuisance be abated as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.005  PROCEDURE FOR DECLARATION OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   A declaration of a public nuisance under the authority of this
subchapter shall occur only in accordance with the following procedure:



   (A)   A declaration may occur only after there has been notice given
to the owner of the property and the owner has had an opportunity to be heard
at a public evidentiary hearing before the City Council.



   (B)   Notice of the public evidentiary hearing shall be given to the
owner and shall consist of personal service or the mailing of a certified
letter to the owner at the address indicated by the city assessor’s
records, the records of Register of Deeds of the county and the records of
the city’s Building and Engineering Department. The notice shall state the
nature of the alleged nuisance and the time, date and location of the
hearing. If the notice is served by certified mail, it shall be delivered
with a return receipt requested according to the practices of the post
office. Receipt of the return receipt card by the city indicating the
owner’s has received the notice shall be deemed notice to the owner. The
notice to an owner shall occur at least seven calendar days prior to the date
of the public hearing. As used in this subchapter, THE OWNER, AN OWNER or
OWNER shall mean any and all person that the city is aware of who have or who
may have an ownership as defined in this subchapter. Whenever this subchapter
provides for notice to the owner, it shall be construed to mean that notice
shall be given to all persons having a known ownership interest as so defined.



   (C)   The City Council, sitting as an administrative body, and
acting a quasi-judicial capacity, shall make a determination as to whether a
public nuisance exists under the standards established by this subchapter.
The City Council shall make this determination based solely upon the evidence
presented at the public evidentiary hearing. In conducting the public
evidentiary hearing, the City Council shall afford the owner and the Police
Department an opportunity to present relevant and material evidence and to
make arguments as to factual or legal issues. Cross-examination of opposing
witnesses shall be permitted. The owner may appear in person or be
represented by an attorney. Lay representation is not permitted. In
conducting its public evidentiary hearing, the City Council shall not be
bound by rules of evidence and may admit and give weight to probative
evidence of a nature that is commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
individuals in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant, incompetent and
immaterial evidence and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.



   (D)   The owner may, at any time during the proceedings, enter into
a good neighbor agreement with the City Council, and so long as the good
neighbor agreement remains in effect, no further action may be taken by City
Council to declare the property a nuisance, keeping in mind the purpose of
this subchapter is to rid the community of drug activity, not take or deny an
owner of the casual use of his or her property as a matter of course.
However, after a determination that a nuisance exists, the owner may not
enter into a good neighbor agreement with the City Council.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.006  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE BY DEFAULT.



   If an owner, having been properly notified of the alleged nuisance and
the time, date and location of the hearing before City Council, or his or her
attorney, shall fail to appear at the hearing the City Council shall enter a
ruling in default. Failure to appear shall be viewed, in all cases, by the
City Council, as the concession, by the owner, to the relevant evidence in
the action.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.007  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE AND COSTS.



   (A)   If the City Council determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that a property is a public nuisance, it may, by resolution, in
addition to any other remedies available to the city at law or in equity,
direct the City Attorney to seek from a court of competent jurisdiction an
order of abatement of the nuisance.



   (B)   The abatement process shall be conducted as follows:



      (1)   If it is determined that all or a portion of the
property is to be ordered vacated, the court shall order the property vacated
and declare that occupancy of all or a portion of the property is prohibited
and authorized the Police Department to prohibit the occupancy of the
property by either padlocking all or a portion of the property or boarding or
otherwise securing all or a portion of the property, as is appropriate, for a
period of up to one year as the court shall determine based upon the evidence;



      (2)   Determine that the owner shall be liable for the full
cost of any materials and personnel (including police and any other city
employees or contractors) involved in the padlocking, boarding or securing of
the property in the first instance and the full cost of any personnel and
materials involved in any subsequent or remedial padlocking, boarding or
securing of the property;



      (3)   Determine that the owner shall be liable for the full
cost to the city in bringing the action to abate before the court;



      (4)   Determine that the costs set out herein shall be a
personal debt of the owner and/or assess those costs against the property as
a lien as provided for in the City Charter for property taxes; and



      (5)   Where only a discreet area under the control of a person
or persons other than the owner is involved in the illegal activity, the
court shall not order that any other than the part of used for the illegal
activity be vacated. The court shall not order that any part of the business
or other property be vacated provided the owner or owners of the property
take steps, as ordered by resolution of City Council adopting a good neighbor
agreement, to police the activity taking place near the business or property.
These actions include, but are not limited to, hiring a private security firm
to patrol the area, the installation of cameras and other surveillance
equipment, posting of signs on the building, and cooperation with the Police
Department. Failure to comply with the resolution of City Council shall
result in a hearing of a declaration of public nuisance as provided for in
this subchapter. It is the intent of this provision to protect those truly
and completely innocent of any participation in the act and those not having
any notice of, or direct or imputed knowledge of, the illegal acts from being
deprived of the use of their property. By way of example and limitation, if
only a single apartment in a multiple dwelling is used for illegal purposes
as provided for in this subchapter, the court may vacate only the apartment
used for the illegal purposes and shall not vacate the entire building.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.008  PRESUMPTION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE - DRUGS OR DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   The City Council may find and that a public nuisance exists and the
court shall order the abatement if the following conditions are established
by the evidence presented at the public evidentiary hearing and before the
court:



   (A)   The property has been searched by the police and illegal
controlled substances or illegal controlled substances or illegal drug
paraphernalia have been found by the police;



   (B)   The property has been the location of a violation of the state
controlled substance law or of the state drug paraphernalia law as evidenced
by conviction of an individual for violation of either at that location,
provided a reasonable person could directly associate the individual and the
property through residence, patronage or by habit;



   (C)   A letter, informing the owner that an illegal controlled
substance and/or illegal drug paraphernalia has been found by the police at
the property or that a drug-related or drug paraphernalia related crime has
been committed on the property, and of the potential consequences if similar
activity occurs at the property, has been personally served on an owner, or
sent by certified mail to an owner as provided for in this subchapter and a
return receipt card has been received by the city; and



   (D)   The same property is searched by police again within one year
from the date of the first search and a controlled substance or drug
paraphernalia is found by police and which directly leads to a conviction
even if the conviction is for a crime which is different than the one
originally charged because of a court approved plea bargain agreement, or, if
within one year, a subsequent violation of the controlled substances act or
the drug paraphernalia law occurs which directly leads to a conviction even
if the conviction is for a crime is lesser than the one originally charged.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.009  PRESUMPTION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE - PROSTITUTION OR SOLICITING FOR
PROSTITUTION.



   The City Council may find that a public nuisance exists and the court
shall order an abatement if the following conditions are established by the
evidence presented at the public evidentiary hearing:



   (A)   The property has been the location of an act of prostitution
or soliciting for prostitution as proven by the conviction of an individual
for engaging in an act of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution at that
location;



   (B)   A letter, informing the owner that an act of prostitution or
soliciting for prostitution has occurred on the property and of the potential
consequences if similar activity occurs at the property, has been personally
served on an owner, or sent by certified mail to an owner as provided for in
this subchapter, and a return receipt card has been received by the city;



   (C)   The same property is again proven to be the location of an act
of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution by the conviction of an
individual for engaging, at that location, in any act prohibited by the laws
of this city, or of any act prohibited by the laws of this state relating to
prostitution or soliciting for prostitution; and



   (D)   The same property is the location within one year from the
date of the first offense of an act of prostitution or solicitation for
prostitution, which directly leads to a conviction even if the conviction is
for a crime which is different than the one originally charged because of a
court approved plea bargain agreement.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.010  NOTIFICATION OF CITY COUNCIL OF VIOLATIONS OF DRUG AND
PROSTITUTION LAWS.



   The Chief of Police shall issue a report on a quarterly basis to the
City Council containing the nature of the violation(s) of law found, the
nature of the drugs or drug paraphernalia seized, the individuals involved
and, with reasonable specificity, location(s) of the contraband or illegal
act. In addition, the Chief of Police shall include violations of law in this
report, to the best of his or her ability, cited by other law enforcement
agencies with jurisdiction in the city including relevant county, state and
federal law enforcement agencies. If no violation has occurred during that
quarter, then the Chief of Police shall issue a report stating this.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.011  NOTIFICATION TO THE PROPERTY OWNER.



   The notification letters sent to the property owner provided for in
this subchapter and the notice of a public evidentiary hearing provided for
in this subchapter shall contain a report of the nature of the violation of
law found, the nature of the drugs or drug paraphernalia seized, the
individuals involved and, with reasonable specificity, the location of the
contraband or illegal act.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.012  POSTING AND LISTING OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   Whenever the court shall have ordered a property to be vacated
and ordered that occupancy is prohibited, the Police Department shall post a
notice so stating at each entrance to any building on the property and at the
entrance to each dwelling unit and other portion of the property ordered
vacated and shall replace any notices that are missing or unreadable.



   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk shall maintain a list of those
properties that have been declared to be public nuisances and of the remedy
ordered by the court.



      (2)   Immediately upon a declaration of public nuisance as
provided for herein, the City Clerk shall add the property to the list.



      (3)   Any resident requesting a list of the properties shall
be supplied one at no charge.



      (4)   The list shall be available for public inspection at the
City Clerk’s office.



   (C)   No person other than an authorized city employee shall tamper
with, damage, alter, destroy or remove any notice posted by the city.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)



§ 131.013  ENTRY INTO OR USE OF PROPERTY OF WHICH THE CITY COUNCIL HAD
ORDERED TO BE VACATED AND FOR WHICH THE COURT HAS PROHIBITED OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No person shall enter into any property that has been declared
by the City Council to be a nuisance and which the Court has ordered to be
vacated and for which occupancy has been prohibited. It shall be an
affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that written
permission to enter the property was obtained from the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and the following minimum criminal penalties which shall be assessed in
addition to any other lawful sentence that the sentencing court may impose:



      (1)   For first violation, a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $250;



      (2)   For a second violation, a fine of not less than $300 nor
more than $500 and imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than 90
days; and



      (3)   For subsequent violations, a fine of $500 and
imprisonment for 90 days.



(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)




DRUGS




§ 131.030  DEFINITION.



   (A)   The term DRUG PARAPHERNALIA as used in this subchapter means
all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended
for use or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance.



   (B)   It includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed
for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for
use in identifying or in analyzing



the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;



      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed
for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;



      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining, marihuana;



      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body; and



      (12)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:



         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;



         (b)   Water pipes;



         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (e)   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning
material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



         (g)   Chamber pipes;



         (h)   Carburetor pipes;



         (i)   Electric pipes;



         (j)   Air-driven pipes;



         (k)   Chillums;



         (l)   Bongs; and



         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.



   (C)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in
control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;



      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of this subchapter;



      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;



      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this subchapter; the innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this subchapter
shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed
for use as drug paraphernalia;



      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object,
is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and



      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)



§ 131.031  UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS.



   It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia.



(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.032  UNLAWFUL TO DELIVER, POSSESS WITH INTENT TO DELIVER OR
MANUFACTURE WITH INTENT TO DELIVER.



   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia.



(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.033  UNLAWFUL TO PROMOTE SALE OF OBJECTS DESIGNED OR INTENDED FOR USE
AS DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.



(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.034  CONFISCATION BY COURT.



   All drug paraphernalia seized for violation of any provision of this
subchapter shall be confiscated by the court.



(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)




PORNOGRAPHY




§ 131.050  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUDIENCE.  One or more persons who are permitted to view a performance:



      (1)   For valuable consideration; or



      (2)   In or from a public place.



   DISPLAY PUBLICLY.  The exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in
any other fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private,
material or performance in a manner that it may be readily seen and its
content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a
public place or vehicle.



   DISSEMINATE.  To manufacture, issue, publish, sell, lend, distribute,
transmit, broadcast,  exhibit or present material or to offer or agree to do
the same or to have in one’s possession with intent to do the same.



   MATERIAL.  Any printed matter, visual representation or sound
recording, and includes but is  not limited to books, magazines, motion
picture films, pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings,
three-dimensional forms, sculptures and phonograph, tape or wire recordings.



   MINOR.  Any person under 18 years of age.



   NUDITY.  Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female
breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the
areola only are covered.



   OBSCENE MATERIAL.  The material described in divisions (1) and (2)
below shall be deemed to be obscene material if the average person applying
contemporary community standards in the city would find that the  material,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in a patently offensive
way, and the material, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



      (1)   Any  picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion
picture, film or other visual representation of the human body or any portion
thereof that depicts nudity, sadomasochistic abuse, sexual conduct or sexual
excitement; or



      (2)   Any book, magazine, paperback, pamphlet or other written
or printed material, however reproduced or any sound recordings which contain
matter of the nature described in division (1) above or obscenities or
explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse depicted or described.



   OBSCENE PERFORMANCE.  A play, motion picture, dance, show, act,
rendition, lecture, reading or other presentation, whether pictured, animated
or live, performed before an audience or intended to be performed before an
audience and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or which includes
obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of nudity,
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, depicted or
described, provided that the average person, applying contemporary community
standards in the city, would find that the performance taken as a whole
appeals to the prurient interest in a patently offensive way and lacks
serious literary artistic, political or scientific value.



   OBSCENITIES.  Those slang words currently generally rejected for
regular use in  mixed society, that are used to refer to genital female
breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products either that have
no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual
or excretory meaning.



   PANDER. Advertising or propagandizing in connection with the sale of
material, the offering of a service or the presentation or exhibition of a
performance by appealing to the prurient interest of potential customers.



   PERFORMANCE.  Any live or reproduced exhibition, including, but not
limited to, any play, motion picture film, dance or appearance presented to
or performed before an audience.



   PORNOGRAPHIC.  Relating to pornography.



   PORNOGRAPHY.  Any material or performance is PORNOGRAPHY if all of the
following elements are present:



      (1)   Considered as a whole, by the average person, applying
the contemporary community standards of the city, it appeals to the prurient
interest;



      (2)   It depicts, describes or represents in a patently
offensive way, sexual conduct, as hereinafter defined; and



      (3)   It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.



   PORNOGRAPHY FOR MINORS.  Any material or performance is PORNOGRAPHY
FOR MINORS if all of the following elements are present:



      (1)   Considered as a whole by the average person applying the
contemporary community standards of the city with respect to what is suitable
for minors, it is presented in a manner as to appeal to the minor’s
prurient interest;



      (2)   It depicts, describes or represents in a patently
offensive way, nudity or sexual conduct  as hereinafter defined; and



      (3)   It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.



   PRURIENT INTEREST.



      (1)   Desire or craving for sexual stimulation or
gratification.



      (2)   In determining PRURIENT INTEREST, the material or
performance shall be judged with reference to average persons, unless it
appears from the character of the material or performance that it is designed
to appeal to the PRURIENT INTEREST of a particular group of persons,
including, but not limited to, homosexuals or sadomasochists. In that case,
it shall be judged with reference to the particular group for which it was
designed.



   PUBLIC PLACE OR VEHICLE.  Any of the streets, alleys, parks,
boulevards, schools or other public property in the city or any dance hall,
rental hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store, depot,
place of public accommodation or other private property generally frequented
by the public for the purposes of education, recreation, amusement,
entertainment, sport, shopping or travel; or any vehicle for public
transportation, owned or operated by government, either directly or through a
public corporation or authority or owned or operated by any non-governmental
agency for the use, enjoyment or transportation of the general public.



   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume or
the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on
the part of one so clothed.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female
or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.



   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female genitals or
the breast of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation or the sensual
experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conductor nudity.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974; Am. Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)



§ 131.051  PROMOTING PORNOGRAPHY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography.



   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting pornography if,
knowing if its content and character, he or she:



      (1)   Disseminates or causes to be disseminated any
pornographic material in or from a public place or vehicle or for valuable
consideration or has in his or her possession any pornographic material with
intent to so disseminate; or knowingly allows the use of any business,
building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by him or her;



      (2)   Sells an admission ticket or pass to premises where
there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or a
performance which is pornographic;



      (3)   Admits by accepting a ticket or pass, a person to
premises where there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited material
or performance which is pornographic;



      (4)   Produces, presents, directs or knowingly allows the use
of any business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or
managed by him or her to be used for a pornographic performance before an
audience;



      (5)   Participates in the portion of a live performance before
an audience which makes it pornographic; or



      (6)   Panders, displays publicly or disseminates door to door
any pornographic material or performance or causes the pandering public
display or door to door dissemination.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, possession of two or more
identical copies of any pornographic material by any person engaged in the
business of disseminating material shall be prima facie evidence of
possession with intent to disseminate for valuable consideration.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.052  PROMOTING PORNOGRAPHY FOR MINORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography for
minors.



   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting pornography to
minors if, knowing its contents and character, he or she:



      (1)   Disseminates or causes to disseminate to a minor
material which is pornography for minors, or knowingly allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by
him or her for the dissemination to a minor of material which is pornography
for minors;



      (2)   Exhibits to a minor a motion picture film or other
performance which is pornography for minors;



      (3)   Sells to a minor an admission ticket or pass to any
building, vehicle or place where there is being exhibited a motion picture
film or other performance which is pornography for minors;



      (4)   Admits a minor to any building, vehicle or place where
there is being exhibited or about to be exhibited a motion picture film or
other performance which is pornography for minors;



      (5)   Knowingly produces, presents, directs or allows the use
of any business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased,  conducted or
managed by him or her for the presentation or performance which is
pornography for minors, before an audience which includes a minor; or



      (6)   Displays publicly or disseminates door to door any
material or performance which is pornography for minors or causes the public
display or door to door dissemination.



   (C)   Divisions (B) (1) through (5) do not apply to a parent,
guardian or other person in loco parentis to the minor.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.053  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this
subchapter if the pornographic material was disseminated by a person who was
acting in his or her capacity as:



   (A)   A teacher of an accredited course of study related to
pornography by a state approved educational institution;



   (B)   A licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the
treatment of a patient;



   (C)   A participant in the criminal justice system, such as a
legislator, judge, prosecutor, law enforcement official or other similar or
related position; or



   (D)   A supplier to any person described in divisions (A) through
(C) above.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974)



§ 131.054  FURNISHING OBSCENE MATERIAL.



    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, give, provide,
loan, rent, trade, dispense or otherwise furnish obscene materials to any
person within the city.



(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.055  TRANSMISSION OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to send, dispatch,
deliver or otherwise transmit or to arrange for the transmission of obscene
materials whether the delivery thereof is to be made within or outside of the
city.



(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.056  DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to show, expose, place,
post, exhibit or otherwise display obscene materials to any person or in any
place whether public or private where the materials may be readily seen and
their content or character distinguished by any person in the city.



(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.057  POSSESSION OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess any obscene
materials for the purpose of furnishing, transmitting or displaying the
materials in the city.



(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.058  PRESENTATION OF OBSCENE PERFORMANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, sponsor, procure,
direct, act or otherwise participate in or to assist in the presentation of
an obscene performance in the city.



(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 131.999




CLUBS




§ 131.075  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLUB or CLUBS.



      (1)   Any profit or nonprofit club or association chartered by
the state and not licensed under the State Liquor Control Act;



      (2)   Any profit or nonprofit club or association not
chartered by the state and not licensed under the State Liquor Control Act;



      (3)   Any person, firm, corporation or association that
operates a pinball machine or pool table and not licensed under the State
Liquor Control Act; or



      (4)   Any person, firm, corporation or association that
permits the playing of any game or contest wherein playing cards or dice are
used and not licensed under the State Liquor Control Act.



(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)



§ 131.076  UNLAWFUL TO OPEN, MAINTAIN OR OPERATE ON JOSEPH CAMPAU AVENUE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
to open, maintain or operate a club on Joseph Campau Avenue within the city.



(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.077  UNLAWFUL TO ASSIST OPENING, MAINTAINING OR OPERATING ON JOSEPH
CAMPAU AVENUE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
to assist another in the opening, maintaining or operating of a club on
Joseph Campau Avenue within the city.



(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.078  AUTHORITY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INSPECT.



   The members of the City Police Department shall have the authority to
inspect any premises whenever they have evidence constituting reasonable
grounds to believe that any provisions of this subchapter is being violated
on the premises.



(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)



§ 131.079  EXEMPTIONS.



   All clubs open and operating on Joseph Campau Avenue, Hamtramck,
Michigan, on the effective date hereof shall be exempt from the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)



§ 131.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Drugs.  Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
131.030 through 131.034 upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)



   (C)   Pornography.  Conviction of violation of any provision of
§§ 131.050 through 131.058 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974; Am. Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)



   (D)   Clubs.  Any person, firm, corporation, or association
violating any provisions of §§ 131.075 through 131.079 shall upon
conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of
the court.



(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



Larceny



   132.001   Larceny from the city’s public libraries



   132.002   Larceny from vacant buildings



   132.003   Larceny of goods valued up to $100



Breaking and Entering



   132.015   Breaking and entering outside showcase



   132.016   Breaking and entering coin box



Graffiti



   132.030   Prohibition



   132.031   Posting notices and signs



Trespass



   132.044   Trespass upon lands or premises of another



   132.045   With intent to commit crime or damage property



   132.046   Prohibited where notice posted



Damaging School Property



   132.060   Damaging



   132.061   Noise, disturbance or improper diversion



   132.062   Profane, indecent or immoral language



   132.063   Immediate departure when directed



   132.064   Not a regularly enrolled student, teacher, parent or other
employee



   132.065   Borrowing money or valuables from student



Defacing Serial Numbers



   132.080   Concealment or misrepresentation of identity



   132.081   Possession not prima facie evidence of violation



Political Campaign Literature



   132.095   Unlawful to post or distribute near church



   132.096   Definitions



   132.097   Prohibition of voting polls



   132.098   No prohibition against passing out campaign literature
near church



Discounting of Scrip



   132.110   Acceptance at face value



   132.111   Liable for amount of discount



   132.112   Return of scrip



   132.113   Prohibition against higher price due to payment by scrip



Advertising



   132.125   Generally



   132.126   Deceptive advertising



   132.127   Publisher’s duties



   132.128   Sign to be posted



 



   132.999   Penalty




LARCENY




§ 132.001  LARCENY FROM THE CITY’S PUBLIC LIBRARIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to procure, or take
in any way from any public library in the city, or from the City Public
Library any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph,
periodical, newspaper, magazine manuscript or exhibit, or any part thereof,
with intent to convert the same to his or her own use and upon conviction
hereof violations shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)



§ 132.002  LARCENY FROM VACANT BUILDINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or
unlawfully remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment or other
property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of any
vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction
or to break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of
unlawfully removing, taking therefrom, or in any manner damaging any fixture,
attachment or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the
construction of the vacant structure of building, whether built or in the
process of construction, and upon conviction violations hereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)



§ 132.003  LARCENY OF GOODS VALUED UP TO $100.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal
or unlawfully take any money, goods or property of any other person, firm or
corporation of the value of $100 or less.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while a
store is open to the public, to knowingly and willfully alter, transfer,
remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which
property is offered for sale, with intent not to pay for property or to pay
less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the
resulting difference in price is less than $100.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful, while a store is open to the public,
with intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or property from
the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and
belongs to the store with a value of less than $100.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 435, passed 10-12-1989)  Penalty, see
§ 132.999




BREAKING AND ENTERING




§ 132.015  BREAKING AND ENTERING OUTSIDE SHOWCASE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to break and enter, or
to attempt to break or enter without breaking at any time any outside
showcase or other outside enclosed counter used for the display of goods,
wares or merchandise with the intent to steal or to commit the crime of
larceny therein and upon conviction violations hereof, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $200 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)



§ 132.016  BREAKING AND ENTERING COIN BOX.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously and
wilfully, by and with the aid and use of any key, instruments, devices or
explosives, blow or attempts to blow or forces or attempts to force an
entrance into any coin box, depository box, newspaper coin box or other
receptacle established and maintained for the convenience of the public or of
any person or persons not making payment for any inside of merchandise or
service, wherein is contained any money or thing of value or for any person
to extract or obtain or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom any money or
thing of value so deposited or contained therein, and upon conviction hereof
violators shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 and costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both a fine and
imprisonment within the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)




GRAFFITI




§ 132.030  PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person without authorization of the public
authority having supervision of the public property involved, or of the owner
of private property involved, to place or insert or cause to be placed or
inserted in any manner whatsoever any inscription drawing, mark and/or
graffiti on any street, sidewalk, alley, thoroughfare, public or private
building, monument, fence, structure, vehicle and/or real or personal
property of any type.



(Ord. 389, passed 3-11-1980)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.031  POSTING NOTICES AND SIGNS.



   All public authorities having supervision of public property may post
notices and signs to publicize the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 389, passed 3-11-1980)




TRESPASS




§ 132.044  TRESPASS UPON LANDS OR PREMISES OF ANOTHER.



   A person shall not:



   (A)   Enter the lands or premises of another without lawful
authority after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant or
the agent of the owner or occupant.



   (B)   Remain without lawful authority on the land or premises of
another after being notified to depart by the owner or occupant or the agent
of the owner or occupant.



(Ord. 2013-011, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.045  WITH INTENT TO COMMIT CRIME OR DAMAGE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon lands or premises
owned by another or owned by any unit of government without lawful authority,
for the purpose of committing any crime or damaging any property thereon.



(Ord. 370, passed 12-6-1977)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.046  PROHIBITED WHERE NOTICE POSTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon lands or premises
owned by another or owned by any unit of government, without lawful authority
where notice posted by the owner prohibits unauthorized entry thereon.



(Ord. 370, passed 12-6-1977)  Penalty, see § 132.999




DAMAGING SCHOOL PROPERTY




§ 132.060  DAMAGING.



   No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or
parochial school building, or any building occupied by any public, private or
parochial school building or the grounds, out-buildings, fences, trees or
other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.061  NOISE, DISTURBANCE OR IMPROPER DIVERSION.



   No person shall wilfully or maliciously make or assist in making any
noise, disturbance or improper diversion, by which the peace, quietude or
good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.062  PROFANE, INDECENT OR IMMORAL LANGUAGE.



   No person shall use profane, indecent or immoral language or indulge in
indecent or immoral conduct in any building or on any property adjacent to
any building in the city occupied as a public, private or parochial school.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.063  IMMEDIATE DEPARTURE WHEN DIRECTED.



   Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public or
parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds shall leave immediately
when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the
principal.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.064  NOT A REGULARLY ENROLLED STUDENT, TEACHER, PARENT OR OTHER
EMPLOYEE.



   No person who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher, parent or
other employee shall enter and remain in any school building, whether public,
private or parochial, in the city, for any reason whatever unless the person
has received written permission from the principal or other person designated
by the principal, to be in any public, private or parochial school building.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.065  BORROWING MONEY OR VALUABLES FROM STUDENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow or attempt to borrow any
money or thing of value from any student in any public, private or parochial
school or on any public, private or parochial school property in the city or
during any time when any student is going to or returning from any regularly
scheduled session of any school without first obtaining the written approval
of the principal of the school or other person designated by the principal to
issue a written approval.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)  Penalty, see § 132.999




DEFACING SERIAL NUMBERS




§ 132.080  CONCEALMENT OR MISREPRESENTATION OF IDENTITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation,
to conceal or misrepresent the identity of any motor, household appliance or
mechanical device by removing or defacing the manufacturer’s serial or
motor number or by altering or replacing any part of the motor, appliance or
mechanical device bearing the serial or motor number with a new or replaced
part upon which the proper serial or motor number has not been stamped or
placed.



(Ord. 219, passed 8-11-1949)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.081  POSSESSION NOT PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.



   In all prosecutions under this subchapter, possession by any dealer,
distributor, wholesaler or person, firm, partnership or corporation in the
business of buying and selling of any motor, appliance or mechanical device
with the manufacturer’s serial or motor number removed, defaced or altered
or with a part bearing the number replaced by one on which the proper number
does not appear, shall be prima facie evidence of violation of the provision
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 219, passed 8-11-1949)  Penalty, see § 132.999




POLITICAL CAMPAIGN LITERATURE




§ 132.095  UNLAWFUL TO POST OR DISTRIBUTE NEAR CHURCH.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
association or any group of  persons to pass out, hand deliver or in any
other manner to distribute or post, or to induce, persuade or employ other
person or persons to pass out, hand, deliver or in any other manner to
distribute or post in any place in and about any property of any church or
other place of regular religious assembly or within 100 feet from the
property located within the city any printed, typewritten or written leaflet,
card, pamphlet, newspaper,  poster or any other printed or written matter or
literature or any photostats, stenciled copies or any other facsimile of
same, in furtherance of any political campaign in favor of or against any
candidate for any public office or in favor of or against any political,
public or legislative issue, question or proposal.



(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.096  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHURCH.  Any edifice, temple, chapel or building used exclusively for
the preaching of the word of Gospel and religious services according to the
liturgy, rituals or tenets of the religion or faith of the congregation
belonging thereto.



   OTHER PLACE OF REGULAR RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY.  Any building which is
maintained regularly and principally for preaching of the word of Gospel and
for religious services and instructions in accordance with the accepted
practices of the congregation or in accordance with the liturgy, rituals or
tenets of the religious sect or denomination of the congregation belonging
thereto.



   PROPERTY.  Includes any edifice, temple, chapel or building used for
the religious services as defined in the definitions above and all the land
thereunder and next adjacent to it, and all other buildings located on the
land and used in furtherance of the religious purposes of the congregation,
whether the property is owned by or leased, rented or kept by or for the
church or other place of regular religious assembly.



(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)



§ 132.097  PROHIBITION OF VOTING POLLS.



   This subchapter shall not be construed or defined as to prohibit the
establishment of voting polls on the property hereinbefore mentioned in this
subchapter for the purpose of conducting elections for the convenience of the
electors residing in the voting precinct or ward, within which the property
is located, or to post in the voting polls all necessary notices to the
election workers or to the voters as required by the election laws of the
state, or to post any other registration or election notices or notices of
the meetings of the Board of Review or near the  property as may be required
by the laws of state or the City Charter of the city.



(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.098  NO PROHIBITION AGAINST PASSING OUT CAMPAIGN LITERATURE NEAR
CHURCH.



   This subchapter shall not be construed or defined as to prohibit the
passing out, handing, delivering or in any manner distributing in about any
property of any church or any other place of regular religious assembly of
any leaflet, card, pamphlet, newspaper, sign, poster or any other printed or
written matter or literature against any legislative proposal seeking to
restrict or interfere with the religious liberty, as guaranteed by the First
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States and by Article II, Section
3 of the Constitution of the state.



(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)




DISCOUNTING OF SCRIP




§ 132.110  ACCEPTANCE AT FACE VALUE.



   No person, firm or corporation shall accept any scrip note or
certificate in lien of federal currency in exchange for any commodity or
other thing of value except at the face value of the scrip, note or
certificate.



(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.111  LIABLE FOR AMOUNT OF DISCOUNT.



   Any person, firm or corporation accepting scrips, note or certificate
in violation of § 132.110 of this subchapter shall be liable to the person
from whom the scrip, note or certificate was accepted at less than face
value, for the amount of the discount placed upon it by the person, firm or
corporation, and shall also be liable to the fine and/or imprisonment
hereinafter provided for violation of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.112  RETURN OF SCRIP.



   Any holder of scrip, note or certificate who accepts any commodity or
other thing of value in exchange for scrip, note or certificate at less than
face value of same shall, upon tender back of the commodity or thing of value
so received, be given back the scrip, note or certificate.



(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)



§ 132.113  PROHIBITION AGAINST HIGHER PRICE DUE TO PAYMENT BY SCRIP.



   No person, firm or corporation shall charge a higher price for any
commodity or other thing of value by reason of the fact that it is paid for
in scrip or other note or certificate issued in lieu of federal currency.



(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)  Penalty, see § 132.999




ADVERTISING




§ 132.125  GENERALLY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or association who, with intent to sell
or in any way dispose of merchandise, securities, service or anything offered
by a person, firm, corporation or association, directly or indirectly, to the
public for sale or distribution or with intent to increase the consumption
thereof or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation
relating thereto or any interest therein, makes, publishes, disseminates,
circulates or places before the public or causes directly or indirectly to be
made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the public in this
city, in a newspaper or other publication or in the form of a book, notice,
handbill, poster, bill, circular, pamphlet or letter or in any other way an
advertisement of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service or
anything so offered to the public which advertisement contains any
representation or statement which is untrue, deceptive or misleading or
intended to subject any person to disadvantage or injury through the
publication of false or deceptive statements, shall be guilty of an offense
punishable as hereinafter provided. Provided, however, that the provisions of
this subchapter shall not apply to any owner, publisher, printer, agent or
employee of a newspaper or other publication, periodical or circular, who, in
good faith and without knowledge of the falsity or deceptive character
thereof, publishes, causes to be published or takes part in the publication
of the advertisement.



(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)



§ 132.126  DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING.



   It shall be deemed deceptive advertising and a violation of the
provisions of this subchapter for any person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of buying and selling new or second-hand furs, wearing apparel,
jewelry, furniture, pianos, phonographs, other musical instruments or other
similar commodities or any form of property, real, personal or mixed or in
the business of furnishing any kind of service, to advertise by “liner
ads” or otherwise, the articles, property or service for sale in a manner
indicating that the sale is being made by a private party or householder not
engaged in the business. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in any
business shall, in advertising goods, property or service for sale, either
through “liner ads” or otherwise, affirmatively and unmistakably indicate
or state that the seller is a business concern and not a private party.



(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)



§ 132.127  PUBLISHER’S DUTIES.



   No newspaper or other publication or employee thereof, shall hereafter
accept advertisement for its classified or other columns without, at the
time, obtaining the name and address of the advertiser and making a record of
the same. The record shall be retained by the newspaper or other publication
obtaining the same for a period of two weeks and shall be subject to the
examination of any police officer. No newspaper or other publication or
employee thereof, shall knowingly accept any advertisement from any person,
firm or corporation engaged in any of the businesses mentioned in § 132.126
of this subchapter if the advertisement is made ostensibly by a private party
or does not affirmatively state that the advertiser is a business concern and
is not a private party.



(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)



§ 132.128  SIGN TO BE POSTED.



   Any person, firm or corporation engaged in any of the businesses
mentioned in § 132.126 hereof, whether conducting the business in a store,
business block, residence or other building, shall at all times, keep a
conspicuous sign posted on the outside of his or her establishment and
another conspicuous sign in the salesroom, which sign shall clearly state or
indicate that the seller is a business concern and not a private party or
householder, provided that the exterior sign shall not be required where the
seller has no control over the exterior of the premises where the business is
conducted.



(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)  Penalty, see § 132.999



§ 132.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Larceny.  Any person violating any of the provisions of §
132.003 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 435, passed 10-12-1989)



   (C)   Graffiti.



      (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 132.030 and
132.031 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions §§ 132.030
and 132.031 shall upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
$500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment,
in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 389, passed 3-11-1980)



   (D)   Trespass.  Any person convicted violating any of the
provisions of §§ 132.045 and 132.046 shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 370, passed 12-6-1977)



   (E)   Damaging school property.  Any person violating any of the
provision of §§ 132.060 through 132.065 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days or be both
so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)



   (F)   Defacing serial numbers.  Any person, firm, co-partnership or
corporation violating any provision of §§ 132.080 and 132.081 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
by both  a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 219, passed 8-11-1949)



   (G)   Political campaign literature.  Any person, firm,
corporation, partnership or association violating any provisions of  §§
132.095 through 132.098 shall be deemed as guilty of breach of peace and upon
conviction thereof by proper tribunal shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $100, and/or costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the Wayne County
Jail for a period of not more than 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment,
in discretion of the court.



(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)



   (H)   Discounting of scrip.  Every person, firm, corporation
convicted of violating any provision of §§ 132.110 through 132.113 shall be
punished by a fine or not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of the fine and costs, the court may make a further
sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail or another
place of imprisonment as may hereafter be established by the City Council as
a place of confinement until the fine and costs be paid but not longer than
90 days, or in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause,
both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In the event that there shall be
imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or both, for the
violation of any of the provisions of this §§ 132.110 through 132.113, then
it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or both, in an
action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)



   (I)   Advertising.  Every person, firm, or corporation convicted of
violating, or failing to comply with the provisions §§ 132.125 through
132.128 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court
may make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne
County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established
by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be
paid, but not longer then 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having
jurisdiction of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In
the event that there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and
costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
132.125 through 132.128, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and
costs, or either, or both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)



CHAPTER 133:  WEAPONS



Section



General Provisions



   133.001   Aiming firearms



   133.002   Aiming and discharging firearm



   133.003   Injury by discharge of firearm



   133.004   Possession or control of firearms while intoxicated



   133.005   Confiscation of firearms



Prohibiting the Possession, Sale and Advertising of Replica and Facsimile
Firearms



   133.020   Definitions



   133.021   Possession or transfer prohibited



   133.022   Display, market for sale or sale prohibited



   133.023   Advertisement prohibited



   133.024   Exemptions



   133.025   Permitted



   133.026   Drawing, exhibiting or brandishing prohibited



   133.027   Drawing, exhibiting or brandishing around peace officer,
firefighter, emergency medical technician or paramedic



   133.028   Seizure and forfeiture



Pistols



   133.040   Definition



   133.041   Presentation for safety inspection



Switch Blades



   133.055   Definition



   133.056   General prohibition



   133.057   Regarding minors under the age of 21



   133.058   Knives with blades more than three inches in length



   133.059   Exceptions



 



   133.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 133.001  AIMING FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally,
without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.002  AIMING AND DISCHARGING FIREARM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge, without
injury to another person, any firearm, while intentionally without malice,
aiming at or toward any person.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.003  INJURY BY DISCHARGE OF FIREARM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maim or injure
any other person by the discharge of any firearm pointed or aimed
unintentionally, without malice at any person.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.004  POSSESSION OR CONTROL OF FIREARMS WHILE INTOXICATED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the
influence of an alcoholic liquor, controlled substance or any other
exhilarating or stupefying drug, or the combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance, to carry, have in possession or control, or use in any
manner or discharge any firearms.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 2013-010, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty,
see § 133.999



§ 133.005  CONFISCATION OF FIREARMS.



   All weapons, guns, pistols or firearms carried, possessed or used
contrary to §§ 133.001 through 133.004 are hereby declared forfeited to the
city.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)




PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION, SALE AND ADVERTISING OF REPLICA AND FACSIMILE
FIREARMS




§ 133.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREARM.  Any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be
propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion including
any shotgun, rifle, pistol or other device of a similar character.



   REPLICA OR FACSIMILE FIREARMS.  Any devices or objects made of
plastic, wood, metal or any other material which are replicas, facsimiles or
toy versions of, or are otherwise recognizable as a pistol, revolver,
shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, starter
pistol, air gun, inoperative firearm or other firearm. As used in this
subchapter, the words REPLICA OR FACSIMILE FIREARMS shall include, but are
not limited to, toy guns, theatrical production props, hobby models (either
in kit form or fully assembled) or any other devices which might reasonably
be perceived to be real firearms.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)



§ 133.021  POSSESSION OR TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to possess or transfer replica or
facsimile firearms within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.022  DISPLAY, MARKET FOR SALE OR SALE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to display, market for sale or sell
replica or facsimile firearms within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.023  ADVERTISEMENT PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to place an advertisement in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster, other publications or other
advertising media with knowledge that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote within the corporate limits of the city the
possession, transfer or sale of objects designed and manufactured as replica
of facsimile firearms.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.024  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to replica or
facsimile firearms which, because of their distinct color, exaggerated size
or permanently affixed international blaze orange markings on the receiver
portions of the product and blaze orange plug recessed no more than six
millimeters from the muzzle end of the barrel, cannot reasonably be perceived
to be real firearms.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)



§ 133.025  PERMITTED.



   (A)   The possession, manufacture, marketing, distribution and sale
of replica or facsimile firearms are permitted if the devices are possessed,
manufactured, distributed or sold:



      (1)   Solely for subsequent transportation in intrastate,
interstate or foreign commerce;



      (2)   Solely for lawful use in theatrical productions
including motion picture, television and stage productions; or



      (3)   Toy guns or firearms.



   (B)   The devices shall not be displayed to the general public or
sold for other uses within the corporate limits of the city regardless of
where manufactured or purchased.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)



§ 133.026  DRAWING, EXHIBITING OR BRANDISHING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to draw, exhibit or brandish replica or
facsimile firearms or simulate the drawing, exhibiting or brandishing of
replica or facsimile firearms, in a rude, threatening or angry manner with
intent to frighten, vex, harass or annoy any other person.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.027  DRAWING, EXHIBITING OR BRANDISHING AROUND PEACE OFFICER,
FIREFIGHTER, EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN OR PARAMEDIC.



   It is unlawful for any person, with knowledge that a peace officer,
firefighter, emergency medical technician or paramedic is engaged in the
performance of his or her duties, to draw, exhibit or brandish replica or
facsimile firearms in their presence.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.028  SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE.



   Any replica or facsimile firearms possessed or sold, or displayed with
the intent to sell, or manufactured within the corporate limits of the city
with intent to sell in violation of this subchapter, or used in a rude,
threatening or angry manner, shall be seized and forfeited to the city.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 133.999




PISTOLS




§ 133.040  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PISTOL.  Any firearm loaded or unloaded 30 inches or less in length or
any firearm loaded or unloaded, which by its construction and appearance
conceals it as a firearm.



(Ord. 330, passed 8-25-1970)



§ 133.041  PRESENTATION FOR SAFETY INSPECTION.



   Any person within the city who owns or comes into possession of a
pistol as defined in § 133.040, shall present the weapon for safety
inspection to the Chief of Police of the city. A certificate of inspection
shall thereupon be issued in triplicate, containing the name, age, address,
description and signature of the person presenting the pistol for inspection
together with a full description thereof, the original of the certificate
shall be delivered to the registrant, the duplicate thereof shall be mailed
within 48 hours to the Commissioner of the State Police and the triplicate
shall be retained and filed in the office of the Chief of Police. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to wholesale or retail dealers in
firearms or to collections of pistols kept solely for the purpose of display,
as relics, curios or antiques, not made for modern ammunition or permanently
deactivated.



(Ord. 330, passed 8-25-1970)  Penalty, see § 133.999




SWITCH BLADES




§ 133.055  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DART.  A pointed weapon or stick, thrown by hand.



   SWITCH-BLADE or SELF-OPENING KNIFE.  A knife containing a blade or
blades which can be opened by depressing a button, pressure on the handle,
release of a spring or other mechanical contrivance.



(Ord. 191, passed 9-21-1943; Am. Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300,
passed 5-27-1965)



§ 133.056  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, keep,
possess, use or loan any switch-blade or self-opening knife; provided, that
the prohibition of this section shall not apply to any one-armed person in
possession of a knife in connection with his or her living requirements.



(Ord. 191, passed 9-21-1943; Am. Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300,
passed 5-27-1965)  Penalty, see § 133.999



§ 133.057  REGARDING MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away
or loan to any minor under the age of 21 years any dart or knife.



(Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300, passed 5-27-1965)  Penalty, see
§ 133.999



§ 133.058  KNIVES WITH BLADES MORE THAN THREE INCHES IN LENGTH.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a
knife with a blade more than three inches in length in any of the streets,
alleys, parks, boulevards or other public property or schools in the city or
in any dance hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or
other private property generally frequented by the public for purposes of
education, recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport or shopping.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person in possession of
any knife when it is used or carried in good faith as a tool of honest work,
trade, business, sport or recreation when the person in possession of the
knife is actively engaged therein or actively engaged in going to or
returning from  honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation.



(Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300, passed 5-27-1965)  Penalty, see
§ 133.999



§ 133.059  EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any knife, dart or instrument of any description that could be
used for cutting or stabbing, in any of the streets, alleys, parks,
boulevards or other public property or schools in the city or in any dance
hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or other private
property generally frequented by the public for purposes of education,
recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport or shopping; provided, that this
section shall not apply to any person under 21 years of age being in
possession of any knife when it is used or carried in good faith as a tool of
honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation or when used or carried in
good faith as equipment related to and required for any legitimate sport,
recreation or youth character building program (Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and
the like), when actively engaged therein or actively engaged in going to or
returning from honest work, trade, business, sport, recreation or youth
character building program.



(Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300, passed 5-27-1965)



§ 133.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Firearms.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, conviction
for violation of any of the provisions of §§ 133.001 through 133.005 shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment of not more than
90 days or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)



      (2)   (a)   An individual without a concealed pistol permit
who has an alcohol content of .08 or more grams per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or because of the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of
alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, the individual’s ability to
use a firearm is visibly impaired is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to
punishment of not more than 90 days imprisonment and a fine of not more than
$100 for carrying or possessing a firearm, or both, and not more than $500
for using or discharging a firearm, or both.



         (b)   An individual with a concealed pistol permit shall
be reported to the firearm licensing board and subject to the following
penalties depending on his or her blood alcohol level:



            1.   A civil infraction with a fine of up to $100
for a person with .02 to .079 BAC (blood alcohol level) or deemed to be
visibly impaired;



   



            2.   A misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days
imprisonment and a $100 fine for a person with .08 to .099 BAC;



            3.   A misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days
imprisonment and a $100 fine for a person with .10 or more BAC.



   (B)   Prohibiting the possession, sale and advertising of replica
and facsimile firearms.  Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
133.020 through 133.028 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of
not more than $500 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days
or to both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)



   (C)   Pistols.  Any person found guilty of violating §§ 133.040
and 133.041 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $100 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days and/or both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 330, passed 8-25-1970)



   (D)   Switch blades.



      (1)   Any police officer of the city may and it shall be his
or her duty to arrest without process any person found violating any
provision of §§ 133.055 through 133.059.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 133.055
through 133.059 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine not
exceeding $500, or imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.



(Ord. 191, passed 9-21-1943; Am. Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300,
passed 5-27-1965; Am. Ord. 2013-010, passed 1-22-2013)



CHAPTER 134:  MINORS



Section



Youth Tobacco and Marijuana



   134.001   Title



   134.002   Purpose



   134.003   Definitions



   134.004   Use of tobacco product by minors; prohibition



   134.005   Noninterference with right of parent or guardian



   134.006   Enforcement



Curfew



   134.020   Prohibition



   134.021   Theaters, moving picture shows, bowling rooms and other
places of amusement



   134.022   Billiard or pool halls



   134.023   Child under sixteen enrolled in a day school program



   134.024   Exceptions



   134.025   Duty of business owner/operator



   134.026   Duty of parent, legal guardian or other adult person



   134.027   Illegal to assist, aid, abet or encourage



Sale of Spray Paint



   134.040   Definition



   134.041   Illegal to possess, buy, transfer or receive possession



   134.042   Illegal for person to assist, aid, abet or encourage
possession by minor



Sale of Liquor



   134.055   Furnishing alcoholic beverage without prescription to minor



   134.056   Possession of liquor by minor



   134.057   Frequenting taverns



   134.058   Lawful employment not prohibited



   134.059   Exceptions



Sale of Model Glue



   134.070   Definition



   134.071   Prohibition against inhalation



   134.072   Prohibition against possession, buying, selling
transferring or receiving possession



   134.073   Exceptions



   134.074   Written consent



Movie Theaters



   134.100   Prohibiting children in theaters and other places of
amusement



   134.101   Notice to be posted



   134.102   Employment of minors



   134.103   Admission



   134.104   Duty of manager or owner



Abandoned Ice Boxes and Refrigerators



   134.115   Unlawful to abandon if it contains an air-tight door or
lock which may not be released for opening from the inside



   134.116   Removal of air-tight snap lock



Street Trades



   134.130   Definition



   134.131   Age limitation



   134.132   Prohibition during school hours



   134.133   Unlawful employment



 



   134.999   Penalty




YOUTH TOBACCO AND MARIJUANA




§ 134.001  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Youth Tobacco and Marijuana
Subchapter.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)



§ 134.002  PURPOSE.



   By enacting this subchapter, the city is acting to protect the public
health, safety or general welfare of the residents.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)



§ 134.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHEWING TOBACCO.  Loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco
that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of any kind
that are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance.



   MARIJUANA.  All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., growing or not
growing, the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant;
and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
the plant or its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the
plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the
plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom,
fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which in incapable of
germination.



   TOBACCO SNUFF.  Shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco that may be
inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)



§ 134.004  USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCT BY MINORS; PROHIBITION.



   A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes,
cigars or marijuana or possess or chew, suck or inhale chewing tobacco,
tobacco snuff, tobacco or narcotic paraphernalia; or possess or use tobacco
in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park, sidewalk or
other land used for public purposes or in a public place of business,
education or amusement.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.005  NONINTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.



   This subchapter does not interfere with the right of a parent or legal
guardian in the rearing and management of his or her minor children or wards
within the bounds of his or her own private premises.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)



§ 134.006  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any police officer or official of the city designated by the Mayor
shall have full authority to enforce this subchapter.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)




CURFEW




§ 134.020  PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for a minor to be on the public streets,
playgrounds, vacant lots or other unsupervised place if the minor is under 18
years of age, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except Fridays
and Saturdays, when the time for minors 16 and 17 years of age shall be
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.021  THEATERS, MOVING PICTURE SHOWS, BOWLING ROOMS AND OTHER PLACES
OF AMUSEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for a minor to be in a theater, moving picture
show, bowling room or other place of amusement:



   (A)   If the minor is under 12 years of age, between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and



   (B)   If the minor is 12 years of age and under 18 years of age,
between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; except Fridays and Saturdays
when the time for minors 16 and 17 years of age shall be between 10:30 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.022  BILLIARD OR POOL HALLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any minor under 17 years of age to remain in
or play billiards or pool in a billiard or pool hall; provided, that the
provisions of this section do not apply to private residences, private clubs,
schools, churches, duly licensed family hobby and recreation centers,
fraternal organizations or any other civic agency, organization or
institution.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.023  CHILD UNDER SIXTEEN ENROLLED IN A DAY SCHOOL PROGRAM.



   It shall be unlawful for any child under 16 years of age or enrolled in
a day school program other than a college or university, to remain in any
restaurant, lunchroom, candy store, confectionery, bowling room, ice cream
parlor, in any theater or other public place of entertainment or any other
public place unless it is part of an organized school program, during the
school hours of the child.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.024  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:



   (A)   A minor accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or
other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or



   (B)   A minor going to or returning from work; provided that the
minor’s hours of employment do not violate state law; provided further that
the minor possesses a signed statement issued by his or her employer within
the previous 90 days setting forth the minor’s hours of employment; and
provided further that the minor shall be exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter for not more than one hour before the minor’s work day begins
and for not more than one hour after the minor’s work day ends.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.025  DUTY OF BUSINESS OWNER/OPERATOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture
operator, theater licensee, bowling room, poolroom, billiard room,
restaurant, lunch room, candy store, confectionery or ice cream parlor
proprietor or the operator, manager or employee of the establishment to
permit a minor to remain in any establishment contrary to the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or employee
of any theater, bowling room, restaurant, lunchroom, candy store,
confectionery or ice cream parlor or any other public place to permit a minor
to remain in any establishment during the respective school hours of the
child after due notification of the school hours of the child by the school
authorities, the police or the parents of the child.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.026  DUTY OF PARENT, LEGAL GUARDIAN OR OTHER ADULT PERSON.



   It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian or other adult
person having the care or custody of a minor under 18 years of age to
knowingly permit the minor to violate any provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.027  ILLEGAL TO ASSIST, AID, ABET OR ENCOURAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage
any minor to violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)  Penalty, see § 134.999




SALE OF SPRAY PAINT




§ 134.040  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SPRAY PAINT.  Any adherent pigmented substance dispersed in particles,
by means of an atomizer or applicator.



(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980)



§ 134.041  ILLEGAL TO POSSESS, BUY, TRANSFER OR RECEIVE POSSESSION.



   No person under 18 years of age shall possess, buy, transfer possession
or receive possession of spray paint.



(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.042  ILLEGAL FOR PERSON TO ASSIST, AID, ABET OR ENCOURAGE POSSESSION
BY MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage
any person under 18 years of age to violate § 134.041.



(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980)  Penalty, see § 134.999




SALE OF LIQUOR




§ 134.055  FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE WITHOUT PRESCRIPTION TO MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or furnish any alcoholic
beverage to a minor except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription
of a duly licensed physician.



(Ord. 303, passed 8-24-1965)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.056  POSSESSION OF LIQUOR BY MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase, consume or knowingly possess any alcoholic liquor on any public
place or on private property or place or to knowingly possess, transport or
have under his or her control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor,
unless the person is employed by a licensee under the Michigan Liquor Control
Code of 1998 and is possessing, transporting or having the alcoholic liquor
in a motor vehicle under his or her control during regular, working hours and
in the course of his or her employment.



(Ord. 303, passed 8-24-1965; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 1-22-2013)  Penalty,
see § 134.999



§ 134.057  FREQUENTING TAVERNS.



   No minor person under the age of 21 years shall enter in, frequent or
remain in any tavern, saloon, bar room or other place within the corporate
limits of the city where spiritous or other intoxicating liquors are sold,
given away or furnished for consumption upon the premises and no proprietor,
keeper, manager or other person shall permit any child to enter in, frequent
or remain in any place or shall encourage or induce any minor child to enter
in, frequent or remain therein.



(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.058  LAWFUL EMPLOYMENT NOT PROHIBITED.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to prevent the lawful employment
of any minor child pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the state, now,
or which may hereafter become effective.



(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)



§ 134.059  EXCEPTIONS.



   This shall not be construed to include within its purview any
restaurant, hotel or place of amusement, the principal business of lodging or
legitimate forms of amusement and wherein the service of spiritous or
intoxicating liquor is incidental thereto.



(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)




SALE OF MODEL GLUE




§ 134.070  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MODEL GLUE.  Any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the
building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles, containing toluene,
acetone or other solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic
vapors.



(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)



§ 134.071  PROHIBITION AGAINST INHALATION.



   No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of
intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of
the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from
any model glue provided, however that this section  shall not apply to the
inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purpose.



(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.072  PROHIBITION AGAINST POSSESSION, BUYING, SELLING TRANSFERRING OR
RECEIVING POSSESSION.



   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to
violate any provision of this subchapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell,
transfer possession or receive possession of any model glue.



(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.073  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) hereof and § 134.074, no
person under 21 years of age shall possess or buy any model glue.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) hereof and § 134.074, no
person shall sell or transfer. possession of any model glue to another person
under 21 years of age.



   (C)   Provided, however, a person may sell or transfer possession of
model glue to a person under 21 years of age for model building or other
lawful use where the minor has in his or her possession and exhibits the
written consent of his or her parent or guardian.



(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.074  WRITTEN CONSENT.



   A person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a
person under 21 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his or her
parent or guardian, shall record the name, address, sex and age of the minor
and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data
required by this section shall be kept in a permanent type register available
for inspection by the Police Department for a period of at least six months.



(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)  Penalty, see § 134.999




MOVIE THEATERS




§ 134.100  PROHIBITING CHILDREN IN THEATERS AND OTHER PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture
operator, theater licensee, operator, manager, employee, parent or guardian
to permit any child under the age of 16 years unaccompanied by a parent or
guardian or an adult in whose care or custody the parent or guardian has
placed the child, to remain in any theater, moving picture show or other
place of amusement within the city after the hour of 9:30 p.m.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture
operator, theater license, operator, manager or employee to permit any male
minor under the age of 18 years or any female minor under the age of 21
years, to be admitted to or to be permitted to remain in any theater, moving
picture show or any other place of amusement within the city between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and it shall be unlawful for any male minor
under the age of 24 years to apply for admission or to remain in any theater,
moving picture show or any other place of amusement within the city between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture
operator, theater licensee, operator, manager or employee, parent or guardian
to permit any child under the age of 16 years to remain in any theater,
moving picture show or other place of amusement within the city between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. except during school vacation periods and on
school vacation days.



(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.101  NOTICE TO BE POSTED.



   Notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be placed or posted
in a conspicuous place in the lobby of each theater.



(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)



§ 134.102  EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.



   No theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator,
manager or employee, by himself, herself or another shall employ, engage or
otherwise permit employment, engagement or use any minor under the age of 16
years, as an employee, entertainer or any other capacity, in or about the
premises, provided, however, that so-called traveling road shows may engage
or employ a minor under the age of 17 years, provided the employment or
engagement is approved by the Department of Labor of the state, and provided
that minors under 17 years pursuing apprenticeship courses as part of their
training may be employed when the employment has the approval of the State
Labor Department and a permit issued by the Board of Education covering the
employment in the city.



(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)



§ 134.103  ADMISSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a parent, guardian or an
adult person in whose care a parent or guardian has placed a child, to
purchase an admission ticket for a child or assist in any way whatsoever any
child to gain admittance into any theater where admittance is unlawful under
the terms of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.104  DUTY OF MANAGER OR OWNER.



   It shall be the duty of the manager or owner of any theater or motion
picture show to make a reasonable effort to see that the provisions of this
subchapter are carried out. By complying with the list of suggestions as
given in this section, any theater owner or manager shall have made his or
her contribution to the effectiveness of this subchapter.



   (A)   The theater schedule should be so arranged that a complete
show is finished before 9:30 p.m. 



   (B)   The theater should warn all children who seek to enter after
the feature picture has started that they will have to leave when the show is
completed.



   (C)   The theater should by, flashing a slide or running a trailer
notice on the screen (before lighting the theater) urge all children to leave
after the performance.



   (D)   The theater may be lighted for a period not less than one
minute at the end of the completed show sometime between 9:00 and 9:30 p. m.



   (E)   The theater should have its ushers see that children do not
remain in the theater after 9:30 p.m.



   (F)   The theater shall use reasonable judgment in deciding whether
or not a child is under 16 years of age.



(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)  Penalty, see § 134.999




ABANDONED ICE BOXES AND REFRIGERATORS




§ 134.115  UNLAWFUL TO ABANDON IF IT CONTAINS AN AIR-TIGHT DOOR OR LOCK
WHICH MAY NOT BE RELEASED FOR OPENING FROM THE INSIDE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave
outside of a building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other
container of any kind, which has an air-tight door or lock which may not be
released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator or
container.



(Ord. 233, passed 9-29-1953)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.116  REMOVAL OF AIR-TIGHT SNAP LOCK.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave
outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other
container of any kind which has an air-tight snap-lock or other device
thereon, without first removing the snap-lock or doors from the ice box,
refrigerator or container.



(Ord. 233, passed 9-29-1953)  Penalty, see § 134.999




STREET TRADES




§ 134.130  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the words STREET TRADE shall mean
the business, occupation, undertaking or pursuit of:



   (A)   Peddling;



   (B)   Boot blacking;



   (C)   Delivering goods, wares, merchandise, telegrams, newspapers,
magazines, periodicals, advertising matter or any other printed or written
material;



   (D)   Distributing, selling or offering for sale goods, wares,
merchandise, newspapers, magazines, periodicals, advertising matter or any
other printed or written material;



   (E)   Soliciting subscriptions for newspapers, magazines or
periodicals;



   (F)   Offering services for hire or gain when conducted in any
street, alley, park, square or other public place or in the lobby or entrance
of any building frequented by the public or conducted by house to house
canvassing; or



   (G)   Soliciting funds for the awarding of prizes by punch boards or
otherwise.



(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935)



§ 134.131  AGE LIMITATION.



   No male under 12 years of age and no female under 18 years of age shall
engage in any street trade.



(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.132  PROHIBITION DURING SCHOOL HOURS.



   No person under 17 years of age shall engage in any street trade during
school hours, unless legally excused from school, as now and hereafter
provided by law. No person under the age of 17 shall engage in any street
trade between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., provided that on
Saturdays he or she may so engage until 10:00 p.m. and provided further that
any person under the age of 17 and over the age of 14 may deliver periodicals
or newspapers on a regularly established route to regular customers until
10:00 p.m. No person under the age of 17 years shall engage in any street
trade for a period longer than eight hours in any one day.



(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.133  UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or organization to hire or employ or permit to be hired or
employed or suffer to work in any street trade any minor contrary to the
terms of this subchapter. No person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or organization shall give, sell, deliver or consign any goods,
wares or merchandise including newspapers, magazines, periodicals,
advertising matter or any printed or written material to any minor for the
purpose of selling, distributing or delivering the same in any street trade
in violation of the terms of this subchapter. It shall be unlawful for any
parent, guardian or custodian to suffer, permit, allow or induce any minor to
engage in any street trade contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935)  Penalty, see § 134.999



§ 134.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Use of tobacco product by minors; prohibition.  A violation
of § 134.004 constitutes a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine
of $50 for the first offense and $100 for each additional offense within one
year.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)



   (C)   Curfew.



      (1)   Any person over 17 years of age, any firm or corporation
violating the provisions of §§ 134.020 through 134.027 shall upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



      (2)   Any minor under 17 years of age, subject to the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, shall be dealt
with in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state.



(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)



   (D)   Sale of spray paint.  Any person violating any of the
provisions of §§ 134.040 through 134.042 upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days
or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980)



   (E)   Sale of liquor.



      (1)   Any person who shall be in violation of any of the
provisions of §§ 134.055 and 134.056 shall upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.



(Ord. 303, passed 8-24-1965)



      (2)   Any minor-child or other person willfully violating the
provisions of § 134.057 hereof shall be guilty of misdemeanor and upon
conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 or by imprisonment in the
Wayne County Jail not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in
the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)



   (F)   Sale of model glue.  Any person or minor over the age of 16
violating any provisions of §§ 134.070 through 134.074 shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail not to exceed 90 days
or both a fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as that hereunder. Any minor under the age of 17 years of age
violating any of the provisions of §§ 134.070 through 134.074 shall be
dealt with in accordance with juvenile court laws and procedures.



(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)



   (G)   Movie theaters.  Any child who shall violate the provisions
of §§ 134.100 through 134.104 shall be considered as committing a
delinquent act. Any person over 17 years of age violating the provisions §§
134.100 through 134.104 shall have committed a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 or imprisonment
for not less than ten days, nor more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the court.



(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)



   (H)   Abandoned ice boxes and refrigerators.  Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of §§ 134.115 and 134.116 shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined
not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment for not in excess of 90 days. Each day
the violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as that thereunder.



(Ord. 233, passed 9-29-1953)



   (I)   Street trades.  Any person of the age of 17 years or more who
violates any of the provisions of §§ 134.130 through 134.133 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both a
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Any child under the age
of 17 years who violated any of the provisions of §§ 134.130 through
134.133 shall be deemed a delinquent child and shall be dealt with as a
juvenile delinquent.



(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935; Am. Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)



CHAPTER 135:  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY



Section



   135.001   Title



   135.002   Statement of purpose



   135.003   Definitions



   135.004   Parental duties



   135.005   Notification



 



   135.999   Penalty



§ 135.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Parental
Responsibility Chapter.”



(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 135.002  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   By enacting this chapter the city requires a parent of a minor child to
exercise reasonable control over that child to prevent that child from
committing any delinquent act.



(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 135.003  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Any drug, substance or immediate precursor
included in Schedules 1 to 5 of Part 72 of the Michigan Public Health Code,
as amended.



   DELINQUENT ACT.  An act which violates the laws of the United States,
the laws of the State of Michigan, or an ordinance of the city, or which
would cause a minor to come under the jurisdiction of the Family Division of
the Circuit Court, as defined by M.C.L.A. 712A.2. as amended “Delinquent
act” does not include a traffic violation which is designated as a civil
infraction.



   MINOR.  Any unemancipated person under the age of 17.



   PARENT.  The mother, father, legal guardian and any other person
having the care of custody of a minor, or any person 17 years of age or older
with whom the minor resides, at the time that the delinquent act is alleged
to have been committed by the minor.



(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 135.004  PARENTAL DUTIES.



   (A)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to
exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act.



   (B)   No parent of any minor shall fail to exercise reasonable
parental control over the minor.  The exercise of reasonable parental
control shall include, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Taking reasonable steps to insure that minors for whom
the Parent has responsibility do not commit delinquent acts.



      (2)   Keeping controlled substances out of the home and out of
the possession of the minor, except those drugs duly prescribed by a licensed
physician or other authorized medical professional.



      (3)    Keeping firearms out of the possession of the minor,
except those used for hunting in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and with the knowledge and supervision of a parent.



      (4)   Requiring the minor to observe the curfew ordinance of
the city.



      (5)   Requiring the minor to attend regular school sessions
and forbidding the minor to be absent from class without parental or school
permission.



      (6)   Arranging proper supervision for the minor when the
parent is absent.



      (7)   Forbidding the minor from willfully or maliciously
destroying property belonging to another person.



      (8)   Forbidding the minor from knowingly possessing stolen
property.



      (9)   Forbidding the minor from possessing alcoholic
beverages, and/or tobacco products.



      (10)   Seeking help from the appropriate governmental
authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor when
necessary.



      (11)   Assisting or cooperating with governmental authorities
in their efforts to handle or control the minor, including the production of
the minor for court appointments and hearings.



(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.005  NOTIFICATION.



   Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any
delinquent act within the city, the Police Department shall immediately
attempt to notify the parent of such arrest or detention, and the parent's
responsibility under this chapter.  A record of such notification efforts
shall be kept by the Police Department.



(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 135.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall be in violation of any of the provisions of §
135.004 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court; the court may in its discretion, consider, as an alternative to the
levy of the above fine and imprisonment, disregard sentencing which may
include but not necessarily be limited to, community service, parenting
classes and/or any combination of like penalties.



(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION CODE



      151.   HISTORIC DISTRICT



      152.   SIDEWALK CAFÉS



      153.   DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



      154.   PARKS AND RECREATION



CHAPTER 150:  HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION CODE



Section



Construction Code



   150.001   Title



   150.002   Adoption of Codes



   150.003   Construction Board of Appeals



   150.004   Contractor registration



   150.005   Vehicle identification



   150.006   Fees



   150.007   Application of building permit; availability under Freedom
of Information Act; compliance with zoning



   150.008   Certificate of use and occupancy



International Property Maintenance Code



   150.010   Adoption; incorporation



   150.011   Additions; insertions; amendments



Minimum Property Standards for One and Two Living Units



   150.020   Adoption



Registration and Obtaining a Certificate of Compliance for all Rental
Dwellings and Rental Units



   150.035   Purpose



   150.036   Definitions



   150.037   Registration required



   150.038   Registration forms and fees



   150.039   Registration term and renewal



   150.040   Responsible local agent



   150.041   Transfer of ownership



   150.042   Certificate of compliance required



   150.043   Certificate of compliance application form and fee



   150.044   Posting of certificate of compliance



   150.045   Disclaimer of liability



   150.046   Dangerous conditions



   150.047   Lien against property



   150.048   Appeal process



Blight



   150.060   Title



   150.061   Purpose



   150.062   Blight prohibited



   150.063   Rodent control



   150.064   Enforcement



Exterior Maintenance of Buildings and Accessory Buildings —Misdemeanors



   150.075   Definitions



   150.076   Defective conditions



   150.077   Enforcement



Non-Owner Occupied Residential Property Registration and
Inspection—Misdemeanors



   150.080   Purpose



   150.081   Definitions



   150.082   Registration required



   150.083   Certificate of compliance required



   150.084   Registration forms and fees



   150.085   Business registration and license required



   150.086   Designation of responsible agent required



   150.087   Transfer of ownership; certificates non-transferable



   150.088   Inspection of non-owner occupied units



   150.089   Posting of certificate of compliance



   150.090   Additional violations



   150.091   Compliance with Code of Ordinances



   150.092   District court actions for rent and/or possession



   150.093   Affidavit of vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or non-rental



   150.094   Suspension of certificate of compliance



   150.095   Dangerous conditions



   150.096   Disclaimer of liability



Exterior Maintenance of Buildings and Accessory Buildings—Civil Infractions



   150.175   Definitions



   150.176   Defective conditions



   150.177   Enforcement



Non-Owner Occupied Residential Property Registration and Inspection—Civil
Infractions



   150.180   Purpose



   150.181   Definitions



   150.182   Registration required



   150.183   Certificate of compliance required



   150.184   Registration forms and fees



   150.185   Business registration and license required



   150.186   Designation of responsible agent required



   150.187   Transfer of ownership; certificates non-transferable



   150.188   Inspection of non-owner occupied units



   150.189   Posting of certificate of compliance



   150.190   Additional violations



   150.191   Compliance with Code of Ordinances



   150.192   District court actions for rent and/or possession



   150.193   Affidavit of vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or non-rental



   150.194   Suspension of certificate of compliance



   150.195   Dangerous conditions



   150.196   Disclaimer of liability



 



   150.999   Penalty




CONSTRUCTION CODE




§ 150.001  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be called the Construction Code Subchapter.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)



§ 150.002  ADOPTION OF CODES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Building, Electrical,
Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, in accordance with Public Act 230 of 1972, §
8(b)(6), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, the Building,
Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Code official of the city is hereby
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the
city under Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through
125.1531, State of Michigan.



   (B)   The city assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Act throughout its corporate limits.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000; Am. Ord. 477, passed 10-5-2001)



§ 150.003  CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Right of appeal; jurisdiction.  Pursuant to the provisions
and requirements or the codes adopted in § 150.002 above, the City
Construction Board or Appeals is hereby created and shall hear all appeals
taken from the Building, Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Codes, as
provided in the codes and other requirements of the State Construction Code
Act of 1972, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through
125.1531.



   (B)   Construction Board of Appeals; appointment; term of office;
qualifications.  The Construction Board of Appeals shall consist of five
regular members and two alternate members who shall serve for a term of five
years pursuant to the adopted codes. Members of the Construction Board of
Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be qualified by experience
and training to perform the duties of the Construction Board of Appeals and,
where required, registered in accordance with state law. A clerical person
appointed by the Civil Service Commission shall serve as the secretary to the
Construction Board of Appeals and shall file a detailed record of all
proceedings and decisions in the office of the City Clerk, and provide to the
appellant a copy of the procedures, under which the hearing will be
conducted, and a copy of the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals.



   (C)   Open Meetings Act; Freedom of Information Act.  The business
of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be conducted at public meetings
held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. Public notice of the time, date and
place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open
Meetings Act. A record of decisions made by the Construction Board of
Appeals, properly indexed and any other writing prepared, owned, used, in the
possession of, or retained by the Construction Board of Appeals in the
performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in
compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 422 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.



   (D)   Fees.  The appellant shall pay a mandatory nonwaivable fee at
the time of filing an appeal to the City Treasurer before any appeal is
considered. The fee shall be established as provided in § 150.006. Unless
the applicant provides written notice of his or her intent to withdraw his or
her appeal at least 72 hours prior to the public meeting scheduled for that
purpose, the fee is nonrefundable.



   (E)   Compensation.  The City Council shall fix, by an annual
resolution, the amount of any per diem compensation provided to members of
the Construction Board of Appeals. The members shall request in writing to
the code official reimbursement for any actual and necessary expenses
incurred in connection with their duties as a member of the Construction
Board of Appeals. If the code official shall approve, he or she shall forward
the request to the City Controller.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.004  CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Registration.  Residential builders, maintenance and
alteration contractors, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, alarm, awning or
sign contractors who are lawfully licensed by the state shall be permitted to
do work for which they are licensed in the city upon registering as a
contractor in the city limits upon payment of a fee provided by resolution or
ordinance of the City Council. A license holder must make the application.



   (B)   Term and issuance of registration.  All contractor
registrations issued by the city shall expire as provided by state law and in
accordance with division (A) above, which includes presentation of the
license and payment of the required fee.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000; Am. Ord. 482, passed 4-8-2002; Am. Ord. 484,
passed 5-30-2002)



§ 150.005  VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   Identification required.  No person engaged in any
construction or work regulated under this section and subchapter shall
operate a truck or commercial vehicle upon the streets and highways of the
city unless the name and address of the person or business operating the
vehicle is displayed conspicuously on the outside of the commercial vehicle.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  All motor vehicles used for the
transportation of employees, goods, services and ware including vehicles
designed to tow other vehicles. Vehicles belonging to employees of
contractors and used only for personal transportation to a job site, shall
not be included.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.006  FEES.



   (A)   Schedule of fees.  The City Council, shall by resolution or
ordinance, establish reasonable fees to be charged by the city for acts and
services performed by the code official or his or her duly authorized
representative, the Construction Board of Appeals, the Plan Commission and
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The fees shall be intended to bear a reasonable
relation to the cost, including overhead, to the city for the acts and
services, including, without limitation in case of the city, issuance of
building permits, examination of plans and specifications, inspection of
construction undertaken pursuant to a building permit and the issuance of
certificate of use and occupancy, and in the case of the Construction and
Zoning Boards of Appeals, hearing appeals in accordance with law and
ordinances of this city.



   (B)   Fees; effective.  Fees authorized by resolution or ordinance,
unless specifically set forth in a dollar amount within the resolution or
ordinance, shall be effective upon publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)



§ 150.007  APPLICATION OF BUILDING PERMIT; AVAILABILITY UNDER FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION ACT; COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING.



   (A)   Application; form; contents.  Except as otherwise provided by
ordinance adopting a nationally recognized code pursuant to Public Act 230 of
1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, before commencing any
construction of, or in, a building or structure, the owner or owner’s
agent, shall submit an application in writing to the Division for a building
permit. A site plan showing the dimensions, and the location of the proposed
building or structure and other buildings or structures on the same premises,
shall be submitted with the application. The application shall contain the
full  name and complete address, by street and number, of the owner(s) in
fee of the premises on which the building or structure will be used. If
construction is proposed to be undertaken by a person other than the owner,
the statement shall also contain the full name and complete address, by
street and number, of the person proposing the construction. The owner, or
the owner’s attorney, agent, engineer, architect or builder may make the
application. A person shall not be recognized as the agent, attorney,
engineer, architect or builder of another person unless the person files with
the Division a written instrument, which could be an architectural,
engineering or construction contract, power of attorney or a notarized letter
of authorization signed by the owner designating the person as the agent,
attorney, architect, engineer or builder and, in case of a builder, setting
forth the builder’s state license number.



   (B)   Freedom of Information Act.  The application for a building
permit shall be filed with the Division and the application and any other
writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the city
in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the
public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 422 of
1976, being M.C. L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq. An application shall not be removed
from the custody of the city after a building permit has been issued.



   (C)   Zoning and other ordinances.  Before the issuance of a
building permit, the applicant shall comply with the provisions of the zoning
regulations of the city, as amended, and any other relevant ordinances of the
city.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)



§ 150.008  CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Certificate required.  A building or structure shall not be
used or occupied in whole or in part until the Division has issued a
certificate of use and occupancy, hereinafter “certificate.” The
certificate shall certify that the building or structure has been constructed
in accordance with the building permit and/or site plan, this subchapter, and
other applicable laws and ordinances. A building or structure altered in
whole or in part shall not be used or occupied until a certificate has been
issued, except that use or occupancy in an already existing building or
structure that was not discontinued during its alteration may be continued
for a maximum of 30 days after completion of the alteration before the
issuance of a certificate is required. A certificate shall be issued by the
code official when the work covered by a building permit and/or site plan has
been completed in accordance with the permit, this subchapter, and other
applicable laws and ordinances. On request of a holder of a building permit,
the Division may issue a temporary certificate for a building or structure,
or part hereof, before the entire work covered by the building permit has
been completed, if the parts of the building or structure to be covered by
the certificate may be occupied before completion of all work in accordance
with the permit, this chapter, and other applicable laws and ordinances,
without endangering the health or safety of the occupants or users. The
Division shall issue a certificate within five business days for
single-family residential and ten business days for all other uses after
approval of the final building inspections and receipt of a written
application therefore on a form to be prescribed by the Division, which shall
signify that a building or structure has received final or temporary approval.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)



INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.010  ADOPTION; INCORPORATION.



   There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code, as promulgated, published and approved by the International
Code Council, Inc., together with all amendments, references and supplements
herein is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Hamtramck; provided, that any provisions thereof are not in conflict of any
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.  The Building Official is designated
as the enforcing agent to discharge the responsibilities and enforce the
provisions of this code.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-04, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 150.011  ADDITIONS; INSERTIONS; AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Insert: “the City of Hamtramck.”



   (B)   Section 103.5 Fees. Insert: “In accordance with the fee
schedule established by resolution of the City Council.”



   (C)   Section 106.4 is amended to read: “106.4 Violation
Penalties. The violation of any provision of International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by reference and incorporated into the Hamtramck
Code of Ordinances by any person shall be punishable by the fines set forth
in the Hamtramck City Code, Section 10.999.”



   (D)   Section 107.2 is amended to read: “107.2 Form. Such notice
prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all the following:



      (1)   Be in writing.



      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.



      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and
why the notice is being sent.



      (4)   Include a corrective action date allowing for reasonable
time to make repairs and Improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance.”



   (E)   Section 107.3 shall be stricken in its entirety.



   (F)   Section 109.6 shall be stricken in its entirety.



   (G)   Section 111 shall be stricken in its entirety, being Sections
111.1 through 111.8.



   (H)   Section 112.4 is amended to read:  “112.4 Failure to
Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been issued a
stop work order, except such work as that person has been directed to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall by guilty of a civil
infraction.”



   (I)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert: “Five (5) inches.”



   (J)   Section 304.14Insect screens. Insert: “April 15th” and
“October 15th.”



   (K)   Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert: “September 15th” and
“May 15th.”



   (L)   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Insert: “September
15th” and “May 15th.”



   (M)   Section 302.4 is amended to read:  “302.4  Weeds. Premises
and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of five inches. Noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.



      Upon failure if the owner or agent having charge of a property to
cut and destroy weeds after service or a notice of violation, they shall be
subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by
the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor
hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in
violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of
such removal, plus an administrative fee as established by resolution of City
Council, shall be charged to the property owner and, if necessary, collected
as a tax lien against the property.”



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-04, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-06,
passed 8-29-2017)  Penalty, see § 150.999




MINIMUM PROPERTY STANDARDS FOR ONE AND TWO LIVING UNITS




§ 150.020  ADOPTION.



   The Minimum Property Standards For One and Two Living Units, as
approved by the Federal Housing Administration of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, designated by it as FHA No. 300,
is hereby adopted as an ordinance for the city and its provisions shall be
effective in the city. From the effective date of this subchapter, the
provisions of the Minimum Property Standards for One and Two Living Units
shall be controlling within the limits of the city.



(Ord. 325, passed 11-12-1969)




REGISTRATION AND OBTAINING A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE FOR ALL RENTAL
DWELLINGS AND RENTAL UNITS




§ 150.035  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to maintain quality
structures for the public health, safety and welfare. This subchapter will
set safeguard controls for the rental of one- and two-family dwellings,
multiple-dwellings, apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group
homes, hotels, motels and flats.



   (B)   The City Council, in adopting this subchapter, recognizes the
growing number of rental units within the city and further recognizes the
unfortunate decline of many of these rental units and their impact upon the
rest of the community. In an attempt to protect the citizens as a whole of
the city, it is deemed necessary that the following sections be adopted in
order to protect the integrity of the residential rental units in the city.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 150.036  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.  A certificate issued by the Department of
Housing which certifies compliance with the provisions of the codes and
ordinances of the city.



   LEASE.  Any written or oral agreement that sets forth any and all
conditions concerning the use and occupancy of rental dwellings or rental
units.



   NEW RENTAL DWELLING.  Any structure, building or other facility
promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home,
residence or sleeping unit which has never been occupied and excluding any
addition or modification of an existing structure. This definition includes
but without limitation one- and two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings,
apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group homes, hotels, motels
and flats.



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION.  A notice issued to the owner or responsible
local agent stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the
subchapter or any other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations
concerning the premises.



   OCCUPANCY.  Includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within
a rental dwelling or rental unit.



   OWNER.  Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the premises.



   OWNER OCCUPIED.  Any part of a structure used as a living quarters by
the owner of the structure where other parts or part of structure are used as
rental unit(s). Example: two-family dwelling, owner occupies one flat;
rooming house, owner occupies one unit and the like.



   PREMISES.  Any lot or piece of land inclusive of the rental dwelling
or rental unit.



   RENTAL DWELLING.  Any structure, building or other facility promised
and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence
or sleeping unit. This definition includes but without limitation one- and
two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings, apartment units, boarding houses,
rooming houses, group homes, hotels, motels and flats.



   RENTAL UNIT.  Any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment or
facility of a rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one
tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 150.037  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   The owner of any rental dwelling or rental unit shall register each
rental dwelling and all rental units contained within the rental dwelling
with the city and shall designate a person, as defined in § 150.040, as the
responsible local agent who shall be legally responsible for operating the
registered rental dwelling or rental unit and shall also be responsible for
providing access to the premises for making the inspections necessary to
ensure compliance with the terms of the subchapter and all applicable codes
and ordinances adopted by the city. Each responsible local agent shall
maintain a current list of the number of occupants of each rental unit for
which he or she is responsible. A certificate of compliance shall not be
issued if the registration provisions of this subchapter are not complied
with.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.038  REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEES.



   (A)   Applications for registration shall be made in a form and in
accordance with the instructions as may be provided by the Department of
Housing and shall include at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, telephone number and date of birth of
applicant;



      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners
of the rental dwelling;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the
responsible local agent; and



      (4)   The number of rental units in each rental dwelling.



   (B)   The fee of $15 for each rental dwelling registered shall be
paid at the time of registration. No post office boxes will be accepted as a
legal address. The registration shall be kept in the Department of Housing.
Applicants will also be informed of certificate of compliance requirements at
the time of registration.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 150.039  REGISTRATION TERM AND RENEWAL.



   Registration shall be made within 90 days of the enactment of the
subchapter. The term of the registration shall be valid as long as the owner
remains unchanged. In the event of a transfer of ownership the registration
and any certificate of compliance shall expire and no longer be valid. Any
new owner shall register and make application for a certificate of compliance
for each rental dwelling and rental unit within ten days of the date of
transfer to a new owner.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.040  RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT.



   The responsible local agent shall be a person or representative of a
corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity, having his or her place of residence in the
city, and shall be designated by the owner as responsible for operating the
premises in compliance with all the provisions of the City Codes and
ordinances. The owner may act as the responsible local agent provided he or
she resides in the city. All official notices of the city may be issued to
the responsible local agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have
been issued upon the owner of record.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 150.041  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any rental dwelling or rental
unit who has received a notice of violation to transfer, convey, lease or
sell (including by land contract) his or her ownership and/or interest in any
way to another, unless the owner shall have first furnished to the grantee,
lessee or vendee or transferee a true copy of any notice of violation and
shall have furnished to the building official a signed and notarized
statement from the grantee, vendee or lessee, or transferee acknowledging the
receipt of the notice of violation.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.042  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall lease, rent or cause to be occupied a rental
dwelling or rental unit unless there is a valid certificate of compliance
issued by the Department of Housing in the name of the owner/responsible
local agent and issued for the specific rental dwelling and rental unit. The
certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in each rental dwelling
and rental unit at all times or in a common area shared by all occupants of a
rental dwelling and rental unit. The certificate shall be issued after making
application with the Department of Housing and an inspection is made to
determine that each rental dwelling and rental unit complies with the
provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city. An inspection report
shall be completed by the inspector after completing the inspection of
dwelling.



   (B)   Before a certificate of compliance is issued all violations
must be corrected and approved. The violations shall be corrected within six
months of inspection, except in dangerous conditions which must be remedied
immediately.



   (C)   A certificate of compliance may be issued to an applicant
after the dwelling has been inspected by the city or its designated
representatives and the inspection discloses to the satisfaction of the city
that:



      (1)   The interior of the dwelling is free from refuse,
garbage, waste and that the interior walls, ceilings and woodwork are free of
major cracks or crevices or have been sealed by the application of paint or
other materials which are designed to prevent the accumulation of dust, dirt
or residue;



      (2)   The dwelling shall be equipped with a functioning hot
water system capable of delivering water at a temperature of 120°F which
system shall be free of leaks and which shall utilize valves which completely
stop the passage of water when so operated;



      (3)   The dwelling shall be equipped with a functioning water
closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower, all of which shall present a clean,
sanitary appearance, free of permeable cracks, crevices or porous areas;



      (4)   The dwelling shall be equipped with a sink which shall
be located in the room designated as the kitchen, and which shall be
connected to a functioning cold water system and a functioning hot water
system, as described above. The sink shall drain into a freely-running sewer
system. The area surrounding the sink, as well as the sink itself, shall
present a non-porous surface for water, and shall be free of cracks,
crevices, and which shall present a clean, sanitary appearance;



      (5)   The dwelling shall be equipped with a sanitary sewage
disposal system that drains freely at all times into the municipal sewage
system;



      (6)   The dwelling shall be equipped with a heating system
that maintains all occupied rooms at a temperature of at least 70°F at a
distance of three-feet above the floor level under ordinary minimum winter
conditions;



      (7)   (a)   The dwelling unit shall have an electrical
service of at least 60 ampere capacity and be adequate for the load being
served. Fifteen and 20 amp Type S fuses shall be used unless circuit breakers
exist;



         (b)   Every habitable room shall contain at least two
separate wall-type electric outlets, or one outlet and one supplied
ceiling-type electric light fixture. Larger rooms shall require at least one
outlet per wall (example: living room, dining room, kitchen);



         (c)   Each entrance/exit shall be illuminated by
exterior lights controlled by interior wall switches. Each public hallway,
stairwell, laundry room, furnace room shall contain at least one supplied
ceiling or wall type electric light fixture;



         (d)   If kitchen outlet(s) is within six feet of water
the outlet shall be a GFI (ground fault interrupter). There shall also be a
GFI outlet in the bathroom not more than 48 inches from the basin. The outlet
shall be at least 30 inches and not more than 60 inches above the floor;



         (e)   Tenants shall have access to their own fuse box
(example: fuse box in each unit or in basement that tenant has access to).
Service (fuse box) shall be closed, having no live parts exposed;



         (f)   All electrical outlets and fixtures shall be kept
in good and safe working order; and



         (g)   If electrical service does not meet these minimum
standards, it shall be brought up to 100 amp service by licensed electrician
with city permit.



      (8)   All floors, steps, porches and stairways inside and
outside of dwelling shall be sound, and free of loose or cracked coverings,
holes, depressions or defects which may tend to present a danger to persons;



      (9)   The outer roof surface of the dwelling shall present an
impervious surface to rain water, and shall present no deformations or voids;



      (10)   The gutters/rainpipes and downspouts shall be properly
secured to the house and be free from deterioration (example: rotting or
missing pieces);



      (11)   All interior and exterior windows of the dwelling shall
be equipped with panes of glass or approved materials sealed from water and
wind. All windows shall be equipped with a storm window and screen. All
windows shall be openable from the inside of dwelling. Each window shall be
capable of being locked or secured from inside the dwelling;



      (12)   All exterior doors of the dwelling shall be capable of
being secured from the inside by a locking device, and shall be openable by
actuating a latch or similar device. All doors shall be maintained so that
they present a barrier to persons and animals. All entrance and exit doors
immediately connected to unit shall have a screen/storm door that is in good
working order;



      (13)   The exterior of the dwelling shall be coated with a
material that seals out moisture, and which presents a continuous
uninterrupted surface except where there are doors or windows;



      (14)   The dwelling shall be free of insects and rodents;



      (15)   The exterior lot shall be free of debris, rubbish,
trash, garbage or wastes, abandoned/unused vehicles, and shall bear no
evidence of rodent infestation;



      (16)   Any garage, shed or storage structure shall be in good
condition, free of deterioration and free of debris;



      (17)   Smoke alarms shall be required in locations and in
numbers in the unit as prescribed by the Fire Inspector and the applicable
ordinance; and



      (18)   If the inspection discloses any evidence of structural,
electrical, mechanical or sanitation conditions that may prove detrimental to
the safety and health of the occupants, the city reserves the right to
conduct the necessary trade inspections to determine the extent of any
violations and the corrective actions required.



   (D)   A certificate of compliance is valid for a period of three
years from its date of issuance, provided that the rental dwelling and rental
units remain in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances and are
not sold or transferred. For a new rental dwelling, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued simultaneously with the certificate of occupancy,
and shall remain valid for three years provided that the rental dwelling and
rental units remain in compliance with all the applicable codes and
ordinances and are not sold or transferred. When the rental dwelling or
rental units are going to be sold or transferred, a new inspection and a new
certificate of compliance shall be required. The inspection fees will follow
the same guidelines as stated in § 150.999(C). The Housing Code Inspector
may revoke a certificate of compliance for a violation of any code, ordinance
or rule or regulation of the city and the certificate must be renewed every
three years. The initial certificate of compliance must be applied for in
accordance with § 150.999(C) within 90 days of the enactment of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.043  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE APPLICATION FORM AND FEE.



   (A)   Application for certificate of compliance shall be made in a
form and in accordance with instructions as may be provided by the Housing
Code Director and shall include at least the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, phone number and date of birth of the
owner(s);



      (2)   Name, address and phone number of responsible local
agent; and



      (3)   Address and number of units applied for under the
certificate of compliance.



   (B)   The inspection fee for a certificate of compliance shall be
$150 for each rental dwelling and $50 for each additional rental unit
contained within the rental dwelling. This fee covers the initial inspection
and one complete reinspection, if needed. Any additional reinspections
performed will require a fee of $20 per unit, per inspector.



   (C)   All owner occupied rentals shall follow the same inspection
fee. The owner’s own unit shall not be inspected unless there is an
indication that there is a safety or health problem located in the unit. The
owner’s unit will not be inspected without permission of the owner. If an
inspection of the owner’s unit is necessary, no fee will be charged for
owner’s unit.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.044  POSTING OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   The following information shall be posted in a conspicuous place either
within each rental dwelling and rental unit or in a common area shared by all
occupants of a rental dwelling and rental unit:



   (A)   A copy of the current certificate of compliance; and



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the responsible
local agent.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.045  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   A certificate of compliance is not a warranty or guarantee
that there are no defects in the rental dwelling or unit and the city shall
not be held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report.



   (B)   This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural or
mechanical defects thereto or other items that are not apparent by a visual
inspection.



   (C)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by
reason of the inspections required by the subchapter or the Code adopted
herein or the issuance of a certificate of compliance or a certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 150.046  DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   Should the Housing Code Department, upon inspection, determine that
there are conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and
safety, it may order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit
occupancy where appropriate.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.047  LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.



   If any owner fails to pay any fees required by the subchapter, then the
amount due shall accrue interest at a rate of 10% per annum from the date
when it becomes due and shall be filed with the City Assessor’s office and
shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and
assessments.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 150.048  APPEAL PROCESS.



   A landlord/owner shall have the opportunity to appeal the denial of a
certificate of compliance. The appeal must be filed with the Housing Code
Board of Appeals within 15 days after denial. The City Council shall
establish a Housing Code Board of Appeals to review any hardships or
variances from the requirements as set forth in the subchapter which shall
act as the appeal process as set forth above. The Housing Code Board of
Appeals shall meet once a month, if necessary, to review any hardship or
variances as may be presented to them from the landlord/owner.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)




BLIGHT




§ 150.060  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Blight Subchapter.



(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)



§ 150.061  PURPOSE.



   By enacting this subchapter, the city will enhance the health, safety
or welfare of its residents.



(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)



§ 150.062  BLIGHT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Blight.  It is hereby determined that the following
structures, uses and activities are causes of or factors encouraging blight
which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable
neighborhoods.



   (B)   Blighting factors prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any
person(s) to maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following causes
of blight upon any property in the city owned, leased, rented or occupied by
these person(s):



      (1)   General zoning.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
maintain or permit to be maintained in any zoned area:



         (a)   More than three single-faced cords of stacked
firewood, stacked less than six inches above the existing grade or more than
five feet in height;



         (b)   The existence of any structure or part of any
structure, which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical
deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other
purpose for which it may have been intended; and/or



         (c)   The existence of any partially completed structure
unless the structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a
valid building permit issued by the city.



      (2)   Residential zoning.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to maintain or permit to be maintained in any area zoned for
residential purposes:



         (a)   The repair of any motor vehicle or part thereof,
unless the motor vehicle or part thereof is owned by the person residing on
the premises, or members of his or her family regularly using the motor
vehicle, the repairs to be conducted in a manner so as not to create a
nuisance to the neighborhood and the repairs to be completed within a period
not to exceed 14 days from the start of the repair. Continuous repair of the
motor vehicles or vehicles at any one residence may and is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and thereby subject to the penalties of this subchapter;



         (b)   Park or store any unlicensed and/or inoperable
motor vehicle, mobile home, boat, camper, trailer or parts thereof; on a
residential driveway, rear yard, side yard or front yard of any the property
for more than 48 hours, unless the same is in a garage;



         (c)   Park or store any licensed motor vehicle, mobile
home, camper, boat or trailer or parts thereof in a rear yard, side yard or
front yard unless same is on a concrete slab that prevents weeds and grass
from growing underneath the vehicle, provided that no portion of the vehicle
is stored in a residential driveway beyond the front wall of either of the
two residential structures immediately adjacent to the driveway on which the
vehicle is stored or parked;



         (d)   Building materials, unless there is in force a
valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon the property
and the materials are intended for use in conjunction with the construction
which shall be completed within a reasonable time as determined by the
Building Code Official; and



         (e)   Junk, trash, rubbish or refuse or any kind, except
domestic refuse stored in a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period
not to exceed seven days.



      (3)   Zoned business, commercial or industrial.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to be maintained in any area
zoned for business, commercial or industrial purposes, junk, trash, rubbish
or refuse of any kind, except that to be disposed of weekly and vehicles and
trailers not directly connected with the operation of the business, unless
stored in a manner that will not create a nuisance.



      (4)   Zoned residential, business, office, commercial or
industrial.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to be
maintained in any area zoned for residential, business, office, commercial or
industrial purposes, any vacant dwelling, garage or other outbuilding unless
the building is kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded
up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals.



      (5)   Public property.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to:



         (a)   Park any automobile, truck, trailer or any vehicle
or part thereof on any public property unless the vehicle has proper license
plates attached and displayed;



         (b)   Park for a period exceeding 24 hours any
automobile, truck, trailer or any vehicle or parts thereof, on any public
street or other city property at any time, if the vehicle is incapable of
movement under its own power;



         (c)   Park any automobile, city-owned and/or operated
vehicles and/or emergency vehicles excluded, on any off-street city property;
and/or



         (d)   Park any automobile, truck, trailer or any vehicle
or parts thereof, on any public street or property of the city for purposes
of repairing same unless the repair be of an emergency nature and the
emergency repairs to be completed within a period of time not to exceed two
hours.



   (C)   (1)   If not in an approved garage, the storing, housing or
wintering of any commercial vehicle(s) in an area zoned residential on a
residential street, residential driveway, side yard, rear yard or front yard
is prohibited unless it is in conjunction with a valid building permit or the
delivery of products or services.



      (2)   There is an exception to allow residents with a valid
peddler's license to obtain a permit to park his or her licensed commercial
vehicle on their residential street or rear lot in compliance with the zoning
ordinance from April 1 through November 30.  A permit may only be issued to
residents with off- street parking for their personal vehicle.  The 
commercial vehicle may not be connected to a generator or other source of
power at any time while parked within the city.



(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000; Am. Ord. 2009-6, passed 12-8-2009; Am. Ord.
2012-2, passed 5-22-2012 )  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.063  RODENT CONTROL.



   (A)   Pesticide to be applied.  The owner, proprietor, tenant or
any person having charge of any property or structure in any area zoned for
business, commercial, industrial or residential purposes shall be responsible
for applying pesticide for the purpose of exterminating insects, rats, vermin
or other pests and their harborage places, in the interior and exterior of
the premises.



   (B)   Exterminator.  If the problem is not remedied with pesticide,
then extermination shall be done by a licensed professional exterminator, as
evidenced by the presentation of a paid receipt of the services to the
official designated by the Mayor after extermination work has taken place.
The owner, proprietor, tenant or any person having charge of any property
shall also remove or make inaccessible materials that may serve as food for
insects, rats, vermin, unwanted animals or other pests.



(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.064  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any official of the city designated by the Mayor shall have full
authority to enforce this subchapter.



(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)



EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS—MISDEMEANORS



§ 150.075  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  Any garage, shed or storage structure accessory
to the principal building or dwelling.



   DEFECT.  Any condition of a principal or accessory building set forth
§ 150.076.



   DWELLING.  Any building used or intended to be used wholly or in part
for living or sleeping by human occupants.



   EYESORE.  A principal and/or accessory building containing one or more
defects.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING.  Any structure of building housing the primary use
existing on the premises, including commercial, industrial or residential.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING includes a dwelling.



(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995)



§ 150.076  DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other
entity with an ownership interest in property, whether legal or equitable
(including land contract vendees’ interests) or for a tenant obligated by
lease to maintain the premises, to permit any principal or accessory building
to lapse into a defective state so as to become an eyesore, nuisance or a
threat to the health and safety of the occupants or others.



   (B)   The existence of any of the following prohibited conditions
shall constitute a defect and shall be, per se, a violation of this
subchapter.



      (1)   Bushes, trees and other landscaping shall be trimmed in
accordance with reasonable landscaping practices. Landscaping shall not
interfere with pedestrian traffic and shall be maintained to allow clear
vision for pedestrians and motorists at driveways, intersections and alleys.
Trees shall be kept trimmed away from neighboring structures and fences to
prevent damage. Front yards shall be maintained with cultivated ground cover
or similar decorative material and maintained in good condition.



      (2)   The hanging of clothes or laundry on front porches,
front railings or front fences is prohibited, except in the case of those
flea market/yard sales that possess the required permit.



      (3)   The placing or use of any furniture, other than
furniture specified for outdoor use, is prohibited on outdoor porches or in
yards. This includes but is not limited to, any furniture that is made of
porous materials (i.e., leather or cloth stuffed couches and chairs, auto
seats, interior coffee tables and the like).



(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.077  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Director of Housing or any authorized person designated by the city
shall notify the owner and, if possible and applicable, the occupant in
writing to correct the defective condition. The notice will specify a number
of days, length depending on severity of defective violation and discretion
of authorized person.



(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995)



NON-OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND
INSPECTION—MISDEMEANORS



§ 150.080  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the subchapter is to ensure that all non-owner occupied
dwellings and units within the city maintain minimum maintenance standards
for the public health, safety and welfare. This



subchapter will set safeguard controls for one and two family dwelling units,
multiple family dwelling units, apartment units, boarding and rooming houses,
group homes, hotels, motels, and flats.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 150.081  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows, terms not herein defined shall have the
meanings customarily assigned to them:



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the city which
certifies compliance with the codes and ordinances of non-owner occupied
dwellings and units in the city.



   CODE OFFICIAL. The official, who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article, or any duly authorized agent.



   DWELLING OR RENTAL UNIT. See NON-OWNER OCCUPIED.



   EXCEPTION. An additional dwelling, in a building occupied by its owner,
which is occupied by an immediate family member, shall be required to be
registered but shall be exempt from inspections and fees. Verification of the
relationship and occupancy shall be provided upon request.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. As defined by the Michigan Housing Code, a
spouse, parent, child, or sibling of the building owner. 



   LANDLORD. Means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of a non-owner occupied
unit, or the property which it is a part of and, in addition, means a person
authorized to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, whether
for any form of compensation or not, including a person who, directly or
indirectly, acts as a rental agent, receives rent, other than as a bona fide
purchaser, and who has no obligation to deliver the receipts to another
person.



   NON-OWNER OCCUPIED. Means any non-owner occupied structure, or part of
a structure in the case of multiple-family structures, containing one or more
rooms including a kitchen and designed as a unit for occupancy by one family
for the purpose of cooking, living and sleeping, which is used as a home or
residence by a person or household unit, or any grounds, or other facilities
or area promised for the use of a residential tenant, whether for any form of
compensation or not, including without limitation, apartment units and one
and two-family dwellings.  A non-owner occupied unit that is rented or
leased with an option to purchase is considered a rental agreement until the
lessee fully exercises the option to purchase as evidenced by a recorded deed
or land contract. 



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local
agent stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the
subchapter or any other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations
concerning the premises.



   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the premises.



   RENEWAL DATE. The expiration date of a previous or current certificate
for the same owner and the same property.



   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The responsible local agent shall be an
individual person, and shall be either the property owner, representative of
a corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, or designated by the owner as responsible for operating the
premises in compliance with all the provisions of the city codes and
ordinances. All official notices and violations may be issued to the
responsible local agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have
been issued upon the owner of record.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 150.082  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit shall register
with the city and shall designate a person as the responsible local agent who
shall be legally responsible for operating the premises in compliance with
all the provisions of the city codes and ordinances, and shall also be
responsible for providing access to the premises for making the inspections
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of all applicable codes and
ordinances adopted by the city. Each responsible local agent shall maintain a
current list of the number of occupants of each non-owner occupied unit for
which they are responsible.  A certificate of compliance shall not be issued
if the registration provisions are not complied with.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.083  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall rent, lease, advertise or offer for rent or
lease, or occupy any non-owner occupied dwelling or rental unit unless there
is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the city in the name of the
owner/responsible local agent and issued for each specific dwelling and unit.
Certificates are not transferable between landlords, dwellings or units.
Application for a non-owner occupied certificate is an admission of fact by
the applicant that the applicant is conducting a rental dwelling operation as
defined by this chapter.  It shall be the duty of all landlords to apply for
the non-owner occupied certificate, and certificate renewals, as required by
this chapter and obtain all required inspections, repairs and approvals prior
to the occupancy date, or the expiration date of any current certificate,
whichever occurs first.



   (B)   Occupancy of any dwelling by a person other than the owner
shall be presumed to require a certificate of compliance. This presumption
may be rebutted by evidence that the occupant has ownership equity in the
dwelling as evidenced by a recorded deed, a recorded land contract, or a
recorded memorandum of land contract. A dwelling that is occupied, rented or
leased with an option to purchase is considered as non-owner occupied under
the terms of this chapter until the lessee fully exercises the option to
purchase as evidenced by recorded documentation.



   (C)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city if the
applicant meets the following requirements:



      (1)   A completed registration form is submitted pursuant to
the provisions of § 150.084;



      (2)   The inspection(s) have been performed at the premises
sought to be certified and all violations disclosed have been corrected;



      (3)   All re-inspections have been approved to confirm the
correction of violations;



      (4)   All registration, inspection and late fees are paid;



      (5)   No certificate of compliance will be issued until all of
the following fees and debts to the city have been paid in full;



      (6)   All previously billed property taxes;



      (7)   All current or past due special assessments;



      (8)   Water or sewer bills outstanding;



      (9)   All charges against the property for mowing, cleanup,
debris removal or similar charges by the city; and



      (10)   Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort
arising from provisions of property maintenance, including blight violations.



   (D)   The term of the certificate shall be established by resolution
of City Council.  The non-owner occupied certificate is valid for the
established period from the date of application for a new certificate, or the
expiration date of the previous certificate for a renewal, unless suspended
or revoked for cause by the city. Licensees shall apply for certificate
renewal 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current certificate. Sale
of the subject premises results in immediate termination of the certificate.
Failure to obtain or renew a certificate or failure to pay any inspection fee
is a violation of this chapter.



   (E)   Failure to register a non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling
unit(s), complete the required inspection or re-inspection, obtain a
certificate of compliance or renew a certificate of compliance prior to the
expiration date, or failure to pay any fee is a violation of this chapter and
may result in additional fees and penalties including court action.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.084  REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEES.



   (A)   Applications for registration will be available at the City of
Hamtramck City Hall and shall include at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or
state I.D. card number and date of birth of applicant. No post office boxes
shall be accepted as legal address;



      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners
of the dwelling or units;



      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or
state I.D. card number and date of birth of the responsible local agent. No
post office boxes shall be accepted as legal address;



      (4)   The authorization appointing a responsible local agent
signed by both the owner and the responsible local agent; and



      (5)   The number of units in each building, if multiple units
exist.



   (B)   A one-time registration fee is required for each property
owner or entity and shall be paid at the time of registration. No post office
boxes will be accepted as legal address.



   (C)   An inspection fee for the each unit shall be paid at the time
of registration for a new certificate, or renewal of an existing certificate.
This inspection fee shall include an initial inspection, and one
re-inspection as needed. Third and subsequent inspections that are required
shall be charged an additional fee, per inspection. If an owner or registered
agent fails to provide access for an inspection, or the inspector cannot gain
access to any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit, this shall be considered
as a ‘lock out’ and be subject to an additional inspection fee.



   (D)   Registration fees, inspection fees, late fees as well as any
other charges in connection with non-owner occupied registration and
compliance shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.085  BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation that meets one or more
of the following conditions will be considered to be operating a business in
the City of Hamtramck and will be required to obtain a business license from
the City Clerk. The business license is in addition to the required
certificate of compliance:



      (1)   Any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit(s) that are
registered in the name of a corporation, incorporation, limited liability
company, or other business entity, and evidenced by deed, land contract,
property transfer affidavit or other documentation showing legal interest and
ownership.



      (2)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation, identified by
name, corporation, incorporation, limited liability company or any
combination thereof, having ownership in three or more non-owner occupied
dwelling units.



   (B)   Any entity that is required under this subsection to obtain a
business license must include with application a list of all properties owned
in the city, and provide proof that said properties have been registered with
the City Assessors’ Office, the Department of Community and Economic
Development and the Department of Public Services.



   (C)   Any entity that is required under this division to obtain a
business license and has properties registered under two or more names, need
only obtain one business license, but must include with application a list of
all properties owned, the name under which each property is registered, and
provide proof that said properties have been registered with the City
Assessors’ Office, the Department of Community and Economic Development and
the Department of Public Services.



   (D)   Business licenses for non-owner occupied properties are
non-transferrable. Upon changes in ownership, the new owner, if required by
this section, must submit application for a new business license.



   (E)   Fees for non-owner occupied dwellings business licenses shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.086  DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE AGENT REQUIRED.



   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling and dwelling units shall
designate an individual person as the responsible local agent who shall be
responsible for operating the dwelling or dwelling units and who shall
provide access for inspection by the code official for compliance with the
applicable ordinance requirements. The owner may act as the responsible local
agent. The responsible local agent shall reside within a 50 mile radius of
the city.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.087  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; CERTIFICATES NON-TRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   Non-owner occupied certificates shall not be transferrable as
to person or place. Upon a transfer of ownership of any dwelling or dwelling
units, the new owner shall apply for a new certificate no later than 30 days
after the transfer of ownership.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any non-owner occupied
dwelling or unit(s) who has received a notice of violation to transfer,
convey, lease or sell (including by land contract) his or her ownership
and/or interest in any way to another, unless the owner shall have first
furnished to the grantee, lessee or vendee or transferee a true copy of any
notice of violation and shall have furnished to the building official a
signed and notarized statement from the grantee, vendee or lessee, or
transferee acknowledging the receipt of the notice of violation.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.088  INSPECTION OF NON-OWNER OCCUPIED UNITS.



   (A)   Access of code official. The code official shall be granted
access by the owner, agent, or occupant of the non-owner occupied dwelling or
dwelling unit(s), at the date and time schedule for the inspection(s), for
the purpose of conducting a compliance inspection. If any owner or occupant
refuses to provide access to the premises for a compliance inspection, or
fails to show up for the inspection, the inspection shall be recorded as a
lock-out and re-inspection fees assessed. All non-owner occupied dwellings
and dwelling units shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in the
International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in § 150.010
of this chapter.



   (B)   Inspection required. All non-owner occupied dwellings and
dwelling unit(s) shall have an inspection to ensure compliance with all the
requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by
reference in § 150.010 of this chapter.



   (C)   Re-inspection required. Re-inspection shall be required when
violations are found to exist during a prior inspection. Before a certificate
of compliance is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The
violations shall be corrected and a re-inspection completed within 30 days
after the initial inspection or by the renewal date, whichever occurs first,
except in dangerous conditions which must be remedied immediately.



   (D)   Additional inspections. In addition to regular or renewal
inspections, inspections may be scheduled on one or more of the following
bases:



      (1)   Upon a tenant complaint to the city. Complaints of
violations from tenants residing in the dwelling unit will be inspected
within a reasonable time if they allege sufficient facts that would give
reasonable cause to believe a violation of this chapter exists.



      (2)   Whenever a code official has a reasonable cause to
believe that there is a violation of this chapter or other conditions which
make the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.089  POSTING OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   No non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling unit may be occupied unless
a copy of the current certificate of compliance is displayed in an eight and
one-half by 11 inch frame securely affixed to the interior wall adjacent to
the primary entrance door to the dwelling or unit. A multiple-family dwelling
or apartment complex shall display the license in the same manner at the
primary entrance of each building or unit.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.090  ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.



   The following are additional violations subject to enforcement:



   (A)   No person shall occupy for sleeping purposes, and no owner or
responsible local agent shall allow a person to occupy for sleeping purposes,
a basement without compliant emergency egress or any non-habitable spaces of
a dwelling or unit;



   (B)   No person shall harass, stalk, threaten, hinder, assault, or
otherwise interfere with a code official or city inspector during the
performance of his or her duties;



   (C)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement or provide
any false information on a non-owner occupied certificate registration
application or any other information to any employee of the City of Hamtramck
or other authorized person in relation to any investigation of a violation of
this chapter;



   (D)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit and the yard connected
therewith shall remain clean and kept free from any accumulation of dirt,
filth, rubbish, or garbage; and



   (E)   Each day upon which a violation of this chapter occurs shall
be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.091  COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units shall comply with
all provisions of this chapter, the International Property Maintenance Code
as adopted in § 150.010, and all other applicable ordinance requirements.
After inspection, all non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units in
compliance with applicable  ordinances  shall  receive  a  certificate 
of  compliance  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  § 150.083.
Those non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units that are not in
compliance with applicable ordinances shall be brought into compliance within
30 days of the date of notice of the violations or by the renewal date,
whichever occurs first, and a subsequent inspection scheduled to verify
compliance. Upon request and submission of proof of extenuating
circumstances, the code official may grant an extension to make the
non-emergency repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.092  DISTRICT COURT ACTIONS FOR RENT AND/OR POSSESSION.



   (A)   When information is requested from court of any action for
rent or possession filed on an unregistered or uncertified property, the
court shall be notified of any violation of this chapter.



   (B)   When so instructed by the court the owner or responsible agent
shall register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.



   (C)   If previously unregistered, or registered but not certified,
the owner or responsible agent shall pay for and schedule inspections no
later than ten days after the completion of proceedings by the court with the
exception of one of the following:



      (1)    An affidavit of non-rental is filed by the owner.



      (2)   The owner provides proof of primary residence within ten
days of the date of notification from the court.



      (3)   The owner provides proof that court action for
possession has not been completed after 30 days, at which time an extension
shall be granted for an additional 30 days.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.093  AFFIDAVIT OF VACANT DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT OR NON-RENTAL.



   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied
shall have an affidavit of vacant dwelling or unit completed by the owner and
kept on file with the City of Hamtramck.



   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied
that does not have at least one owner occupied unit is subject to vacant
property registration and fees.



   (C)   At such time the vacant dwelling or dwelling unit is to be
occupied as a non-owner occupied dwelling, it shall be the owner's
responsibility to notify the city to remove the affidavit or vacant property
registration and to register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or
unit.



   (D)   Any property that has such an affidavit filed that is found to
be occupied by any person other than the property owner listed on the
affidavit shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties
herein.



   (E)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit, which has had an affidavit
filed, is subject to inspection by a code official to insure vacancy of the
dwelling or unit. No schedule is needed for the inspections which can take
place at any time.



   (F)   The owner of any dwelling unit that has a valid certificate
and becomes owner occupied shall file an affidavit of non-rental with the
city within 15 days of the change in occupancy.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.094  SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   A certificate of compliance issued by the city may be
suspended by the code official for any of the following conditions:



      (1)   A condition exists contrary to the public health,
morals, safety, or welfare.



      (2)   Unauthorized use or beyond the scope of the
certificate(s) issued.



      (3)   Any condition forbidden by the provisions of this
section or any other established city ordinance or other regulation.



      (4)   Violation of any criminal law.



      (5)   A verified complaint of violations to this subchapter.



   (B)   Upon suspension, the owner or agent shall be notified in
writing of the suspension and violations, corrective action, and the time
allotted for the violations to be corrected.



   (C)   If a certificate has been suspended, either by complaint or
otherwise, the owner or agent shall schedule a re-inspection to insure all
violations have been corrected.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.095  DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   Should the code official, upon inspection, determine that there are
conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may
order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where
appropriate.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.096  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   A certificate of compliance is not a warranty or guarantee
that there are no defects in the dwelling or dwelling unit(s) and the city
shall not be held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report.



   (B)   This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural or
mechanical defects thereto or other items that are not apparent by a visual
inspection.



   (C)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by
reason of the inspections required by the subchapter or the code adopted
herein or the issuance of a certificate of compliance or a certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)



EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS—CIVIL INFRACTIONS



§ 150.175  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Any garage, shed or storage structure accessory to
the principal building or dwelling.



   DEFECT. Any condition of a principal or accessory building set forth §
150.176.



   DWELLING. Any building used or intended to be used wholly or in part
for living or sleeping by human occupants.



   EYESORE. A principal and/or accessory building containing one or more
defects.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. Any structure of building housing the primary use
existing on the premises, including commercial, industrial or residential.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING includes a dwelling.



(Ord. , passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.176  DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other
entity with an ownership interest in property, whether legal or equitable
(including land contract vendees’ interests) or for a tenant obligated by
lease to maintain the premises, to permits any principal or accessory
building to lapse into a defective state so as to become an eyesore, nuisance
or a threat to the health and safety of the occupants or others.



   (B)   The existence of any of the following prohibited conditions
shall constitute a defect and shall be, per se, a violation of this
subchapter:



      (1)   Bushes, trees, and other landscaping shall be trimmed in
accordance with reasonable landscaping practices. Landscaping shall not
interfere with pedestrian traffic and shall be maintained to allow clear
vision for pedestrians and motorists at driveways, intersections and alleys.
Trees shall be kept trimmed away from neighboring structures and fences to
prevent damage. Front yards shall bne maintained with cultivated ground cover
or similar decorative material and maintained in good condition.



      (2)   The hanging of clothes or laundry on front porches,
front railings or front fences is prohibited, except in the case of those
flea market/yard sales that possess the required permit.



      (3)   The placing or use of any furniture, other than
furniture specified for outdoor use, is prohibited on outdoor porches or in
yards. This includes but is not limited to, any furniture that is made of
porous materials (i.e., leather or cloth stuffed couches, and chairs, auto
seats, interior coffee tables and the like).



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-9-2017)  Penalty see §
150.999



§ 150.177  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Director of Housing or any authorized person designated by the city
shall notify the owner and, if possible and applicable, the occupant in
writing to correct the defective condition. The notice will specify a number
of days, length depending on severity of defective violation and discretion
of authorized person.



(Ord., passed - -2013)  Penalty, see § 150.999



NON-OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION—CIVIL
INFRACTIONS



§ 150.180  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the subchapter is to ensure that all non-owner occupied
dwellings and units within the city maintain minimum maintenance standards
for the public health, safety and welfare. This subchapter will set safeguard
controls for one and two family dwelling units, multiple family dwelling
units, apartment units, boarding and rooming houses, group homes, hotels,
motels, and flats.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 150.181  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the City of
Hamtramck which certifies compliance with the codes and ordinances of
non-owner occupied dwellings and units in the city.



   CODE OFFICIAL. The official, who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly authorized agent.



   DWELLING OR RENTAL UNIT. See NON-OWNER OCCUPIED.



   EXCEPTION. An additional dwelling, in a building occupied by its owner,
which is occupied by an immediate family member, shall be required to be
registered but shall be exempt from inspections and fees. Verification of the
relationship and occupancy shall be provided upon request.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. As defined by the Michigan Housing Code, a
spouse, parent, child, or sibling of the building owner. 



   LANDLORD. The owner, lessor, or sublessor of a non-owner occupied unit,
or the property which it is a part of and, in addition, means a person
authorized to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, whether
for any form of compensation or not, including a person who, directly or
indirectly, acts as a rental agent, receives rent, other than as a bona fide
purchaser, and who has no obligation to deliver the receipts to another
person.



   NON-OWNER OCCUPIED. Any non-owner occupied structure, or part of a
structure in the case of multiple-family structures, containing one or more
rooms including a kitchen and designed as a unit for occupancy by one family
for the purpose of cooking, living and sleeping, which is used as a home or
residence by a person or household unit, or any grounds, or other facilities
or area promised for the use of a residential tenant, whether for any form of
compensation or not, including without limitation, apartment units and one
and two-family dwellings.  A non-owner occupied unit that is rented or
leased with an option to purchase is considered a rental agreement until the
lessee fully exercises the option to purchase as evidenced by a recorded deed
or land contract.



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local
agent stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the
subchapter or any other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations
concerning the premises.



   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the premises.



   RENEWAL DATE. The expiration date of a previous or current certificate
for the same owner and the same property.



   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The responsible local agent shall be an
individual person, and shall be either the property owner, representative of
a corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, or designated by the owner as responsible for operating the
premises in compliance with all the provisions of the city codes and
ordinances. All official notices and violations may be issued to the
responsible local agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have
been issued upon the owner of record.



   TERMS. Not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned
to them.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 150.182  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit shall register
with the city and shall designate a person as the responsible local agent who
shall be legally responsible for operating the premises in compliance with
all the provisions of the city codes and ordinances, and shall also be
responsible for providing access to the premises for making the inspections
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of all applicable codes and
ordinances adopted by the city. Each responsible local agent shall maintain a
current list of the number of occupants of each non-owner occupied unit for
which they are responsible.  A certificate of compliance shall not be issued
if the registration provisions are not complied with.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.183  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall rent, lease, advertise or offer for rent or
lease, or occupy any non-owner occupied dwelling or rental unit unless there
is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the city in the name of the
owner/responsible local agent and issued for each specific dwelling and unit.
Certificates are not transferable between landlords, dwellings or units.
Application for a non-owner occupied certificate is an admission of fact by
the applicant that the applicant is conducting a rental dwelling operation as
defined by this section. It shall be the duty of all landlords to apply for
the non-owner occupied certificate, and certificate renewals, as required by
this subchapter and obtain all required inspections, repairs and approvals
prior to the occupancy date, or the expiration date of any current
certificate, whichever occurs first.



   (B)   Occupancy of any dwelling by a person other than the owner
shall be presumed to require a certificate of compliance. This presumption
may be rebutted by evidence that the occupant has ownership equity in the
dwelling as evidenced by a recorded deed, a recorded land contract, or a
recorded memorandum of land contract. A dwelling that is occupied, rented or
leased with an option to purchase is considered as non-owner occupied under
the terms of this subchapter until the lessee fully exercises the option to
purchase as evidenced by recorded documentation.



   (C)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city if the
applicant meets the following requirements:



      (1)   A completed registration form is submitted pursuant to
the provisions of § 150.084.



      (2)   The inspection(s) have been performed at the premises
sought to be certified and all violations disclosed have been corrected.



      (3)   All re-inspections have been approved to confirm the
correction of violations.



      (4)   All registration, inspection and late fees are paid.



      (5)    No certificate of compliance will be issued until all
of the following fees and debts to the city have been paid in full:



         (a)   All previously billed property taxes;



         (b)   All current or past due special assessments;



         (c)   Water or sewer bills outstanding;



         (d)   All charges against the property for mowing,
cleanup, debris removal or similar charges by the city; and



         (e)   Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort
arising from provisions of property maintenance, including blight violations.



   (D)   The term of the certificate shall be established by resolution
of City Council.  The non-owner occupied certificate is valid for the
established period the date of application for a new certificate, or the
expiration date of the previous certificate for a renewal, unless suspended
or revoked for cause by the city. Licensees shall apply for certificate
renewal 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current certificate. Sale
of the subject premises results in immediate termination of the certificate.
Failure to obtain or renew a certificate or failure to pay any inspection fee
is a violation of this chapter.



   (E)   Failure to register a non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling
unit(s), complete the required inspection or re-inspection, obtain a
certificate of compliance or renew a certificate of compliance prior to the
expiration date, or failure to pay any fee is a violation of this subchapter
and may result in additional fees and penalties including court action.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.184  REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEES.



   (A)   Applications for registration will be available at the City of
Hamtramck City Hall and shall include at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or
state I.D. card number and date of birth of applicant. No post office boxes
shall be accepted as legal address;



      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners
of the dwelling or units;



      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or
state I.D. card number and date of birth of the responsible local agent. No
post office boxes shall be accepted as legal address;



      (4)   The authorization appointing a responsible local agent
signed by both the owner and the responsible local agent; and



      (5)   The number of units in each building, if multiple units
exist.



   (B)   A one-time registration fee is required for property owner or
entity registered and shall be paid at the time of registration. No post
office boxes will be accepted as legal address.



   (C)   An inspection fee for the each unit shall be paid at the time
of registration for a new certificate, or renewal of an existing certificate.
This inspection fee shall include an initial inspection, and one
re-inspection as needed. Third and subsequent inspections that are required
shall be charged an additional fee, per inspection. If an owner or registered
agent fails to provide access for an inspection, or the inspector cannot gain
access to any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit, this shall be considered
as a ‘lock out’ and be subject to an additional inspection fee.



   (D)   Registration fees, inspection fees, late fees as well as any
other charges in connection with non-owner occupied registration and
compliance shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.185  BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation that meets one or more
of the following conditions will be considered to be operating a business in
the City of Hamtramck and will be required to obtain a business license from
the City Clerk. The business license is in addition to the required a
certificate of compliance:



      (1)   Any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit(s) that are
registered in the name of a corporation, incorporation, limited liability
company, or other business entity, and evidenced by deed, land contract,
property transfer affidavit or other documentation showing legal interest and
ownership.



      (2)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation, identified by
name, corporation, incorporation, limited liability company or any
combination thereof, having ownership in three or more non-owner occupied
dwelling units.



   (B)   Any entity that is required under this subsection to obtain a
business license must include with application a list of all properties owned
in the City of Hamtramck, and provide proof that said properties have been
registered with the City of Hamtramck Assessors’ Office, the Department of
Community and Economic Development and the Department of Public Services.



   (C)   Any entity that is required under this section to obtain a
business license and has properties registered under two or more names, need
only obtain one business license, but must include with application a list of
all properties owned, the name under which each property is registered, and
provide proof that said properties have been registered with the City of
Hamtramck Assessors’ Office, the Department of Community and Economic
Development and the Department of Public Services.



   (D)   Business licenses for non-owner occupied properties are
non-transferrable. Upon changes in ownership, the new owner, if required by
this section, must submit application for a new business license.



   (E)   Fees for non-owner occupied dwellings business licenses shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.186  DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE AGENT REQUIRED.



   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling and dwelling units shall
designate an individual person as the responsible local agent who shall be
responsible for operating the dwelling or dwelling units and who shall
provide access for inspection by the code official for compliance with the
applicable ordinance requirements. The owner may act as the responsible local
agent. The responsible local agent shall reside within a 50 mile radius of
the City of Hamtramck.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.187  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; CERTIFICATES NON-TRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   Non-owner occupied certificates shall not be transferrable as
to person or place. Upon a transfer of ownership of any dwelling or dwelling
units, the new owner shall apply for a new certificate no later than 30 days
after the transfer of ownership.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any non-owner occupied
dwelling or unit(s) who has received a notice of violation to transfer,
convey, lease or sell (including by land contract) his or her ownership
and/or interest in any way to another, unless the owner shall have first
furnished to the grantee, lessee or vendee or transferee a true copy of any
notice of violation and shall have furnished to the building official a
signed and notarized statement from the grantee, vendee or lessee, or
transferee acknowledging the receipt of the notice of violation.



(Ord., passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.188  INSPECTION OF NON-OWNER OCCUPIED UNITS.



   (A)   Access of code official. The code official shall be granted
access by the owner, agent, or occupant of the non- owner occupied dwelling
or dwelling unit(s), at the date and time schedule for the inspection(s), for
the purpose of conducting a compliance inspection. If any owner or occupant
refuses to provide access to the premises for a compliance inspection, or
fails to show up for the inspection, the inspection shall be recorded as a
lock-out and re-inspection fees assessed. All non-owner occupied dwellings
and dwelling units shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in the
International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in § 150.010
of this chapter.



   (B)   Inspection required. All non-owner occupied dwellings and
dwelling unit(s) shall have an inspection to ensure compliance with all the
requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by
reference in § 150.010 of this chapter.



   (C)   Re-inspection required. Re-inspection shall be required when
violations are found to exist during a prior inspection. Before a certificate
of compliance is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The
violations shall be corrected and a re-inspection completed within 30 days
after the initial inspection or by the renewal date, whichever occurs first,
except in dangerous conditions which must be remedied immediately.



   (D)   Additional inspections. In addition to regular or renewal
inspections, inspections may be scheduled on one or more of the following
bases:



      (1)   Upon a tenant complaint to the City of Hamtramck.
Complaints of violations from tenants residing in the dwelling unit will be
inspected within a reasonable time if they allege sufficient facts that would
give reasonable cause to believe a violation of this subchapter exists.



      (2)   Whenever a code official has a reasonable cause to
believe that there is a violation of this subchapter or other conditions
which make the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.189  POSTING OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   No non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling unit may be occupied unless
a copy of the current certificate of compliance is displayed in an eight and
one-half by 11 inch frame securely affixed to the interior wall adjacent to
the primary entrance door to the dwelling or unit. A multiple-family dwelling
or apartment complex shall display the license in the same manner at the
primary entrance of each building or unit.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.190  ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.



   The following are additional violations subject to enforcement:



   (A)   No person shall occupy for sleeping purposes, and no owner or
responsible local agent shall allow a person to occupy for sleeping purposes,
a basement without compliant emergency egress or any non-habitable spaces of
a dwelling or unit;



   (B)   No person shall harass, stalk, threaten, hinder, assault, or
otherwise interfere with a code official or city inspector during the
performance of his or her duties;



   (C)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement or provide
any false information on a non-owner occupied certificate registration
application or any other information to any employee of the city or other
authorized person in relation to any investigation of a violation of this
subchapter;



   (D)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit and the yard connected
therewith shall remain clean and kept free from any accumulation of dirt,
filth, rubbish, or garbage; and



   (E)   Each day upon which a violation of this section occurs shall
be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.191  COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units shall comply with
all provisions of this section, the International Property Maintenance Code
as adopted in § 150.010, and all other applicable ordinance requirements.
After inspection, all non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units in
compliance with applicable  ordinances  shall  receive  a  certificate 
of  compliance  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  § 150.083.
Those non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units that are not in
compliance with applicable ordinances shall be brought into compliance within
30 days of the date of notice of the violations or by the renewal date,
whichever occurs first, and a subsequent inspection scheduled to verify
compliance. Upon request and submission of proof of extenuating
circumstances, the code official may grant an extension to make the
non-emergency repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.192  DISTRICT COURT ACTIONS FOR RENT AND/OR POSSESSION.



   (A)   When information is requested from court of any action for
rent or possession filed on an unregistered or uncertified property, the
court shall be notified of any violation of this chapter.



   (B)   When so instructed by the court the owner or responsible agent
shall register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.



   (C)   If previously unregistered, or registered but not certified,
the owner or responsible agent shall pay for and schedule inspections no
later than ten days after the completion of proceedings by the court with the
exception of one of the following:



      (1)   An affidavit of non-rental is filed by the owner.



      (2)   The owner provides proof of primary residence within ten
days of the date of notification from the court.



      (3)   The owner provides proof that court action for
possession has not been completed after 30 days, at which time an extension
shall be granted for an additional 30 days.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.193  AFFIDAVIT OF VACANT DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT OR NON-RENTAL.



   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied
shall have an affidavit of vacant dwelling or unit completed by the owner and
kept on file with the city.



   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied
that does not have at least one owner occupied unit is subject to vacant
property registration and fees.



   (C)   At such time the vacant dwelling or dwelling unit is to be
occupied as a non-owner occupied dwelling, it shall be the owner's
responsibility to notify the city to remove the vacant property registration
and to register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.



   (D)   Any property that has such an affidavit filed that is found to
be occupied by any person other than the property owner listed on the
affidavit shall be in violation of this subchapter and subject to the
penalties herein.



   (E)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit, which has had an affidavit
filed, is subject to inspection by a code official to insure vacancy of the
dwelling or unit. No schedule is needed for the inspections which can take
place at any time.



   (F)   The owner of any dwelling unit that has a valid certificate
and becomes owner occupied shall file an affidavit of non-rental with the
city within 15 days of the change in occupancy.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.194  SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   A certificate of compliance issued by the City of Hamtramck
may be suspended by the code official for any of the following conditions:



      (1)   A condition exists contrary to the public health,
morals, safety, or welfare.



      (2)   Unauthorized use or beyond the scope of the
certificate(s) issued.



      (3)   Any condition forbidden by the provisions of this
section or any other established city ordinance or other regulation.



      (4)   Violation of any criminal law.



      (5)   A verified complaint of violations to this subchapter.



   (B)   Upon suspension, the owner or agent shall be notified in
writing of the suspension and violations, corrective action, and the time
allotted for the violations to be corrected.



   (C)   If a certificate has been suspended, either by complaint or
otherwise, the owner or agent shall schedule a re-inspection to insure all
violations have been corrected.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.195  DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   Should the code official, upon inspection, determine that there are
conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may
order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where
appropriate.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.196  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   A certificate of compliance is not a warranty or guarantee
that there are no defects in the dwelling or dwelling unit(s) and the city
shall not be held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report.



   (B)   This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural or
mechanical defects thereto or other items that are not apparent by a visual
inspection.



   (C)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by
reason of the inspections required by the subchapter or the code adopted
herein or the issuance of a certificate of compliance or a certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.



   (B)   Construction Code.  A violation of §§ 150.001 through
150.008 shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil
fines and court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation
continues after due notice shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall
be set in accordance with a structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of
the City Council (authority Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§
124.651 through 124.729). Payment of a fine shall not exempt the offender
from compliance with the provisions of that subchapter.



(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)



   (C)   Registration and obtaining a certificate of compliance for all
rental dwellings and rental units.



      (1)   (a)   Any owner of a rental dwelling or rental unit
who shall fail to register his or her rental dwelling and rental units or who
shall fail to obtain a certificate of compliance for each of his or her
rental dwellings and rental units shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any owner
who fails to comply with any of the requirements of §§ 150.035 through
150.095 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



         (b)   Upon conviction under this division (C)(1), the
owner shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Each violation for each
rental dwelling and rental unit shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)



      (2)   A violation of §§ 150.180 through 150.196 shall
constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil fines and
court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be set in accordance with a
structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City Council (authority
Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651 through 124.729). Payment
of a fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions
of that subchapter.



   (D)   Blight.  A violation of §§ 150.060 through 150.064 shall
constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil fines and
court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be set in accordance with a
structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City Council (authority
Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651 through 124.729). Payment
of a fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)



   (E)   Exterior maintenance of buildings and accessory buildings. 
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates any of the provisions of
§§ 150.075 through 150.077 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a
fine of not more than $500 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than
90 days or to both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.



   (F)   Housing code. A violation of §§ 150.175 through 150.177
shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil fines
and court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be set in accordance with
a structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City Council (authority
Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651 through 124.729). Payment
of a fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions
of that subchapter.



(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995; Am. Ord. , passed - -2013)



CHAPTER 151:  HISTORIC DISTRICT



Section



   151.001   Short title



   151.002   Statement of purpose



   151.003   Definitions



   151.004   Historic District Study Committee and the Study Committee
report



   151.005   Establishing additional, modifying or eliminating districts



   151.006   Historic District Commission



   151.007   Historic District Commission meetings, recordkeeping and
rules of procedure



   151.008   Delegation of minor classes of work



   151.009   Ordinary maintenance



   151.010   Review by the Commission



   151.011   Design review standards and guidelines



   151.012   Permit applications



   151.013   Denials



   151.014   Notice to proceed



   151.015   Appeal of a Commission decision



   151.016   Work without a permit



   151.017   Demolition by neglect



   151.018   Review of work in proposed districts



   151.019   Emergency moratorium



   151.020   Acceptance of gifts or grants



   151.021   Acquisition of historic resources



 



   151.999   Penalty



§ 151.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Historic District Chapter of the
city.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.002  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public
purpose and the City Council may hereby regulate the construction, addition,
alteration, repair, moving, excavation and demolition of resources in
Historic Districts within the city limits.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to:



      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving
districts, which reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture;



      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values in each district
and surrounding areas;



      (3)   Foster civic beauty;



      (4)   Strengthen the local economy; and



      (5)   Promote the use of Historic Districts for the education,
pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state.



   (C)   The city may by ordinance establish one or more Historic
Districts. The Historic District(s) shall be administered by the Historic
District Commission and pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERATION.  Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  The written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a
resource.



   COMMISSION.  The Historic District Commission of the city.



   DEMOLITION.  The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part,
of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.



   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.  Neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing
a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the
resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.



   DENIAL.  The written rejection of a permit application for work that
is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area, or group of areas, not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or
culture.



   HISTORIC PRESERVATION.  The identification, evaluation, establishment
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering or culture.



   HISTORIC RESOURCE.  A publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture of the city, state or the
United States.



   NOTICE TO PROCEED.  The written permission to issue a permit for work
that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a
finding under Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.205(6), as
amended.



   OPEN SPACE.  Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area or a formal
or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between
other resources.



   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.  Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time,
in its exterior condition. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not change the external
appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and
expected effects of weathering. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not constitute work
for the purposes of this chapter.



   PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area or group of areas not necessarily
having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is
under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making
a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a Historic
District or added to an established Historic District.



   REPAIR.  To restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound
condition by any process. A REPAIR that changes the external appearance of a
resource constitutes work for the purposes of this chapter.



   RESOURCE.  One or more publicly or privately owned historic or
non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces
located within a Historic District.



   WORK.  Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation
or demolition.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.004  HISTORIC DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE AND THE STUDY COMMITTEE REPORT.



   (A)   Before establishing a Historic District(s), the City Council
shall appoint a Historic District Study Committee. A majority of the persons
appointed to the Study Committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest
in or knowledge of historic preservation. The Study Committee shall contain
representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly
organized local historic preservation organizations.



   (B)   The Study Committee shall do all of the following:



      (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within
each proposed Historic District following procedures established by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the State Historical Center;



      (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed Historic
District and historic resources located within that district;



      (3)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic
resources within a proposed Historic District and the percentage of historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic
resources, the Committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for
evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for
inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set
forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 60 and criteria established or approved by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the State Historical Center.



      (4)   Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee
report that addresses at a minimum all of the following:



         (a)   The charge of the Committee;



         (b)   The composition of Committee membership;



         (c)   The Historic District(s) studied;



         (d)   The boundaries of each proposed Historic District
in writing and on maps;



         (e)   The history of each proposed Historic District;



         (f)   The significance of each district as a whole, as
well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent
the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the
evaluation criteria;



         (g)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for
review and recommendations to the local planning body, the State Historic
Preservation Office of the State Historical Center, the State Historical
Commission and the State Historic Preservation Review Board; and



         (h)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to
the public pursuant to Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.203(4),
as amended;



      (5)   Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of
the preliminary report, the Historic District Study Committee shall hold a
public hearing in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. Public notice of the time, date and
place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267
of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. Written
notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days
prior to the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed Historic
District, as listed on the most current tax rolls. The report shall be made
available to the public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246;



      (6)   After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and
the City Council have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by
the City Council, to take the following actions:



         (a)   The Committee shall prepare and submit a final
report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local
planning body to the City Council as to the establishment of a Historic
District(s). If the recommendation is to establish a Historic District(s),
the final report shall include a draft of the proposed ordinance(s); and



         (b)   After receiving a final report that recommends the
establishment of a Historic District(s), the City Council, at its discretion,
may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the City Council passes
an ordinance(s) establishing one or more Historic Districts, the city shall
file a copy of the ordinance(s), including a legal description of the
property or properties located within the Historic District(s) with the
Register of Deeds. The City Council shall not pass an ordinance establishing
a contiguous Historic District less than 60 days after a majority of the
property owners within the proposed Historic District, as listed on the tax
rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of the Historic
District pursuant to a written petition.



   (C)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by a committee in the performance of an official function of the
Historic District Commission should be made available to the public in
compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 through 15.246.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.005  ESTABLISHING ADDITIONAL, MODIFYING OR ELIMINATING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The City Council may at any time establish by ordinance
additional Historic Districts, including proposed districts previously
considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing Historic
District or may eliminate an existing Historic District. Before establishing,
modifying or eliminating a Historic District, a Historic District Study
Committee appointed by the City Council shall follow the procedures as stated
in Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.203(1 through 3), as amended.



   (B)   To conduct these activities, the City Council may retain the
initial committee, establish a standing committee or establish a committee to
consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. The
Committee shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent
to the proposed action.



   (C)   In considering elimination of a Historic District, a committee
shall follow the procedures set forth in Public Act 169 of 1970, being
M.C.L.A. § 399.203(1 through 3), as amended, for the issuance of a
preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but
with the intent of showing one or more of the following:



      (1)   The Historic District has lost those physical
characteristics that enabled the establishment of the district;



      (2)   The Historic District was not significant in the way
previously defined; and



      (3)   The Historic District was established pursuant to
defective procedures.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.006  HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   (A)   The City Council hereby does create a commission to be called
a Historic District Commission. Each member of the Commission shall reside
within the city limits. The Commission shall consist of seven members.
Members shall be appointed by the City Council. A majority of the members
shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic
preservation. Members shall be appointed for a term of three years, except
the initial appointments of three members for a term of two years and two
members for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for
three-year terms. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event
of a vacancy on the Commission, interim appointments shall be made by the
City Council within 60 calendar days to complete the unexpired term of the
position. Two members shall be appointed from a list submitted by duly
organized local historic preservation organizations. If a person is available
for appointment, one member shall be an architect who has two years of
architectural experience or who is duly registered in the state.



   (B)   The City Council may prescribe powers and duties of the
Commission, in addition to those prescribed in this chapter, that foster
historic preservation activities, projects and programs in the local unit.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.007  HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION MEETINGS, RECORDKEEPING AND RULES
OF PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Historic District Commission shall meet at least monthly
or more frequently at the call of the Commission.



   (B)   The business that the Commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act,
Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, as
amended. Public notice of the date, time and place of the meeting shall be
given in the manner required by Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. A meeting agenda shall be part of the
notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed
or considered by the Commission.



   (C)   The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions,
proceedings and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession
of or retained by the Commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of
Information, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231
through 15.246.



   (D)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and
shall adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties
under this act.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.008  DELEGATION OF MINOR CLASSES OF WORK.



   The Commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff or to
another delegated authority. The Commission shall provide to its delegated
authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of
appropriateness under this section. The Commission shall review the
certificates of appropriateness issued by the delegate on at least a
quarterly basis to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities
should be continued.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.009  ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of a resource within a Historic District or to prevent
work on any resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or
other duly delegated authority before the chapter was enacted.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.010  REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless
specifically authorized to do so by the City Council or unless interior work
will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The Commission
shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in
Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.205(3), as amended.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.011  DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.



   (A)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the United
States Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and guidelines
for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 67.
Design review standards and guidelines that address special design
characteristics of Historic Districts administered by the Commission may be
followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior’s
Standards and guidelines and are established or approved by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the State Historical Center.



   (B)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of
the following:



      (1)   The historic or architectural value and significance of
the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding
area;



      (2)   The relationship of any architectural features of the
resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area;



      (3)   The general compatibility of the design, arrangement,
texture and materials proposed to be used; and



      (4)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the
Commission finds relevant.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.012  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the
exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a Historic District.
The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an
application for a permit with the inspector of buildings. Upon receipt of a
complete application, the inspector of buildings shall immediately refer the
application, along with all required supporting materials that make the
application complete, to the Commission. A permit shall not be issued and
proposed work shall not proceed until the Commission has acted on the
application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to
proceed as prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   The Commission shall file certificates of appropriateness,
notices to proceed and denials of applications for permits with the inspector
of buildings. A permit shall not be issued until the Commission has acted as
prescribed by this chapter.



   (C)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the
exterior of a resource the Commission considers valuable to the city, the
state or the nation, and the Commission determines that the alteration or
loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city,
state or nation, the Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of
the resource an economically feasible plan for the preservation of the
resource.



   (D)   The failure of the Commission to act on an application within
60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the
Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant
and the Commission, shall be considered to constitute approval.



   (E)   The Commission may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit
application.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.013  DENIALS.



   (A)   If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be
binding on the inspector or other authority.



   (B)   A denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation by the
Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an
application may be re-submitted for Commission review when the suggested
changes have been made.



   (C)   The denial shall also include the notification of the
applicant’s right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board
and to the circuit court.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.014  NOTICE TO PROCEED.



   Work within a Historic District shall be permitted through the issuance
of a notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions
prevail, and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the
Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the
following conditions:



   (A)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public
or to the structure’s occupants;



   (B)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program
that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant
proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals,
financing and environmental clearances;



   (C)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to
the owner when a governmental action, an act of God or other events beyond
the owner’s control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for
sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within
the Historic District, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or



   (D)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority
of the community.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.015  APPEAL OF A COMMISSION DECISION.



   (A)   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission
concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic
Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within 60 calendar days
after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit
all or part of the appellant’s evidence and arguments in written form. The
State Historic Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal at its
first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit
applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic Preservation Review
Board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over
the Historic District Commission whose decision was appealed to the State
Historic Preservation Review Board.



   (B)   Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation
organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or
severally aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission may
appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant
aggrieved by a decision rendered under this chapter may not appeal to the
court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.016  WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the
Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the resource
to the condition that the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to
modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If
the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement
within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an order from the Circuit
Court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or
to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness.
If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court,
the Commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work
necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work
so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with
the court’s order. The costs of the work done shall be charged to the
owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the
property. When acting pursuant to an order of the Circuit Court, the
Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.017  DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.



   Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a
Historic District or a proposed Historic District, subject to its review and
approval, is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do
either of the following:



   (A)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect; or



   (B)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time,
the Commission or its agents may enter the property and make the repairs as
necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be
charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment
against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the property for
purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.018  REVIEW OF WORK IN PROPOSED DISTRICTS.



   Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering or cultural significance of a
proposed Historic District, the City Council may, at its discretion, adopt a
resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
Historic District be referred to the Historic District Commission as
prescribed in § 151.012. The Historic District Commission shall review
permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed
Historic District was an established Historic District. The review may
continue in the proposed Historic District for not more than one year or
until the time as the City Council approves or rejects the establishment of
the Historic District by ordinance, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.019  EMERGENCY MORATORIUM.



   If the City Council determines that pending work will cause irreparable
harm to resources located within an established or proposed Historic
District, the City Council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium
on all work for a period not to exceed six months. The City Council may
extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six
months, upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is
still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject
to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.020  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS.



   (A)   The City Council may accept state or federal grants for
historic preservation purposes, may participate in state and federal programs
that benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts
for historic preservation purposes.



   (B)   The City Council may appoint the Historic District Commission
to accept and administer grants, gifts and program responsibilities.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.021  ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES.



   If all efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail or if it
is determined by the City Council that public ownership is most suitable, the
City Council, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the
resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from
the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the
recommendation of the Commission. The Commission is responsible for
maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically
designated for other purposes or public funds committed for that use by the
City Council. Upon recommendation of the Commission, the city may sell
resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in
the property transfer documents, if appropriate.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
organization, institution or agency of government that violates this act is
responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.



   (B)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
organization, institution or agency of government that violates this chapter
may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a
resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved,
excavated or demolished.



(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)



CHAPTER 152:  SIDEWALK CAFÉS



Section



   152.001   Title



   152.002   Definitions



   152.003   Licensing procedures



   152.004   Operating restrictions



   152.005   Revocation of license



 



   152.999   Penalty



§ 152.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Sidewalk Café Chapter.



(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)



§ 152.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ.  A sidewalk café operation serving alcoholic
and nonalcoholic beverages. Businesses operating a MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ are
required to hold a city issued, City Council approved license that conforms
to the procedures and regulations of this chapter.



   MINOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ.  A sidewalk café operation serving only
nonalcoholic beverages. Businesses operating a MINOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ are
required to hold a city issued, City Council approved license that conforms
to the procedures and regulations of this chapter.



   SIDEWALK CAFÉ.  An outdoor dining area located on a public sidewalk
that is public through dedication or easement or public right-of-way; that
provides wait staff service or counter service; that contains readily
removable tables, chairs and railings; and that may contain planters. It is
otherwise unenclosed by fixed walls and is open to the air, except that it
may have awnings, umbrellas or other non-permanent covers.



(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)



§ 152.003  LICENSING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The city is authorized to issue a revocable, seasonal license
to operate a sidewalk café on public property, provided that the applicant
has complied with the standards set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Minor sidewalk café licenses for establishments serving
non-alcoholic beverages on public sidewalk areas shall be reviewed by city
staff.



   (C)   Major sidewalk café licenses for establishments serving
alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages on public sidewalk areas shall be
reviewed by city staff.



   (D)   The applicant must hold a valid business license at the time
of applying for a sidewalk café license.



   (E)   The seasonal license shall permit the operation of a sidewalk
café from April 1 up to and including October 31 of any calendar year. A
license may also be issued for less than a full season or for a stipulated
number of operating days.



   (F)   The fees for the license under this provision shall be those
fees which have been approved by the City Council.



   (G)   No license shall be issued by the city unless the fees
required by this section are paid.



   (H)   Insurance requirement; the requirements and conditions of any
insurance shall be those that have been approved by the City Council.



   (I)   Site development plan approval.



      (1)   No outdoor service of food and/or beverages in the form
of a sidewalk café shall be established on public property, except in
conformance with a site development plan approved by the city staff.



      (2)   A license application available from the city for site
development plan approval shall be submitted to the city. The application
shall include the following:



         (a)   Name of the individual and business;



         (b)   Individual and business address;



         (c)   Address of the sidewalk occupancy;



         (d)   Property owner if other than applicant (when the
applicant is not the owner of the affected property, written authorization
from the property owner shall be required to submit the application);



         (e)   Name of the planner, engineer, architect or agent;



         (f)   Dates of occupancy;



         (g)   Hours of occupancy;



         (h)   Capacity of the existing establishment;



         (i)   Areas of occupancy (dimensions) in square feet;



         (j)   Use of musical instruments or sound reproduction
system;



         (k)   If alcoholic beverages will be served at outdoor
café; and



         (l)   If application is a new application or renewal.



      (3)   The site development plan and the accompanying
application shall show the following:



         (a)   The applicant’s entire property and adjacent
properties on a location map with streets within a distance of at least 60
feet, at a scale of one inch equals ten feet or other scale showing adequate
detail. The site plan shall be submitted on an eight and one-half inch by
11-inch sheet;



         (b)   A detailed plan showing the design, relevant
details and location of all temporary structures such as awnings, planters,
landscaping, railings, tables, chairs and other equipment, as well as
lighting and electrical outlet locations;



         (c)   All exterior lighting, including its type and
location. Exterior lighting shall have the shading as will prevent the source
of light from being seen from any adjacent residential property or roadway;
and



         (d)   If the use of musical instruments and/or a sound
reproduction system is planned, the number and types of instruments and/or
the type of sound reproduction system. In any event, the use shall be
governed by the city’s noise ordinance which regulates and prohibits
unnecessary and annoying noise.



      (4)   Copies of the site development plan shall be distributed
to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and the City Manager for review and
comments in relation to compliance with this and all other city ordinances.



   (J)   Sidewalk café licenses may be renewed for additional seasons,
subject only to the city staff review and submission of the appropriate
licenses.



   (K)   Major sidewalk cafés are limited to Conant, Joseph Campau,
Holbrook, Caniff and Carpenter.



(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006; Am. Ord. 528, passed 10-24-2006)  Penalty, see
§ 152.999



§ 152.004  OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   All sidewalk cafés shall cease sales or service by 1:00 a.m.
each night, and all areas shall be vacated by 2:00 a.m.



   (B)   All alcoholic beverages to be served at sidewalk cafés shall
be prepared within the existing restaurant, and alcoholic drinks shall only
be served to patrons seated at tables. A member of the public who is within
the confines of the sidewalk café area while a patron at a sidewalk café
and therefore on public property shall not be construed as violating any
ordinance controlling open containers in a public area. The operator of the
sidewalk café shall take whatever steps are necessary to procure the
appropriate license from the MLCC if the operator intends to serve alcoholic
beverages in the sidewalk café area. The operator shall also comply with all
other laws and regulations in the state concerning the serving of alcoholic
beverages.



   (C)   The license evidencing the licensing of the sidewalk café in
accord with this chapter shall be prominently displayed.



   (D)   The restaurant shall not serve food or beverage to a patron at
a sidewalk café area unless that patron is seated at a table.



   (E)   Sidewalk cafés and the public property on which they are
located shall be kept neat and clean at all times and free from any substance
that may cause damage to the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury.



(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.005  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The licensee agrees that any license granted under the
provisions of this chapter may be revoked without just cause or explanation
by the city or its designee upon the recommendation of any of the city
departments that participated in the license review process.



   (B)   Upon revocation of a license, the licensee shall immediately
cease operation or any use of the encroachment upon written or oral notice
from the city. All furnishings and fixtures shall be removed from public
property within 24 hours of the notice and the licensee shall restore the
sidewalk to its original condition.



(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who operates a sidewalk café without a license or who
violates any of the standards or operating provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of $200,
payable to the city within five days notice of noncompliance. Failure to pay
the $200 fine shall result in immediate termination of the sidewalk café
license. A second act of noncompliance within the license period shall result
in immediate termination of the license agreement upon notice of the second
act of noncompliance. The licensee may petition the City Council for
reinstatement of the license agreement.



(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)



CHAPTER 153:  DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



Section



Downtown Development Authority



   153.001   Title



   153.002   Definitions



   153.003   Determination of necessity



   153.004   Creation of authority



   153.005   Description of Downtown District



   153.006   Board of Directors



   153.007   Powers of authority



   153.008   Executive director; bond of executive director



   153.009   Fiscal year; adoption of budget



   153.010   Purchasing and contracts



   153.011   Borrowing and incurring debt



   153.012   Development plan



Downtown Development Authority Plan



   153.025   City Council findings



   153.026   City Council determinations



   153.027   Approval by City Council




DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY




§ 153.001  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be called the Downtown
Development Authority Subchapter.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.002  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The terms used in this subchapter shall have the same meaning
as given to them in Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651
through 125.1680, or as hereinafter provided in this section unless the
context clearly indicates to the contrary.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT 197.  Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651
through 125.1680 as now in effect or hereafter amended.



      AUTHORITY.  The downtown development authority of the city
created by this subchapter.



      BOARD or BOARD OF DIRECTORS.  The Board of Directors of the
authority, the governing body of the authority.



      CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  The Mayor of the city.



      CITY.  The City of Hamtramck, Michigan.



      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of
Hamtramck.



      DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A plan developed by the downtown development
authority pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651
through 125.1680.



      DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.  Generally the Joseph Campau corridor from
Carpenter Street south to Denton Street.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.003  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.



   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary and in the best
interest of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase
property tax valuation where possible in the downtown business district and
to eliminate the causes of deterioration and promote economic growth by
establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Public Act 197 of
1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.004  CREATION OF AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby created, pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, a downtown development authority for
the city. The authority shall be a corporate public body and shall be known
and exercise its powers under the title of the Hamtramck Downtown Development
Authority. The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court
of this state, and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the
purpose of its incorporation as provided by this subchapter and Public Act
197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680. The enumeration
of a power in this subchapter or in Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.1651 through 125.1680 shall not be construed as a limitation upon
the general powers of the authority.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.005  DESCRIPTION OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.



   The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers
as provided by Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through
125.1680, shall consist of the territory in the city described in Appendix A,
subject to changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this subchapter and
Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680.



(Appendix LA: See legal description contained in the plan adopted on December
13, 2005.)



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.006  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   (A)   The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a
Board of Directors consisting of the Mayor of the city and not less than
eight nor more than 12 members appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by
the City Council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons
having an interest in property in the downtown district. At least one
director shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the downtown
district has 100 or more persons residing within it.



   (B)   The terms of the directors shall be for four years with terms
beginning July 1 and ending June 30 or upon the appointment of a successor.
When a vacancy occurs, the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City
Council, shall make an appointment to fill the remainder of the term.



   (C)   The members of the Board shall elect the chairperson and any
other officers of the Board.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.007  POWERS OF AUTHORITY.



   Except as specifically otherwise provided by this subchapter, the
authority shall have all powers provided by Public Act 197 of 1975, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, subject to limitations imposed by
law.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.008  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR; BOND OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.



   If an executive director is employed as authorized by Public Act 197 of
1975, § 5, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1655, the director shall post bond in the
sum of $5,000 as required by the section of the statute unless covered by a
blanket bond covering city employees. The premium of the bond shall be deemed
an operating expense of the authority, payable from funds available to the
authority for operating expenses.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.009  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (A)   The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each
year and end on June 30 of the following year, or any other fiscal year as
may hereafter be adopted by the city.



   (B)   The Board shall annually prepare a budget and submit it to the
City Manager for submission to the City Council by April 1 of each year. The
Board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the City
Council has approved the budget. The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a
budget concerning the operation of any improvements which have been financed
by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the
revenue bonds.



   (C)   The city will maintain the financial records for the authority
which shall be submitted to the City Council at the same time and on the same
basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The
authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing
the city, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the City Council.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.010  PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS.



   (A)   All purchases shall follow the procedures established by city
ordinance for city purchasing.



   (B)   All contracts shall require approval of the City Council.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.011  BORROWING AND INCURRING DEBT.



   The authority may, with the approval of the local governing body,
borrow money and issue revenue bonds or notes to finance all or part of the
costs of acquiring or constructing property in connection with the
implementation of a development plan in the downtown district or to refund or
advance bonds or notes issued pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, § 13,
being M.C.L.A. § 125.1663.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)



§ 153.012  DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The Board may create a development plan for the area encompassed by the
downtown development authority, and the plan, when approved by the Board and
the City Council, shall be implemented as set forth in the development plan
and as required by Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651
through 125.1680.



(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006)




DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PLAN




§ 153.025  CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS.



   The City Council, in reviewing the plan has found:



   (A)   The amended development plan meets the requirements set forth
in Public Act 197 of 1975, § 17(2), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through
125.1681, and the amended tax increment financing plan meets the requirements
set forth in Public Act 197 of 1975, § 14(2), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1664;



   (B)   The proposed method of financing the amended development plan
is feasible, and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing;



   (C)   The amount of captured assessed value estimated to result from
adoption of the amended development plan is reasonable;



   (D)   The property included in the development area that could be
acquired pursuant to the development plan is reasonable and necessary to
carry out the purposes of the amended development plan and the purposes of
the act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner;



   (E)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master
plan of the city;



   (F)   Public services such as police protection, fire and utilities
are, or will be, required to service the development area; and



   (H)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and
utilities (to the extent required by the plan) are reasonably necessary.



(Ord. 516, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 531, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 153.026  CITY COUNCIL DETERMINATIONS.



   (A)   The City Council hereby determines that the amended tax
increment financing plan and development plan constitute a public purpose.



   (B)   The City Council hereby determines that it is in the best
interests of the public to proceed with the amended tax increment financing
plan and development plan and that the joint plan will halt property value
deterioration, increase property tax valuation, eliminate the cause of
property value deterioration and promote economic growth in the development
area.



(Ord. 516, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 531, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 153.027  APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council hereby approves the amended Hamtramck Tax Increment
Financing Plan and Development Plan to be dated May 22, 2007.



(Ord. 516, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 531, passed 5-22-2007)



CHAPTER 154:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   154.001   New building construction



§ 154.001  NEW BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.



   There shall be no new building constructed on any park land which is
located within the boundaries of the city, and which is owned by the city or
by any agency of the city, except if the building is approved by a
three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special
election.



(Ord. 458, passed 11-5-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.999



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES



      II.   BONDS, LOANS AND NOTES



      III.   ZONING



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


104
 
8-2-1932
 
Granting to Thomas E. Currie, the right to lay, maintain and operate pipes
for the distribution of gas.


229
 
1-13-1953
 
Granting a franchise to the Detroit Edison Co. to erect, construct, lay,
operate and maintain all equipment requisite for the transmission,
transforming and distribution of electricity for public and private use.


393
 
4-15-1980
 
Granting a franchise to Omnicom of Michigan, Inc. to own, operate and
maintain a cable televisions system.


454
 
6-8-1995
 
Granting a franchise to Michigan Consolidated Gas Co. the right, power and
authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services for a
period of 30 years.


455
 
6-22-1995
 
Granting a cable franchise for a period of 15 years to Omnicom of Michigan,
Inc.


 
 



 



TABLE II:  BONDS, LOANS AND NOTES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


367
 
8-19-1975
 
Authorizing execution of Amendment No. 2 to annual contributions contract No.
C-3069 and issuance of project loan notes and permanent notes.


424
 
12-8-1987
 
To amend Ordinance No. 393, known as the City of Hamtramck CATV Ordinance, by
changing the performance bond requirements.


 
 



 



TABLE III:  ZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


312
 
9-17-1968
 
Creating a Urban Renewal District to be known as the Wyandotte Neighborhood
District Area.


328
 
4-21-1970
 
Providing for the designation of an Urban Renewal District Area to be known
as the Wyandotte Neighborhood District Area.


360
 
1-7-1975
 
Designation of a Community Development Program District area to encompass the
corporate limits of the City of Hamtramck, excepting the Wyandotte Urban
Renewal Area (R-31).


489
 
1-7-2003
 
Establishing a Neighborhood Enterprise Zone located within the area bounded
by Commor Ave. on the north, Dequindre Avenue on the east, Grand Trunk
Railroad on the west and Caniff Avenue on the south.


497
 
5-12-2004
 
Establishing the general rules and regulations that control the design,
location, use or occupancy of all buildings, structures, and land usage in
the City, copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk and are
adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if
set out at length herein.


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED



 

M.C.L.A. Cites
 
Code Section




15.231 et seq.
 
150.003


15.231 - 15.246
 
111.004, 111.016, 151.004, 151.007


15.261
 
151.007


15.261 - 15.275
 
30.001, 30.008, 30.030, 30.035, 150.003, 151.004, 151.007


117.4(2)
 
38.003


117.5b
 
10.001


123.161 et seq.
 
51.040, 51.041


124.651 - 124.729
 
150.999


125.651 - 125.709e
 
32.135, 32.137


125.655
 
32.135


125.1401 et seq.
 
37.018


125.1501 - 125.1531
 
150.002, 150.003, 150.007


125.1651 - 125.1680
 
153.002 - 153.005, 153.007, 153.012


125.1651 - 125.1681
 
153.025


125.1655
 
153.008


125.1663
 
153.011


125.1664
 
153.025


129.111 - 129.118
 
37.053


129.141 - 129.150
 
37.053


205.13
 
118.123


257.1 et seq.
 
130.050


257.1 - 257.923
 
70.001, 72.999


257.1d   
 
91.006


257.8b
 
91.006


257.10 et seq.
 
74.002


257.25
 
112.004


257.606
 
74.003


257.674
 
50.035


257.722
 
70.015, 70.016


323.1 et seq.
 
52.003


324.20101 et seq.
 
34.033


338.1083
 
94.007


338.41 et seq.
 
120.005


399.1 - 399.10
 
32.097, 32.107


399.151 et seq.
 
32.107


399.203
 
151.005


399.203(4)
 
151.004


399.205(3)
 
151.010


399.205(6)
 
151.003


418.101 - 418.941
 
33.043


436.1101 - 436.2303
 
113.002


436.1801 - 426.1815
 
119.001


445.471 - 445.476
 
114.023


445.481 et seq.
 
115.007, 115.013


445.481 - 445.492
 
114.023


445.482
 
115.001


445.551 - 445.555
 
114.023


445.2001
 
118.123


446.201 - 446.219
 
114.023


484.2102
 
111.003


484.2251
 
111.004


484.3101 - 484.3120
 
111.001, 111.003


600.113(1)(c)
 
10.002


600.8701 et seq.
 
10.999


712A.2.
 
135.003


750.5
 
38.003


750.82
 
130.008


750.535
 
115.013


764.9c(2)
 
10.010


2389 - 2392
 
32.138


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




38
 
5-26-1923
 
119.001 - 119.008, 119.999


40
 
7-14-1925
 
119.185 - 119.188, 119.999


77
 
7-26-1928
 
114.003, 114.006, 114.009, 114.022, 114.999


56
 
8-2-1928
 
118.095 - 118.102, 118.104, 118.105, 118.999


60
 
8-2-1928
 
119.050 - 119.053, 119.999


64
 
8-2-1928
 
119.065 - 119.075, 119.999


70
 
8-2-1928
 
118.050 - 118.059, 118.999


78
 
9-18-1928
 
132.125 - 132.128, 132.999


63
 
1-22-1929
 
118.070 - 118.079, 118.999


65
 
1-22-1929
 
116.001 - 116.009, 116.999


81
 
2-28-1929
 
114.002, 114.003, 114.006, 114.009, 114.010, 114.017, 114.018, 114.022,
114.025, 114.999


86
 
3-26-1929
 
71.001


89
 
7-23-1929
 
117.001, 117.999


90
 
3-25-1930
 
117.002 - 117.020, 117.999


91
 
7-22-1930
 
119.020 - 119.035


97
 
7-21-1931
 
118.051


101
 
11-10-1931
 
119.110 - 119.114, 119.999


104
 
8-2-1932
 
T.S.O. I


105
 
8-18-1932
 
119.021, 119.022, 119.035


106
 
10-25-1932
 
119.090 - 119.099, 119.999


111
 
5-2-1933
 
119.092


112
 
5-2-1933
 
132.110 - 132.113, 132.999


116
 
7-6-1933
 
118.052


121
 
12-28-1933
 
119.001, 119.002, 119.005


124
 
6-28-1934
 
116.001 - 116.003, 116.005 - 116.007, 116.009


127
 
6-28-1934
 
118.103


126
 
7-3-1934
 
119.024


130
 
1-4-1935
 
134.130 - 134.133, 134.999


133
 
1-17-1935
 
116.001


134
 
1-17-1935
 
115.004


138
 
2-7-1935
 
119.001, 119.002


147
 
8-29-1935
 
118.070


150
 
10-24-1935
 
119.021


153
 
11-29-1935
 
119.020


154
 
12-17-1935
 
118.102, 118.104


156
 
3-26-1936
 
119.002


158
 
10-6-1936
 
119.020


168
 
6-9-1938
 
134.100 - 134.104, 134.999


173
 
7-20-1939
 
32.135 - 32.138


179
 
11-12-1941
 
71.001


189
 
5-27-1943
 
118.120 - 118.123


191
 
9-21-1943
 
133.055, 133.056, 133.999


196
 
8-21-1944
 
130.075, 130.076, 130.999, 132.001 - 132.003, 132.015, 132.016, 133.001 -
133.005, 133.999


198
 
1-15-1946
 
10.011


201
 
7-9-1946
 
134.057 - 134.059, 134.999


204
 
1-7-1947
 
132.095 - 132.098, 132.999


205
 
10-23-1947
 
71.001


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.150


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.151


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.152


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.153


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.154


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.155


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.156


207
 
12-23-1947
 
32.157


215
 
1-30-1948
 
51.003


208
 
4-13-1948
 
10.011


213
 
9-24-1948
 
10.011


207
 
7- -1949
 
32.138


219
 
8-11-1949
 
132.080, 132.081, 132.999


223
 
8-22-1950
 
119.155 - 119.172, 119.999


227
 
9-23-1952
 
32.138


229
 
1-13-1953
 
T.S.O. I


230
 
2-3-1953
 
72.045 - 72.058, 72.999


233
 
9-29-1953
 
134.115, 134.116, 134.999


236
 
9-7-1954
 
72.090, 72.091, 72.999


239
 
11-3-1955
 
116.020 - 116.026, 116.999


241
 
12-6-1955
 
36.001


245
 
10-29-1957
 
71.001


246
 
11-12-1958
 
36.001


247
 
3-31-1959
 
36.001


253
 
12-15-1959
 
33.040


257
 
5-31-1960
 
33.002


258
 
5-31-1960
 
34.002


260
 
6-31-1960
 
36.001


261
 
11-15-1960
 
36.001


264
 
6-6-1961
 
72.055


270
 
6-5-1962
 
119.200 - 119.203, 119.999


271
 
7-3-1962
 
119.004


278
 
11-13-1962
 
37.001


282
 
3-12-1963
 
90.065 - 90.068, 90.999


285
 
10-1-1963
 
71.001


287
 
2-11-1964
 
133.055 - 133.059, 133.999


288
 
3-3-1964
 
130.090, 130.091, 130.999


289
 
3-17-1964
 
130.075, 130.999


292
 
10-13-1964
 
37.001


293
 
10-27-1964
 
93.001 - 93.007, 93.999


298
 
3-2-1965
 
132.060 - 132.065, 132.999


300
 
5-27-1965
 
133.055 - 133.059, 133.999


301
 
8-10-1965
 
134.070 - 134.074, 134.999


303
 
8-24-1965
 
134.055, 134.056, 134.999


304
 
12-21-1965
 
36.001


307
 
3-28-1967
 
34.015 - 34.018, 34.999


308
 
4-11-1967
 
90.040 - 90.050, 90.999


309
 
9-5-1967
 
112.001 - 112.007, 112.999


310
 
9-5-1967
 
71.001


311
 
2-20-1968
 
71.001


312
 
9-17-1968
 
T.S.O. III


313
 
9-24-1968
 
33.041 - 33.046, 33.999


318
 
7-14-1969
 
118.054


319
 
10-14-1969
 
34.018


320
 
10-21-1969
 
37.001


325
 
11-12-1969
 
150.020


327
 
3-10-1970
 
71.001


328
 
4-21-1970
 
T.S.O. III


330
 
8-25-1970
 
133.040, 133.041, 133.999


331
 
8-25-1970
 
37.001


332
 
8-25-1970
 
71.001


333
 
12-15-1970
 
71.001


339
 
7-13-1971
 
71.001


340
 
7-27-1971
 
33.015 - 33.028


344
 
3-14-1972
 
37.001


353
 
3-28-1974
 
32.120 - 32.123


355
 
5-7-1974
 
131.050 - 131.053, 131.999


357
 
7-2-1974
 
72.055


360
 
1-7-1975
 
T.S.O. III


361
 
2-4-1975
 
36.001


364
 
3-11-1975
 
36.001


365
 
5-20-1975
 
73.001 - 73.006, 73.999


366
 
5-20-1975
 
131.050, 131.054 - 131.058, 131.999


367
 
8-19-1975
 
T.S.O. II


368
 
9-26-1975
 
36.001


375
 
3-22-1977
 
116.002, 116.003


376
 
4-26-1977
 
118.001 - 118.005, 118.020 - 118.024, 118.035, 118.036, 118.999


370
 
12-6-1977
 
132.045, 132.046, 132.999


381
 
10-17-1978
 
71.001


383
 
11-28-1978
 
72.070 - 72.079, 72.999


389
 
3-11-1980
 
132.030, 132.031, 132.999


390
 
3-25-1980
 
134.040 - 134.042, 134.999


391
 
4-1-1980
 
34.019


392
 
4-15-1980
 
131.030 - 131.034, 131.999


393
 
4-15-1980
 
T.S.O. I


394
 
5-6-1980
 
92.001 - 92.011, 92.999


395
 
1-13-1981
 
131.075 - 131.079, 131.999


396
 
1-29-1981
 
110.001 - 110.012, 110.999


407
 
7-26-1983
 
134.020 - 134.027, 134.999


410
 
2-11-1984
 
70.030, 70.031


412
 
5-8-1984
 
90.001 - 90.025, 90.999


416
 
5-7-1985
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


424
 
12-8-1987
 
T.S.O. II


427
 
6-30-1988
 
72.030 - 72.032, 72.999


428
 
8-11-1988
 
133.020 - 133.028, 133.999


430
 
9-22-1988
 
37.001


431
 
10-6-1988
 
71.001


435
 
10-12-1989
 
132.003


435
 
10-12-1989
 
132.999


436
 
10-26-1989
 
117.035 - 117.042, 117.999


440
 
1-30-1992
 
72.015, 72.016, 72.999


443
 
7-22-1993
 
34.018


444
 
8-19-1993
 
150.035 - 150.048, 150.999


449
 
10-20-1994
 
72.001 - 72.003, 72.999


454
 
6-8-1995
 
T.S.O. I


455
 
6-22-1995
 
T.S.O. I


456
 
9-21-1995
 
150.075 - 150.077, 150.999


457
 
6-20-1996
 
110.025, 110.999


458
 
11-5-1996
 
154.001


461
 
5-1-1997
 
70.030


462
 
5-1-1997
 
70.015, 70.016


466
 
4-30-1998
 
32.095 - 32.107


467
 
6-25-1998
 
113.001 - 113.004, 113.999


471
 
5-13-1999
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


473
 
3-9-2000
 
150.060 - 150.064, 150.999


474
 
4-20-2000
 
150.001 - 150.008, 150.999


477
 
10-5-2001
 
150.002


478
 
12-18-2001
 
134.001 - 134.006, 134.999


479
 
2-4-2002
 
36.001


482
 
4-8-2002
 
150.004


484
 
5-30-2002
 
150.004


485
 
9-19-2002
 
70.001 - 70.003, 70.999


486
 
11-6-2002
 
91.001, 91.004, 91.999


487
 
11-6-2002
 
94.001 - 94.007, 94.999


489
 
1-7-2003
 
T.S.O. III


490
 
2-18-2003
 
111.001 - 111.018, 111.999


491
 
4-15-2003
 
35.001


494
 
10-21-2003
 
74.001 - 74.009, 74.999


497
 
5-12-2004
 
T.S.O. III


501
 
3-2-2004
 
151.001 - 151.021, 151.999


506
 
9-21-2004
 
131.001 - 131.013


507
 
10-26-2004
 
32.075 - 32.080


508
 
1-18-2005
 
30.001


509
 
2-14-2005
 
32.060 - 32.062


511
 
4-12-2005
 
37.015


513
 
5-9-2005
 
50.001 - 50.006, 50.008 - 50.015, 50.999


514
 
6-13-2005
 
32.121


515
 
6-13-2005
 
32.035 - 32.046


516
 
12-13-2005
 
153.025 - 153.027


530
 
1-23-2006
 
32.061, 32.062


517
 
1-24-2006
 
30.001 - 30.016


518
 
3-14-2006
 
37.015


520
 
5-9-2006
 
152.001 - 152.005, 152.999


519
 
5-23-2006
 
153.001 - 153.012


521
 
6-13-2006
 
37.045 - 37.062


522
 
6-13-2006
 
37.030 - 37.034


525
 
6-27-2006
 
32.020 - 32.024


526
 
7-11-2006
 
32.001 - 32.006


527
 
10-10-2006
 
32.077


528
 
10-24-2006
 
152.003


529
 
10-24-2006
 
37.015


530
 
1-23-2007
 
31.015 - 31.019, 33.003, 34.003


531
 
5-22-2007
 
153.025 - 153.027


2007-534
 
10-23-2007
 
50.030 - 50.035, 50.999


2008-1
 
1-22-2008
 
38.001 - 38.007, 38.999


2008-2
 
1-22-2008
 
130.055


2008-3
 
3-11-2008
 
95.001 - 95.016, 95.999


2008-4
 
3-11-2008
 
30.004


2008-5
 
4-8-2008
 
93.035 - 93.042, 93.999


2008-7
 
5-27-2008
 
37.016


2008-8
 
5-27-2008
 
37.017


2008-10
 
7-30-2008
 
37.018


2008-11
 
8-26-2008
 
39.001 - 39.013, 39.999


2008-12
 
11-12-2008
 
37.016


2008-13
 
12-9-2008
 
34.018


2009-1
 
3-24-2009
 
39.008


2009-2
 
3-24-2009
 
30.030 - 30.041


2009-4
 
6-23-2009
 
52.001 - 52.013, Ch. 52, Apps. A - C


2009-6
 
12-8-2009
 
150.062


2010-2
 
4-27-2010
 
51.001 - 51.029, 51.040 - 51.042, 51.050 - 51.052, 51.060 - 51.062, 51.110 -
51.117, 51.999


2010-3
 
4-27-2010
 
53.001 - 53.012, 53.999


2010-4
 
4-27-2010
 
54.001 - 54.015, 54.999


2010-5
 
5-11-2010
 
135.001 - 135.005, 135.999


2010-6
 
5-11-2010
 
120.001 - 120.012, 120.999


2011-1
 
2-8-2011
 
34.030 - 34.034


2011-3
 
6-14-2011
 
34.018


2011-6
 
10-25-2011
 
40.01, 40.02


2012-1
 
2-14-2012
 
10.013


2012-2
 
5-22-2012
 
150.062


—
 
- -2013
 
93.045 - 93.048


—
 
- -2013
 
96.001 - 96.015


—
 
- -2013
 
96.025 - 96.032, 96.999


—
 
- -2013
 
150.010, 150.011


—
 
- -2013
 
150.080 - 150.096, 150.999


—
 
- -2013
 
150.175 - 150.177, 150.999


—
 
- -2013
 
150.180 - 150.196, 150.999


2013-008
 
1-22-2013
 
115.001 - 115.013, 115.999


2013-009
 
1-22-2013
 
114.001 - 114.025, 114.999


2013-010
 
1-22-2013
 
133.004, 133.999


2013-011
 
1-22-2013
 
132.044


2013-012
 
1-22-2013
 
134.056


2013-052
 
3-12-2013
 
119.220 - 119.225


—
 
3-26-2013
 
93.999


2013-17
 
3-26-2013
 
96.999


2013-113
 
5-28-2013
 
130.053


—
 
12-4-2013
 
51.024 - 51.026


2014-41
 
6-10-2014
 
91.001 - 91.007, 91.999


2014-42
 
6-10-2014
 
93.037, 93.041


2014-45
 
6-24-2014
 
53.013, 53.999


2014-46
 
6-24-2014
 
37.031


2014-64
 
8-12-2014
 
90.005, 90.069, 90.070


2016-02
 
7-12-2016
 
34.033


2016-03
 
9-6-2016
 
34.018


2016-04
 
9-6-2016
 
150.010, 150.011


2016-05
 
9-6-2016
 
96.001 - 96.014


2016-06
 
9-6-2016
 
150.080 - 150.096, 150.180 - 150.196


2017-01
 
4-25-2017
 
112.999


2017-02
 
5-9-2017
 
50.001 - 50.015, 50.030 - 50.035


2017-03
 
5-9-2017
 
150.076, 150.176


2017-06
 
8-29-2017
 
93.038, 93.039, 150.011


Page 1 of 106
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HAMTRAMCK
ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE, AND SCOPE......................................................................................................
Table of Contents
7
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. .........................................................................................................................................7
SECTION 2. PURPOSE.................................................................................................................................................7
SECTION 3. SCOPE.....................................................................................................................................................7
SECTION 4. CONFLICTING SECTIONS. ........................................................................................................................7
SECTION 5. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. ..................................................................................................................7
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS....................................................................................................................................9
SECTION 1. SCOPE.....................................................................................................................................................9
SECTION 2. INTERCHANGEABILITY. ..........................................................................................................................9
SECTION 3. TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES..........................................................................................................9
SECTION 4. TERMS NOT DEFINED..............................................................................................................................9
SECTION 5. TERMS DEFINED. ....................................................................................................................................9
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION. .....................................................................................................................24
SECTION 1. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CODE OFFICIAL. .....................................................................................24
III – 1.01. General.............................................................................................................................................24
III – 1.02. Appointment. ....................................................................................................................................24
III – 1.03. Deputies. ..........................................................................................................................................24
III – 1.04. Enforcement. ....................................................................................................................................24
III – 1.05. Administrative Reviews and Permits. ...............................................................................................24
III – 1.06. Comprehensive Plan. .......................................................................................................................24
III – 1.07. Cooperation of other Officials and Officers.....................................................................................25
III – 1.08. Liability. ...........................................................................................................................................25
SECTION 2. PERMITS AND APPROVALS....................................................................................................................25
III – 2.01. General.............................................................................................................................................25
III – 2.02. Permits. ............................................................................................................................................25
III – 2.03. Certificate of Compliance Required.................................................................................................26
III – 2.04. Fees. .................................................................................................................................................26
SECTION 3. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. ...............................................................................................................27
III – 3.01. Authority...........................................................................................................................................27
III – 3.02. Amount of Bond................................................................................................................................27
III – 3.03. Return of Performance Bond............................................................................................................27
III – 3.04. Withholding and Partial Withholding of Performance Bond. ..........................................................27
SECTION 4. PLAN COMMISSION...............................................................................................................................27
III – 4.01. General.............................................................................................................................................27
III – 4.02. Establishment of the Commission.....................................................................................................27
III – 4.03. Terms of Office.................................................................................................................................28
III – 4.04. Membership Requirements. ..............................................................................................................28
III – 4.05. Compensation...................................................................................................................................28
III – 4.06. Powers and Duties of the Commission.............................................................................................28
III – 4.07. Appeals and Hearings. .....................................................................................................................29
SECTION 5. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. ...............................................................................................................30
III – 5.01. General.............................................................................................................................................30
III – 5.02. Establishment of the Board. .............................................................................................................30
III – 5.03. Terms of Office.................................................................................................................................30
III – 5.04. Membership Requirements. ..............................................................................................................30
III – 5.05. Compensation...................................................................................................................................30
III – 5.06. Powers and Duties of the Board.......................................................................................................31
III – 5.07. Appeals and Hearings. .....................................................................................................................33
III – 5.08. Limitations on the Powers of the Board. ..........................................................................................34
Page 2 of 106
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP. ...............................................................................................36
SECTION 1. GENERAL..............................................................................................................................................36
IV – 1.01. Classification....................................................................................................................................36
IV – 1.02. Zoning Map. .....................................................................................................................................36
SECTION 2. CONFORMITY TO ORDINANCE REGULATIONS.......................................................................................37
IV – 2.01. Scope. ...............................................................................................................................................37
IV – 2.02. Area, Bulk, and Height Requirements. .............................................................................................37
IV – 2.03. Application of Regulations. ..............................................................................................................37
IV – 2.04. Uses. .................................................................................................................................................38
ARTICLE V. RESIDENTIAL ZONES. .................................................................................................................39
SECTION 1. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R). .................................................................................................................39
V – 1.01. Intent..................................................................................................................................................39
V – 1.02. Permitted Uses...................................................................................................................................39
V – 1.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval......................................................................................39
V – 1.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses. ..........................................................................................................39
V – 1.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements................................................................................................40
V – 1.06. Structure and Site Requirements........................................................................................................40
SECTION 2. MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM). ...............................................................................41
V – 2.01. Intent..................................................................................................................................................41
V – 2.02. Permitted Uses...................................................................................................................................41
V – 2.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval......................................................................................41
V – 2.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses. ..........................................................................................................41
V – 2.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements................................................................................................41
V – 2.06. Structure and Site Requirements........................................................................................................42
ARTICLE VI. COMMERICIAL ZONES..............................................................................................................43
SECTION 1. MULTI-USE DISTRICT (C2)...................................................................................................................43
VI – 1.01. Intent.................................................................................................................................................43
VI – 1.02. Permitted Uses. ................................................................................................................................43
VI – 1.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.....................................................................................44
VI – 1.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses..........................................................................................................44
VI – 1.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements. .............................................................................................44
VI – 1.06. Structure and Site Requirements. .....................................................................................................44
SECTION 2. CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD). .................................................................................................46
VI – 2.01. Intent.................................................................................................................................................46
VI – 2.02. Permitted Uses. ................................................................................................................................46
VI – 2.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.....................................................................................47
VI – 2.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses..........................................................................................................47
VI – 2.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements. .............................................................................................47
VI – 2.06. Structure and Site Requirements. .....................................................................................................47
ARTICLE VII. INDUSTRIAL ZONES..................................................................................................................50
SECTION 1. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I). ....................................................................................................................50
VII – 1.01. Intent. ..............................................................................................................................................50
VII – 1.02. Permitted Uses. ...............................................................................................................................50
VII – 1.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval. ..................................................................................51
VII – 1.04. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements. ............................................................................................51
VII – 1.05. Accessory Buildings and Uses.........................................................................................................51
VII – 1.06. Structure and Site Requirements. ....................................................................................................51
Page 3 of 106
ARTICLE VIII. NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES.........................................52
SECTION 1. GENERAL..............................................................................................................................................52
VIII – 1.01. Intent..............................................................................................................................................52
VIII – 1.02. Board Authority to Permit Some Changes.....................................................................................52
VIII – 1.03. Status of Alleged Nonconformities.................................................................................................52
SECTION 2. NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND. .......................................................................................................52
SECTION 3. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES...........................................................................................................52
SECTION 4. NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND. ..........................................................................53
SECTION 5. USES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL LAND USE. ................................................................................................53
SECTION 6. CHANGE OF NON CONFORMING USE. ...................................................................................................54
SECTION 7. EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES..................................................................54
SECTION 8. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE TO NONCONFORMITIES. .........................................................................54
VIII – 8.01. General. .........................................................................................................................................54
VIII – 8.02. Work Permitted. .............................................................................................................................54
SECTION 9. CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.................................................................................................55
SECTION 10. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD..................................................................................................55
VIII – 10.01. Single Family Dwellings. .............................................................................................................55
VIII – 10.02. Nonconforming Lots. ...................................................................................................................55
SECTION 11. CITY ACQUISITION OF NONCONFORMITIES.........................................................................................55
ARTICLE IX. GENERAL PROVISIONS. ............................................................................................................56
SECTION 1. EXISTING BUILDINGS AND USES...........................................................................................................56
IX – 1.01. General.............................................................................................................................................56
IX – 1.02. Additions, Alterations, or Repairs. ...................................................................................................56
IX – 1.03. Maintenance. ....................................................................................................................................56
IX – 1.04. Moved and Temporary Buildings, Structures, and Uses. .................................................................56
IX – 1.05. Illegal Uses.......................................................................................................................................56
SECTION 2. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. ......................................................................................................................56
IX – 2.01. General.............................................................................................................................................56
IX – 2.02. Separation from Main Building........................................................................................................56
IX – 2.03. Private Garage. ................................................................................................................................56
IX – 2.04. Storage Buildings. ............................................................................................................................57
SECTION 3. ALLOWABLE PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS. .............................................................................................57
IX – 3.01. General.............................................................................................................................................57
IX – 3.02. Front Yards.......................................................................................................................................57
IX – 3.03. Rear Yards........................................................................................................................................57
SECTION 4. PASSAGEWAYS. ....................................................................................................................................57
IX – 4.01. Residential Entrances.......................................................................................................................57
IX – 4.02. Location of Passageways. ................................................................................................................57
SECTION 5. OFF-STREET PARKING..........................................................................................................................57
IX – 5.01. General.............................................................................................................................................57
IX – 5.02. Parking Space Requirements............................................................................................................57
IX – 5.03. Parking Stall Dimensions. ................................................................................................................58
IX – 5.04. Design of Parking Facilities.............................................................................................................58
IX – 5.05. Use of Parking Facilities..................................................................................................................59
SECTION 6. LOADING SPACES. ................................................................................................................................59
IX – 6.01. General.............................................................................................................................................59
IX – 6.02. Size. ..................................................................................................................................................59
SECTION 7. GENERAL SCREENING AND LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.........................................................................59
IX – 7.01. Lighting. ...........................................................................................................................................59
IX – 7.02. Screenwalls.......................................................................................................................................59
IX – 7.03. Side and Rear Yard Screening..........................................................................................................60
IX – 7.04. Right-of-Way. ...................................................................................................................................60
SECTION 8. DUMPSTERS..........................................................................................................................................60
Page 4 of 106
SECTION 9. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. ...........................................................................................................60
IX – 9.01. General.............................................................................................................................................60
IX – 9.02. Front Yards.......................................................................................................................................60
IX – 9.03. Street-Side Side Yards. .....................................................................................................................60
IX – 9.04. Rear Yards........................................................................................................................................61
IX – 9.05. Maintenance. ....................................................................................................................................61
SECTION 10. GRADING AND EXCAVATION REGULATIONS. .....................................................................................61
IX – 10.01. General...........................................................................................................................................61
IX – 10.02. Grading Responsibilities. ...............................................................................................................61
SECTION 11. HOME OCCUPATIONS..........................................................................................................................62
IX – 11.01. Conditions. .....................................................................................................................................62
IX – 11.02. Allowable Home Occupations. .......................................................................................................62
IX – 11.03. Home Occupations Not Identified. .................................................................................................63
SECTION 12. ADULT USES.......................................................................................................................................63
IX – 12.01. Intent...............................................................................................................................................63
IX – 12.02. Definitions. .....................................................................................................................................63
IX – 12.03. Adult Uses Prohibited.....................................................................................................................64
SECTION 13. MEDICAL MARIHUANA (ENACTED 12-13-11)......................................................................................64
IX – 13.01. Intent...............................................................................................................................................64
IX – 13.02. Review and Approval......................................................................................................................65
IX – 13.03. Definitions. .....................................................................................................................................65
IX – 13.04. Conditions and Standards. .............................................................................................................66
IX – 13.05. Civil Forfeiture...............................................................................................................................72
IX – 13.03. Criminal Penalty. ...........................................................................................................................72
IX – 13.04. Police Department Procedures. .....................................................................................................72
ARTICLE X. FENCES. ...........................................................................................................................................73
SECTION 1. GENERAL..............................................................................................................................................73
X – 1.01. Scope..................................................................................................................................................73
X – 1.02. Responsibility.....................................................................................................................................73
X – 1.03. Mixed-Use Adjoining Properties. ......................................................................................................73
X – 1.04. Bodies of Water..................................................................................................................................73
X – 1.05. Maintenance, Repair, and Removal...................................................................................................73
X – 1.06. Nonconforming Fences. .....................................................................................................................74
X – 1.07. Prohibited Fences..............................................................................................................................74
SECTION 2. PERMITS. ..............................................................................................................................................74
X – 2.01. Permit Required.................................................................................................................................74
X – 2.02. Permit Fees........................................................................................................................................75
X – 2.03. Construction Documents....................................................................................................................75
SECTION 3. SPECIFIC STANDARDS...........................................................................................................................75
X – 3.01. Types of Fences..................................................................................................................................75
X – 3.02. Vegetation..........................................................................................................................................75
X – 3.03. Building Lines....................................................................................................................................75
X – 3.04. Construction. .....................................................................................................................................76
SECTION 4. APPEALS AND VARIANCES. ..................................................................................................................76
X – 4.01. Appeals. .............................................................................................................................................76
X – 4.02. Variances. ..........................................................................................................................................76
ARTICLE XI. SIGN REGULATIONS. .................................................................................................................77
SECTION 1. PURPOSE...............................................................................................................................................77
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.........................................................................................................................................77
SECTION 3. PERMITS. ..............................................................................................................................................82
XI – 3.01. Permit Required. ..............................................................................................................................82
XI – 3.02. Permit Fees.......................................................................................................................................82
XI – 3.03. Construction Documents. .................................................................................................................82
XI – 3.04. Bond Required..................................................................................................................................82
XI – 3.05. License Required. .............................................................................................................................83
Page 5 of 106
SECTION 4. GENERAL PROVISIONS..........................................................................................................................83
XI – 4.01. Changes to Signs. .............................................................................................................................83
XI – 4.02. Conformance to Codes. ....................................................................................................................83
XI – 4.03. Signs in Rights-of-Way. ....................................................................................................................83
XI – 4.05. Traffic Visibility................................................................................................................................84
XI – 4.06. Computation of Frontage. ................................................................................................................84
XI – 4.07. Maintenance, Repair, and Removal. ................................................................................................84
IX – 4.08. Obsolete Sign Copy. .........................................................................................................................84
IX – 4.09. Nonconforming Signs. ......................................................................................................................84
SECTION 5. SPECIFIC SIGN STANDARDS. .................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.01. Animated and Changeable Messages. ..............................................................................................85
XI – 5.02. Awning Signs. ...................................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.03. Billboards. ........................................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.05. Directional Signs..............................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.06. Freestanding Signs. ..........................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.07. Menu Boards. ...................................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.08. Projecting Signs. ..............................................................................................................................85
XI – 5.09. Temporary Signs...............................................................................................................................86
XI – 5.10. Wall Signs.........................................................................................................................................87
XI – 5.11. Window Signs. ..................................................................................................................................87
SECTION 6. EXEMPT SIGNS. ....................................................................................................................................88
SECTION 7. PROHIBITED SIGNS. ..............................................................................................................................88
ARTICLE XII. SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES. ..........................................90
SECTION 1. GENERAL..............................................................................................................................................90
XII – 1.01. Scope. ..............................................................................................................................................90
XII – 1.02. Purpose. ..........................................................................................................................................90
SECTION 2. SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS................................................................................................................90
XII – 2.01. Scope. ..............................................................................................................................................90
XII – 2.02. Preliminary Site Plan Review. ........................................................................................................90
XII – 2.03. Final Site Plan Review. ...................................................................................................................91
SECTION 3. SITE PLAN REVIEW CRITERIA...............................................................................................................93
XII – 3.01. General. ..........................................................................................................................................93
XII – 3.02. Preliminary and Final Site Plan Application Form Contents. ........................................................94
XII – 3.03. Preliminary Site Plan Data Required. ............................................................................................94
XII –3.04. Final Site Plan Data Required.........................................................................................................95
SECTION 4. COMBINING PRELIMINARY AND FINAL SITE PLANS..............................................................................96
SECTION 5. PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT. ................................................................................................................96
SECTION 6. INSPECTION. .........................................................................................................................................96
SECTION 7. VIOLATIONS. ........................................................................................................................................96
ARTICLE XIII. SPECIAL LAND USE REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES. .......................97
SECTION 1. GENERAL..............................................................................................................................................97
XIII – 1.01. Intent..............................................................................................................................................97
XIII – 1.02. Authority. .......................................................................................................................................97
SECTION 2. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS. ..............................................................................................................97
XIII – 2.01. Fee Required..................................................................................................................................97
XIII – 2.02. Application.....................................................................................................................................97
XIII – 2.03. Notification Required.....................................................................................................................97
XIII – 2.04. Request for Public Hearing. ..........................................................................................................98
SECTION 3. STANDARDS..........................................................................................................................................98
XIII – 3.01. General Standards. ........................................................................................................................98
XIII – 3.02. Eligible Uses and Activities. ..........................................................................................................99
SECTION 4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION. .......................................................................................100
XIII – 4.01. Conditions....................................................................................................................................100
XIII – 4.02. Decision. ......................................................................................................................................101
Page 6 of 106
ARTICLE XIV. ZONING CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. ........................................................................102
SECTION 1. CODE OFFICIAL TO PROCESS. .............................................................................................................102
XIV – 1.01. General. .......................................................................................................................................102
XIV – 1.02. Rezoning Upon Request. ..............................................................................................................102
SECTION 2. PLAN COMMISSION TO REVIEW. .........................................................................................................102
SECTION 3. PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE............................................................................................................102
SECTION 4. EFFECT OF PROTEST TO PROPOSED AMENDMENT...............................................................................102
ARTICLE XV. VIOLATION, PENALTY, AND PUBLIC NUISANCES.........................................................103
SECTION 1. VIOLATION OF LAW............................................................................................................................103
SECTION 2. NUISANCE DECLARATION. .................................................................................................................103
SECTION 3. INFRACTION TYPE. .............................................................................................................................103
XV – 3.01. Municipal Civil Infraction.............................................................................................................103
XV – 3.02. Misdemeanor.................................................................................................................................103
SECTION 4. SANCTIONS.........................................................................................................................................103
ARTICLE XVI, SEVERABILITY, SAVING CLAUSE, REPEALER, AND PUBLICATION. ......................104
SECTION 1. SEVERABILITY....................................................................................................................................104
SECTION 2. SAVING CLAUSE.................................................................................................................................104
XVI – 2.01. Prosecutions.................................................................................................................................104
XVI – 2.02. Preliminary Site Plan Approval. ..................................................................................................104
SECTION 3. REPEAL CLAUSE.................................................................................................................................104
SECTION 4. PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE..................................................................................................105
XVI – 4.01. Publication...................................................................................................................................105
XVI – 4.02. Effective Date...............................................................................................................................105
APPENDICES
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP A
TABLE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS B
Page 7 of 106
CITY OF HAMTRAMCK
ORDINANCE 497
An ordinance to provide for the manner in which regulations and boundaries of
zones or districts shall be determined and enforced and amended, supplemented,
or changed.
The City of Hamtramck ordains that:
ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE, AND SCOPE.
Section 1. Short Title.
These regulations shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hamtramck”,
hereinafter referred to as “this Ordinance.”
Section 2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare by
controlling the design, location, use, or occupancy of all buildings and structures within the City
of Hamtramck through the regulated and orderly development of land and land uses and to
promote economic stability and aesthetic design in as much as it safeguards the public health,
safety, and welfare.
Section 3. Scope.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the construction, addition, alteration, moving,
repair, and use of any building, structure, parcel of land, sign, or fence within the City of
Hamtramck, except work located primarily in a public way, on public utility towers and poles,
and public utilities unless specifically mentioned in this Ordinance.
Section 4. Conflicting Sections.
If, in any specific case, different sections of this Ordinance specify different requirements, the
more restrictive shall govern. If there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
Section 5. Conflicting Ordinances.
If the provisions of this Ordinance impose regulations for lower heights of buildings, or a less
percentage of lot that may be occupied, or require wider or larger courts or deeper yards than are
imposed or required by existing provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall govern. If, however, the provisions of the state housing code or other ordinances or
regulations of this City impose requirements for lower heights of buildings or less percentage of
lot that may be occupied, or require wider or larger courts or deeper yards than are required by
this Ordinance, the provisions of the state housing code or other ordinance shall govern.
Section 6. Public Benefit.
In fulfilling these purposes, this Ordinance is intended to benefit the public as a whole and not
any specific person or class of persons. Although, through implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this Ordinance, benefits and detriments shall be enjoyed or suffered by specific
individuals, such is merely a byproduct of the overall benefit to the whole community.
Page 8 of 106
Therefore, unintentional breaches of the obligations of administration and enforcement imposed
by the City of Hamtramck shall not be enforceable in tort.
Page 9 of 106
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS.
Section 1. Scope.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this
Ordinance, have the meanings as shown in this article. The particular shall control the general.
The text shall control if any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this
Ordinance and any caption or illustration occurs. The word “shall” is always mandatory and the
word “may” is permissive.
Section 2. Interchangeability.
Words stated in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the
feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular, unless
the context clearly indicates the contrary.
Section 3. Terms Defined in other Codes.
If terms are not defined in this Ordinance and are defined in other legally adopted codes, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
Section 4. Terms not Defined.
If terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this article, such terms shall have
ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
Section 5. Terms Defined.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this
Ordinance, have the meanings as shown in this section.
ABANDONED SIGN. See Article XI, Section 2.
ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building customarily incidental to and located on the
same lot occupied by the principal use or main building, such as a detached garage.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS. An accessory building used by a single-family to be
located above a garage.
ACCESSORY USE. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the structure to
which it is related; a use that is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with,
such primary use.
AGRICULTURE. The tilling of soil, raising of crops, farm animals, livestock, horticulture,
gardening, beekeeping, and aquaculture.
ALLEY. Any public way or thoroughfare greater than 10 feet but less than 16 feet in width,
which has been dedicated to the public for public use.
ALTERATION. Any change, addition, or modification in construction, occupancy, or use.
Page 10 of 106
AMUSEMENT CENTER. An establishment within an enclosed building offering five or more
amusement devices, including, but not limited to, coin-operated electronic games, electronic dart
boards, juke boxes, shooting galleries, table games, and similar recreational diversions. Vending
machines shall not be included in the count of coin-operated machines for purposes of this
definition.
ANIMATED SIGN. See Article XI, Section 2.
Electrically activated. See Article XI, Section 2.
Environmentally activated. See Article XI, Section 2.
Mechanically activated. See Article XI, Section 2.
APARTMENT HOUSE. A residential building designed or used for three or more dwelling
units. All apartment houses are subject to any general business license and rental inspection
ordinances of the City.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar large mechanical equipment, including paint,
body, fender, and major engine and engine part overhaul, which is conducted in a completely
enclosed building.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar large mechanical equipment, including
brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune ups, and transmission
work, which is conducted in a completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOTIVE SELF-SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the
fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than a service station attendant. Such an
establishment shall be permitted to offer for sale at retail other convenience items as a clearly
secondary activity and shall be permitted to also include a freestanding automatic car wash.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the
fuel tanks of motor vehicles. Accessory activities shall be permitted to include minor automotive
repair and maintenance, car wash service, and food sales.
BAR. Any business establishment that is licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
to serve alcohol and does not provide a full-service dining menu.
BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a
building having only one floor level, shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level
qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
BOARD. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City as created in this Ordinance.
BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more than 10 guest
rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation for
Page 11 of 106
more than 1 week and less than 12 weeks. All boarding houses are subject to any general
business license and rental inspection ordinances of the City.
BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING CODE. The Michigan Building Code promulgated by the State of Michigan, as
adopted by the City.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL. A person registered with the State of Michigan under the
Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act, Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, being
sections 338.2301 through 338.2313 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and duly authorized by the
City to perform inspections within the City.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest
point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the highest
midpoint between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING INSPECTOR. A person registered with the State of Michigan under Building
Officials and Inspectors Registration Act, Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, beings sections
338.2301 through 338.2313 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and duly authorized by the City to
perform inspections within the City.
BUILDING LINE. The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure nearest a property
line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices, and other ornamental features projecting from
the walls of the building or structure. Roof eaves and overhangs exceeding one (1) foot shall be
counted as part of the building line.
BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which the principle use of the site is conducted.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building used temporarily for the storage of construction
materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site permitted construction of utilities, or
other community facilities, or used temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a
subdivision under construction. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, tents, booths,
and other canvass-like structures.
BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL SERVICES. An establishment intended for the conduct, service,
or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the conduct of professional or
business service.
CANOPY. A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material supported by the building
or by support extending to the ground directly under the canopy placed so as to extend outward
from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings.
CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan.
CODE OFFICIAL. The person appointed by the chief executive officer of the City who is
charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance.
Page 12 of 106
COMMERCIAL CENTER, COMMUNITY. A completely planned and designed commercial
development of 100,000 to 300,000 square feet that usually contains one junior department store,
a variety store or discount department store, a supermarket, and specialty stores. A community
commercial center generally has between twenty and seventy retail tenants and the market
support of more than 5,000 households.
COMMERCIAL CENTER, CONVENIENCE. A completely planned and designed commercial
development providing for the sale of general merchandise and daily necessities. A convenience
store located in a convenience commercial center shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
COMMERCIAL CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD. A completely planned and designed
commercial development with a gross leasable area of less than 100,000 square feet. Typical
anchors include supermarkets and pharmacies. Neighborhood commercial centers offer
convenience goods and personal services, and usually depend on the market support of more
than 1,000 households.
COMMERCIAL CENTER, REGIONAL. A completely planned and designed commercial
development having between 400,000 and 750,000 square feet of gross leasable area. A regional
commercial center offers a variety of general merchandise, apparel, furniture, home furnishings,
services, and recreational facilities and is built around one or more full department stores of not
less than 100,000 square feet each.
COMMERCIAL, HEAVY. An establishment or business that generally uses open sales yards,
outside equipment storage or outside activities that generate noise or other impacts considered
incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical businesses in this definition are lumberyards,
construction specialty services, heavy equipment suppliers, or building contractors.
COMMERCIAL, LIGHT. An establishment or business that generally has retail or wholesale
sales, office uses, or services, which do not generate noise or other impacts considered
incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical businesses in this definition are retail stores,
offices, catering services, or restaurants.
COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE. Establishments that engage in the sale of
general retail goods and accessory services. Businesses within this definition include those that
conduct sales and storage entirely within an enclosed structure (with the exception of occasional
outdoor “sidewalk” promotions); businesses specializing in the sale of either general
merchandise or convenience goods.
COMMISSION. The City Plan Commission as created by this Ordinance.
COMMON COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Hamtramck as created by the City
Charter.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The declaration of purposes, policies, and programs for the
development of the City; also known as the Master Plan.
Page 13 of 106
CONDOMINIUM. A single-dwelling unit in a multiunit dwelling or structure that is separately
owned and may be combined with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the
property.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST. When a member of the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals, who is asked to make a decision as part of the appropriate Board or Commission, has a
financial interest in the person or corporation making the request, owns property or resides
within 300 feet of the area in question, or is related to the person making the request within the
second-degree of blood or marriage.
CONSTRUCTION. The erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, repairing, moving, or
equipping of any building.
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE. Any building or portion thereof that contains facilities for
living, sleeping, and sanitation as required by this Ordinance, and may include facilities for
eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence shall be
permitted to be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house, but does
not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, or lodging houses.
COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and
bounded on three or more sides by walls of the same building.
DAY CARE, FAMILY. The keeping for part-time care or instruction or both, whether or not for
compensation, of six or fewer children at any one time within a dwelling, not including members
of the family residing on the premises. All family day care facilities are subject to any general
business license and rental inspection ordinances of the City.
DAY CARE, GROUP. An establishment for the care or instruction or both, whether or not for
compensation, of seven or more persons at any one time. Child nurseries, preschools, and adult
care facilities are included in this definition. Such establishment shall be licensed by the State.
All group day care facilities are subject to any general business license and rental inspection
ordinances of the City.
DENSITY. The number of dwelling units that are allowed on an area of land, which area of land
shall be permitted to include dedicated streets contained within the development.
DRIVEWAY. A private access road, the use of that is limited to persons residing, employed, or
otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is located.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE UNIT. A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three
or more families living independently in which they may or may not share common entrances or
other spaces or both. Individual dwelling units may be owned as condominiums, or offered for
rent.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED. A group of three (3) or more single family
dwelling units which are joined consecutively by a common party wall, but not a common
floor-ceiling. Each unit shall have its own outside entrance. For the purposes of this Ordinance,
Page 14 of 106
dwellings such as semi-detached and rowhouses, shall be deemed a single family attached
dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities
designed for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities
designed for occupancy by two families.
DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling units that is used, intended, or
designed to be used, rented, leased, sublet, or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation.
EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or
agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be
for use under, on, or above the lot or lots.
FACE OF BUILDING, PRIMARY. The wall of a building fronting on a street or right-of-way,
excluding any appurtenances such as projecting fins, columns, pilasters, canopies, marquees,
showcases, or decorations.
FARM ANIMALS. Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to, if permitted,
be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale or family food production,
education, or recreation, or all of the above. Farm animals are identified by these categories:
large animals, e.g. horse and cattle; medium animals, e.g. sheep and goats; or small animals, e.g.
rabbits, chinchillas, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks, and pigeons.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of a building measured
from the exterior face of exterior walls or, if appropriate, from the centerline of dividing walls;
this includes courts and decks and porches when covered by a roof.
FLOOR AREA, NET. The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts, courts, elevators,
stairways, exterior walls, and similar facilities.
FRONTAGE. The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of-way measured at the front
property line.
GARAGE. A building or portion of a building not more than 576 square feet in area and not
exceeding 15 feet in height at the midway point between the eaves and the ridge, in which only
private or pleasure-type motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the
premises are primarily stored or kept.
GRADE (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the existing surface of
the ground, within the area between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building.
Page 15 of 106
GROUP CARE FACILITY. A facility, required to be licensed by the State, which provides
training, care, supervision, treatment, or rehabilitation to the aged, disabled, those convicted of
crimes, or those suffering the effects of drugs or alcohol; this does not include day care centers,
family day care homes, foster homes, school, hospitals, jails, or prisons.
HABITABLE SPACE (Room). Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking.
Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not
considered habitable space.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that constitutes a physical or health hazard.
HOME OCCUPATION. The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or nonresidential
uses by a resident thereof, which is subordinate and incidental to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes.
HOSPITAL. An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment, and care of human illness or
infirmity and providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and including related facilities,
laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, and staff offices.
HOUSEHOLD PETS. Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, etc. for family use only (noncommercial) with
cages, pens, etc.
INDUSTRIAL OR RESEARCH PARK. A tract of land developed according to a site plan for
the use of a family of industries and their related commercial uses, and that is of sufficient size
and physical improvement to protect surrounding areas and the general community and to ensure
a harmonious integration into the neighborhood.
IMPROVEMENTS. Those features and actions associated with a project which are considered
necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural resources or the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City, and future users or inhabitants of the
proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and
drainage. “Improvements” do not include the entire project that is the subject of zoning
approval.
JUNK YARD. Any land area including buildings thereon used primarily for the outdoor
abandonment, collection, dismantling, salvaging, and storage of inoperable vehicles or
machinery, waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or other discarded materials which may or may not be
offered for sale in whole or in part.
KITCHEN. Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and intended to be used
for the cooking or preparation of food.
LABORATORY. A place devoted to experimental, routine, or basic study such as testing and
analytical operations, and in which manufacturing of products, except prototypes for test
marketing, is not performed.
Page 16 of 106
LANDSCAPING. The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas, materials, and treatment
that generally includes naturally growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs, and flowers.
These treatments shall be permitted also to include the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water
features, and contouring of the earth.
LIVESTOCK. Includes, but is not limited to, horses, bovine animals, sheep, goats, swine,
reindeer, donkeys, mules, and any other hoofed animals.
LOADING BERTH. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings,
for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials. Off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in
computation of required off-street parking. A loading space is five hundred twenty-eight (528)
square feet in area.
LOT. A single parcel of land. (N.B. this definition shall require lot combinations for large
projects occurring on contiguous lots owned by the same person.)
LOT, CORNER: A lot whose lot lines form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets
shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot
lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five (135)
degrees.
LOT COVERAGE: The amount of a lot, stated in terms of percentage, that is covered by all
structures located thereon. This shall be deemed to include all buildings or structures covered by
a permanent roof, including porches, breezeways, patio roofs, and the like, whether open
box-type or lathe roofs or both, or fully roofed, but shall not be deemed to include fences, walls,
or hedges used as fences.
LOT LINE: A boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The exterior line along the right-of-way of a road on which a lot fronts or
abuts.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line, that generally crosses a front
lot line or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which actually exists in a subdivision plat as shown on the records of
the County Registrar of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description
of which has been so recorded.
LOT DEPTH: The average distance between the front lot line and rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH: The average distance between side lot lines.
Page 17 of 106
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. All other types of manufacturing not included in the definitions
of light manufacturing and medium manufacturing.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging, or testing of goods or equipment, including research activities, conducted entirely
within an enclosed structure, with no outside storage, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or
vans and imposing a negligible impact on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, or pollutants.
MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging, or testing of goods or equipment, including research activities, conducted entirely
within an enclosed structure or an open yard that is capable of being screened from neighboring
properties, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or other vehicles.
MAYOR. The chief executive officer of the City, whether the official designation of his office is
mayor, city manager, or otherwise.
MODULAR HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, not built on a chassis,
constructed according to the Building Code, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with a
permanent foundation when connected to the required facilities.
MINING. The physical excavation, filling, and grading of any lot other than normal
maintenance.
MORTUARY, FUNERAL HOME. An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial
or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral
services, spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, or display of funeral equipment, or
all of the above.
MOTEL, HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guestrooms intended or designed to be
used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied, or which guests occupy for sleeping
purposes.
NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which width, area, or other dimension did not conform to the
regulations when this Ordinance or subsequent amendment became effective.
NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully existing when
this Ordinance or subsequent amendment became effective, which does not now conform.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing
at the effective date of this Ordinance, or affecting amendment, which was designed, erected, or
structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the zoning regulations of the zone in which
it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE. See “Use, nonconforming.”
Page 18 of 106
OPEN SPACE. Land areas that are not occupied by building, structure, parking areas, streets,
alleys, or required yards. Open space shall be permitted to be devoted to landscaping,
preservation of natural features, patios, and recreational areas and facilities.
PARK. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for outdoor active
or passive recreational uses.
PARKING LOT. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of automobiles.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. A space within a building or private or public parking lot,
exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office, and work areas, for the parking of an
automobile.
PERSON. Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations,
clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations; or any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of
personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other
person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A residential or commercial development guided
by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision regulations, other than
use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site
and building design and location, under general guidelines. A PUD includes cluster zoning,
planned development, community unit plan, planned residential development, and other
terminology denoting zoning requirements designed to accomplish the objectives of this
Ordinance through a land development project review process based on the application of site
planning criteria to achieve integration of the proposed land development project with the
characteristics of the project area. This Ordinance does not allow for Planned Unit
Developments.
PLOT PLAN. A plot of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements, the size and
location of any existing buildings or building to be erected, the location of the lot in relation to
abutting streets, and other such information.
POOLS (SWIMMING), HOT TUBS, AND SPAS.
Above-ground/on ground pool. See “Private swimming pool.”
Barrier. A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an above-ground swimming pool or
a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming pool and
obstructs access to the swimming pool.
Hot tub. See “Private swimming pool.”
In-ground pool. See “Private swimming pool.”
Power safety cover. A pool cover that is placed over the water area, and is opened and
closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a control switch.
Private swimming pool. Any structure that contains water over 24 inches in depth and
which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or recreational bathing in
connection with an occupancy in Residential Zones and which is available only to
the family and guests of the householder. This includes in-ground, aboveground,
and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
Page 19 of 106
Private swimming pool, indoor. Any private swimming pool that is totally contained
within a private structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of the
structure.
Private swimming pool, outdoor. Any private swimming pool that is not an indoor
pool.
Public swimming pool. Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool.
Spa. See “Private swimming pool.”
PREMANUFACTURED UNIT. A structure, transportable of a minimum of two sections that
has a Certificate of Acceptability issued under the rules set forth in the Stille-Derossett-Hale
Single State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, being sections
125.1501 through 125.1531 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, storm sewer, or drainage facility, sanitary
sewer, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking
area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume
the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or for which the local government
responsibility is established.
PUBLIC SERVICES. Uses operated by a unit of government to serve public needs, such as
police (with or without jail), fire service, ambulance, judicial court, or government offices, but
not including public utility stations or maintenance facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY STATION. A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-public utility
agency to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas, telecommunications, and related equipment,
or to pump or chemically treat water. This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid
waste, or hazardous waste.
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or otherwise permanently appropriated to the
public for public use.
QUASI-PUBLIC. Essentially a public use, although under private ownership or control.
QUORUM. A majority of the authorized members of a Board or Commission.
RECREATION, INDOOR. An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation
activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and serving of food, or
the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses, or both. Included in this definition shall be
bowling, roller skating or ice skating, billiards, pool, motion picture theaters, laser tag, video
arcades, dance halls, gymnasiums, indoor sporting centers, and related amusements.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR. An area free of buildings, except for restrooms, dressing rooms,
equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open-air pavilions, and similar structures used
primarily for recreational activities.
Page 20 of 106
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. A vehicle used for recreational activities, including, but not
limited to, boats, wave runners, travel trailers, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles,
racecars, dune buggies, campers, motor homes, and travel trailers.
RECYCLING FACILITY. Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap materials
are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, disassembled, or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper, rags, tires, and bottles, and other such
materials.
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An architect or engineer registered or licensed to
practice professional architecture or engineering under the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of
the Public Acts of 1980, being sections 339.2001 through 339.2014 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws.
REHABILITATION CENTER (Halfway House). An establishment whose primary purpose is
the rehabilitation of persons. Such services include drug and alcohol rehabilitation, assistance to
emotionally and mentally disturbed persons, and halfway houses for prison parolees and
juveniles.
RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL, AND FRATERNAL ACTIVITY. A use or building owned or
maintained by organized religious organizations or nonprofit associations for social, civil, or
philanthropic purposes, or the purpose for which persons regularly assemble.
RENOVATION. Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than ordinary repair.
RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or beverages or
both to customers in a ready to consume state and whose principal method of operation includes
one of the following characteristics:
a. Customers are normally provided with an individual menu and are served their food and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and
beverages are consumed.
b. A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages are consumed within the restaurant
building.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment that sells food or beverages or both already
prepared for consumption within the restaurant building or off-premises as a carryout order
packaged in paper, styrofoam, or similar materials, and may include drive-in or drive-up
facilities for ordering.
RESTAURANT, TAKE OUT. An establishment that sells food or beverages or both already
prepared for consumption intended to be taken off the premises for consumption.
ROAD FRONTAGE. The length of the lot line that borders a public road.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL. A school establishment to provide for the teaching of industrial,
clerical, managerial, or artistic skills. This definition applies to schools that are owned and
Page 21 of 106
operated privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum (e.g. beauty
school or modeling school).
SETBACK. The minimum required open-space between the property line and the building line.
SIGN. An advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration,
insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification,
advertisement, or promotion of the interests of any person, entity, product, or service, including
the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features
used to draw the attention of observers.
SIGNS, COMMUNITY. Temporary on- or off-premises signs generally made of a woven
material or durable synthetic materials primarily attached to or hung from light poles or on a
building. These signs are solely of a decorative, festive, or informative nature announcing
activities, promotions, or events with seasonal or traditional themes having broad community
interest, and which are sponsored or supported by a City-based nonprofit organization.
SITE PLAN. A plan that outlines the use and development of any tract of land.
SPECIAL LAND USE. A use that would become harmonious or compatible with neighboring
uses through the application and maintenance of qualifying conditions.
STATE. The State of Michigan and its various branches and administrative agencies.
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A structure constructed for residential
purposes that is licensed by the State under the adult foster care facility licensing act, Act No.
218 of the Public Acts of 1979, being sections 400.701 to 400.737 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws, that provides resident services or care for six or fewer persons under twenty-four hour
supervision for persons in need of that supervision or care.
STORY. That portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than 6 feet above
grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet
above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be
considered as a story.
STREET. Any thoroughfare or public way not less than 16 feet in width which has been
dedicated.
STREET, PRIVATE. A right-of-way or easement in private ownership not dedicated or
maintained as a public street that affords the principal means of access to two or more sites.
STRUCTURAL CHANGES. Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than
repairs. Also, a change in a mechanical system that involves an extension, addition, or change to
the arrangement, type or purpose of the original installation of the system.
Page 22 of 106
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any
piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract, lot, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites,
or other divisions of land.
TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USE. A structure or use permitted by the Building Code
Official to exist during periods of construction of the principal use or for special events, not to
exceed six (6) months. Two extension periods of six (6) months each are allowed.
THEATRE. A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage productions,
performances, or motion pictures.
TOWNHOUSES: A row of three (3) or more attached single-family dwellings, not more than
two and one-half (2.5) stories in height and for which there is a rear and front entrance to each
dwelling. Townhouse shall not be used as a synonym for the term “condominium” which refers
to how property or space is owned rather than for a particular housing style.
USE. The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged, designed,
or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied, including all accessory uses.
USE, CHANGE OF. The change within the classified use of a structure or premise.
USE, NONCONFORMING. A use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this
Ordinance became effective, which has been lawfully continued and which does not now
conform with the use regulations.
USE, PRINCIPAL. A use that fulfills a primary function of a household, establishment,
institution, or other entity.
USE, TEMPORARY. A use that is authorized by this Ordinance to be conducted for a fixed
period of time. Temporary uses are characterized by such activities as the sale of agricultural
products, contractor’s offices and equipment sheds, fireworks, carnivals, flea markets, and
garage sales.
VARIANCE. A deviation granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, as created in this Ordinance,
from the use and dimensional requirements established by this code only for reasons established
in this Ordinance.
WAREHOUSE, WHOLESALE OR STORAGE. A building or premises in which goods,
merchandise, or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
YARD. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the
ground upward by buildings or structures, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
Page 23 of 106
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto.
YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building and between the
building line and the side lot line.
ZONING APPROVAL: A document signifying compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance as to use, height, bulk, setback, parking, and all other dimensional requirements.
Page 24 of 106
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION.
Section 1. Powers and Duties of the Code Official.
III – 1.01. General.
This section establishes the duties and responsibilities for the zoning code official and other
officials and agencies, with respect to the administration of this Ordinance. The zoning code
official or his designee shall be referred to hereafter as “the code official”.
III – 1.02. Appointment.
The chief executive officer of the City shall appoint the code official whom shall be charged with
the enforcement of this Ordinance.
III – 1.03. Deputies.
The code official may appoint such number of technical officers and other employees as shall be
authorized from time to time by the Common Council. The code official shall be permitted to
deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of this Ordinance.
III – 1.04. Enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the code official shall apply and enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. An appeal of an application of this Ordinance by the code official shall be submitted
to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which, unless otherwise provided, may interpret this Ordinance,
and such interpretation shall be considered final.
III – 1.05. Administrative Reviews and Permits.
1.05.1. Certificate of Compliance. The code official shall receive all applications for certificates of
compliance and coordinate and perform the necessary inspections.
1.05.2. Review of Zoning Permits. The code official shall be authorized to undertake reviews, make
recommendations, and grant approvals as set forth in this Ordinance. All applications for
building and zoning permits and amendments thereto shall be submitted to the code
official for review and approved before permit issuance. Each application shall include a
set of plans and all data necessary to show that the requirements of this Ordinance are
met.
1.05.3. Site Plan Reviews. The code official shall receive all applications for site plan review and
prepare submittals for review by the Plan Commission.
1.05.4. Special Land Use Permits. The code official shall receive all applications for special land
uses as shall be permitted or approved as required by this Ordinance and prepare
submittals for review by the Plan Commission.
1.05.5. Variance Applications. The code official shall receive all applications for use variances
and dimensional variances as required by this Ordinance and prepare submittals for
review by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
III – 1.06. Comprehensive Plan.
The code official shall assist the Commission in the development of the Comprehensive Plan.
Page 25 of 106
III – 1.07. Cooperation of other Officials and Officers.
The code official shall be authorized to request, and shall receive so far as is required in the
discharge of the duties described in this Ordinance, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials and officers of the City.
III – 1.08. Liability.
The code official, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties described
in this Ordinance, shall not be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties.
A suit brought against the code official or any employee because such act or omission performed
by the code official or the employee in the enforcement of any provisions of such codes or other
pertinent law or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code or enforced by the
enforcing agency shall be defended by the City until final termination of such proceedings, and
any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the City. This Ordinance shall not be
construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, or
controlling any building or parcel of land for any damages to persons or property caused by
defects, nor shall the enforcing agent or the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason
of the reviews or permits issued under this Ordinance.
Section 2. Permits and Approvals.
III – 2.01. General.
All departments, officials, and employees who are charged with the duty or authority to issue
permits or approvals shall not issue any permit or approval for uses or purposes when the permit
or approval would be in conflict with this Ordinance. No permit shall be issued to any person
who is in default to the City. By way of illustration, a person in default could owe the City
income tax, property tax, water bill, or a business license fee. If a written payment plan has been
accepted by the chief executive officer, the code official shall issue a conditional permit if all
other provisions of this Ordinance are met. Any permit or approval, if issued in conflict with this
Ordinance, shall be null and void.
III – 2.02. Permits.
2.02.1. Conformance to Zoning. No use, building, or structure, whether publicly or privately
owned, shall be constructed or authorized until the location and extent thereof conform to
the approved plan and the code official has issued the proper permits. Specifically, a
zoning permit shall be obtained before the construction, physical development, or razing
of a proposed new or expanded use, structure, or building; the restoration and structural
improvement of any existing use or structure other than normal repairs and minor
improvement; or a change of one use to any other use. When a building permit is
required, zoning approval shall be an eligibility requirement or prerequisite for such
permit.
2.02.2. Expiration or Cancellation. Each license, permit, or approval issued shall expire after 180
days if no work is undertaken or such use or activity is not established, unless a different
time of issuance of the license or permit is allowed in this Ordinance, or unless an
extension is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals before expiration. Failure to
comply fully with the terms of any permit, license, or approval shall be permitted to be
grounds for cancellation or revocation. Action to cancel any license, permit, or approval
shall be permitted to be taken on proper grounds by the code official. Cancellation of a
Page 26 of 106
permit or approval by the Commission or Board shall be permitted to be appealed in the
same manner as its original action.
2.02.3. Validity of Licenses, Permits, Approvals, and Variances. The code official shall require that
the development or use in question before the Commission or Board proceed only under
the terms of such license, permit, approval, or variance including any requirements or
conditions established as a condition of issuance by the Commission or Board. Except as
specifically provided for in this Ordinance and conditions of approval, the securing of
one required review or approval shall not exempt the recipient from the necessity of
securing any other required review or approval.
2.02.4. Approval for and Availability of Essential Services. All projects that require the additional
use of new facilities or essential services, such as sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants,
potable water, public streets, street lighting, and similar services, shall obtain such
approval as required by the agency providing such services before project approval and
permit issuance. Nonavailability of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for
denying permits for additional development until such services are available. The City is
not obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available. If
capacity is available, the extension of such services shall be by and at the cost of the
developer. All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full conformance
with the City’s standards for such service, and shall be subject to review, permit, and
inspection as required by other policies or ordinances of the City.
III – 2.03. Certificate of Compliance Required.
A person shall not occupy a new structure, except an owner-occupied dwelling unit, or lot, or
occupy an existing structure or lot until the code official has issued a certificate of compliance. If
a change in ownership occurs in an established business, a certificate of compliance shall be
required. Before a certificate of compliance is issued, the code official and other interested City
officials and departments shall perform a thorough inspection intended to insure that both the
structure and the use comply with all zoning requirements and any conditions previously
imposed. After inspection and consultation with other interested City officials and departments,
the code official shall:
a. Issue the certificate of compliance if all requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied and
all conditions, if any, have been met;
b. Deny the certificate of compliance if all of the requirements of this Ordinance are not
satisfied and all conditions, if any, have not been met, with such denial being in writing
and clearly identifying the reasons for denial and imposing a time frame for compliance;
c. Issue a temporary certificate of compliance for no more than sixty days, if in the opinion
of the code official the reasons for possible denial are minor and can be addressed within
a reasonable period of time; the temporary certificate of compliance shall have conditions
imposed by the code official.
III – 2.04. Fees.
A fee for services shall be charged. All fees shall be established by resolution of the Common
Council during the adoption of the annual budget. Failure to apply for the appropriate zoning
permit and paying the appropriate fee shall result in a municipal civil infraction and a doubling
of the permit fee.
Page 27 of 106
Section 3. Performance Guarantee.
III – 3.01. Authority.
To insure compliance with this Ordinance and any conditions imposed under this Ordinance, in
authorizing any zoning permit, special land use approval, or variance, the body or official
charged with administering, as designated by this Ordinance, the respective request may require
that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond in an amount
authorized by this Ordinance be deposited with the city treasurer to insure faithful completion of
the improvements. The performance guarantee shall be deposited when the permit is issued
authorizing the activity or project. This section shall not be applicable to improvements for
which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been
deposited under the Land Division Act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended,
being sections 560.101 to 560.293 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
III – 3.02. Amount of Bond.
Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, the Common Council shall by resolution during
adoption of the annual budget establish a guideline for the amount of bonds that the Common
Council deems adequate for the protection of the City and its inhabitants.
III – 3.03. Return of Performance Bond.
Upon the satisfactory completion of specific requirements as attested to by the code official, the
city treasurer shall be authorized to return any improvement or performance bond without
interest that may pertain to the specific improvement.
III – 3.04. Withholding and Partial Withholding of Performance Bond.
When the project is not satisfactorily completed, the code official may direct the city treasurer
not to return all or part of any bond; but to apply the bond or part thereof to the project in
question. If any action begin and fail to meet full completion based on the approve site plan, or
if the project area is reduced in size and action is only partially completed, the code official shall
determine the amount of the bond or bonds to be returned to the applicant, without interest, and
the amount be applied to the improvements.
Section 4. Plan Commission.
III – 4.01. General.
This section addresses the duties and responsibilities of the City Plan Commission, hereafter
referred to as “the Commission”, and other officers and agencies, with respect to the
administration of this Ordinance.
III – 4.02. Establishment of the Commission.
The City Plan Commission is hereby established under the Municipal Planning Act, Act No. 285
of the Public Acts of 1931, being sections 125.31 to 125.45 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
The Commission shall consist of the mayor of the City, one administrative official of the City
selected by the mayor, and one member of the Common Council to be selected by the Common
Council as members ex officio, and six other persons who shall be appointed by the mayor as
provided in this Ordinance. All ex officio members, appointed under this Ordinance, shall have
full voting rights.
Page 28 of 106
III – 4.03. Terms of Office.
4.03.1. Appointment. The terms of the ex officio members shall correspond to their respective
official tenures, except that the term of the administrative official selected by the mayor
shall terminate with the term of the mayor. All commissioners who are members of the
Plan Commission established by Ordinance No. 194 upon the effective date of this
Ordinance shall serve until their term expires. The appointing authority shall not make
an appointment or reappointment until the term of the appointed member has expired.
The term of each appointed member shall be three years or until his successor takes
office. The terms of office of each appointed member shall thereafter expire on January 1
in the year of expiration.
4.03.2. Removal from Office. Upon written charges and after a public hearing, the mayor may
remove a member, other than the member selected by the Common Council, for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The Common Council may for
like cause remove the member selected by the Common Council upon written charges
and after a public hearing.
4.03.3. Vacancies. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of term shall be filled within 30 days for the unexpired term by the mayor in
the case of a member selected or appointed by the mayor, and by the Common Council in
the case of the member appointed by the Common Council.
III – 4.04. Membership Requirements.
An appointed member shall be a resident of the City for not less than thirty days before his
appointment and shall maintain residency during his term; if an appointed member discontinues
his residency within the City, the mayor shall declare the position vacant and shall appoint
another qualified person within thirty days. An appointed member shall not hold another
municipal office except that one appointed member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or a member of a joint fire administrative board.
III – 4.05. Compensation.
An appointed member of the Commission may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the
Common Council during its adoption of the annual budget and may be reimbursed for preapproved
expenses related to performing his duties.
III – 4.06. Powers and Duties of the Commission.
4.06.1. Meetings. All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted under the Open Meetings
Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being sections 15.261 to 15.275 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws. The Commission shall meet annually in January for the
purpose of electing officers and adopting rules for transaction of business. The
Commission shall hold not less than one regular meeting in each month. The chairman
may call special meetings. The mayor shall be empowered to set the date and time of the
annual meeting.
4.06.2. Quorum and Votes Required. The Commission shall not conduct business unless a majority
of its members are present. Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the concurring
vote of a majority of its voting members shall be required to pass on any decision,
approval, or determination that the Commission may make under this Ordinance. Any
three members of the Commission shall have the power at any meeting to schedule a
public hearing.
Page 29 of 106
4.06.3. Records to be Public. The city clerk shall keep a record of the Commission’s resolutions,
transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record subject
to the Freedom of Information Act, Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being
sections 15.231 to 12.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
4.06.4. Chairman. The Commission shall elect its chairman from amongst the appointed members
and create and fill such other offices as the Commission may determine. The term of the
chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection.
4.06.5. Annual report. By January 31 of each year, the Commission shall make an annual report
of the activities of the Commission of the previous calendar year and forward
recommendations to the Common Council.
4.06.6. Comprehensive plan, subdivision of land, and approval or disapproval of plats. The
Commission shall be vested with all powers vested in a municipal planning commission
under The Municipal Planning Act, Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of 1931, being
sections 125.31 to 125.45 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, commencing with section
125.36 et seq.
4.06.7. Zoning ordinance. The Commission shall develop and recommend to the Common
Council, under the guidelines of the comprehensive plan, a zoning ordinance and official
zoning map establishing zoning districts within the City. Such an ordinance shall be
made in regards to the character of each district and the most appropriate use of land
within the City.
4.06.8. Site plan reviews. The Commission shall review all site plans submitted under this
Ordinance and the conditions imposed thereunder, and shall approve all site plans that
contain the information required by this Ordinance, other applicable City ordinances, and
state and federal statutes.
4.06.9. Special land use permits. The Commission shall review all requests for a special land use
in accordance with Article XIII, Section 4. If required by the code official, maps,
drawings, or other documentation in support of the request shall accompany the
application. The granting of a special land use permit shall not exempt the applicant from
compliance with other relevant provisions of related ordinances.
4.06.10. Employees, contracts for services, and expenditures. The Commission may appoint such
employees as the Commission may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment,
promotion, demotion, and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law that
govern other corresponding civil employees of the City. The Commission may also
contract with planners, engineers, architects, and other consultants for such services as
the Commission may require. The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts,
shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Common Council, which
shall provide the funds, equipment, and accommodations necessary for the Commission’s
work.
4.06.11.Conflict of Interest: No member of the commission may participate in any decision,
approval, or determination with regard to any matter of which he/she has a direct
interest.
III – 4.07. Appeals and Hearings.
Any person with standing aggrieved by any decision of the Commission shall have the right to
make such appeals as shall be permitted to be provided by this Ordinance or state law. Such
appeals shall be based on the record.
Page 30 of 106
Section 5. Zoning Board of Appeals.
III – 5.01. General.
This section addresses the duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Board of Appeals, hereafter
referred to as “the Board”, and other officers and agencies, with respect to the administration of
this Ordinance.
III – 5.02. Establishment of the Board.
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established under the City and Village Zoning Act, Act
No. 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, being sections 125.581 to 125.600 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws. The Board shall consist of seven members, each to be appointed by the
Common Council as provided for in this Ordinance, within ten days after the effective date of
this Ordinance. The Common Council may also appoint not more than two alternate members
for the same term as regular members of the Board. The alternate members may be called on a
rotating basis as specified in this Ordinance to sit as regular members of the Board in the absence
of a regular member or in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision
on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. A
member shall disqualify himself from a vote in which he has a conflict of interest. The alternate
member called shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has
the same voting rights as a regular member of the Board.
III – 5.03. Terms of Office.
5.03.1. Appointment. The terms of office for the membership of the Board shall be three years,
expiring on January 1 in the year of expiration. Appointments of the first members of
this Board created under this Ordinance shall be for terms of one, two, and three years,
respectively, so as nearly as possible to provide for the subsequent appointment of an
equal number of members each year, except that three members shall be appointed to the
one-year term. After the initial appointments, each member shall hold office for the full
three-year term.
5.03.2. Removal from Office. The Common Council shall, upon written charges and after a public
hearing, remove members of the Board for nonperformance of duty or misconduct in
office.
5.03.3. Vacancies. Within 30 days, the Common Council shall fill a vacancy on the Board
occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term for the unexpired term.
III – 5.04. Membership Requirements.
An appointed member shall be a resident of the City for not less than thirty days before his
appointment and shall maintain residency during his term; if an appointed member discontinues
his residency within the City, the Common Council shall declare the position vacant and shall
appoint another qualified person within thirty days. An appointed member shall not hold another
municipal office except that one appointed member may be a member of the Plan Commission.
III – 5.05. Compensation.
Appointed and alternate members of the Board may be compensated at a rate to be determined
by the Common Council during its adoption of the annual budget and may be reimbursed for preapproved
expenses related to performing their duties.
Page 31 of 106
III – 5.06. Powers and Duties of the Board.
5.06.1. Meetings. All meetings of the Board shall be conducted under the Open Meetings Act, Act
No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being sections 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws. The Board shall meet annually in January for the purpose of electing
officers and establishing rules and procedures under this Ordinance and applicable state
laws for transaction of business. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairman under their adopted procedures and at such other times as the Board shall
determine or specify in its rules of procedure. The mayor shall be empowered to set the
date and time of the annual meeting. The public shall be afforded an opportunity to
speak at any public hearing under the rules of procedure and by-laws of the Board.
5.06.2. Quorum and Votes Required. The Board shall not conduct business unless a majority of its
members are present. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board is
necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of and
administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which
the Board shall pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance except
that a concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board is necessary to grant a
variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance.
5.06.3. Records to be Public. The city clerk shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record subject to the
Freedom of Information Act, Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being sections
15.231 to 12.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
5.06.4. Chairman. The Board shall elect its chairman from amongst the members and create and
fill such other offices as the Board may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one
year, with eligibility for reelection.
5.06.5. Board Secretary. The code official shall appoint a secretary to assist the Board. The
secretary shall keep minutes of the Board meetings for public record and conduct all
correspondence, including notification of decisions. The secretary shall also certify
records. The secretary shall prepare and submit minutes of the Board meetings to the
chairman and to the Board.
5.06.6. General Powers. The Board shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirements, decision, or determination made by the code official. The Board shall also
hear and decide matters referred to the Board or upon which the Board shall pass under
this Ordinance. For special land use decisions, an appeal may be taken to the Board.
5.06.7. Interpretations. The Board may interpret this Ordinance and the Map and all matters
relating thereto when a question arises in the administration of this Ordinance as to the
meaning and intent of any provision or part of this Ordinance. Any text interpretation
shall be narrow and in a manner as to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
Interpretations shall not have the effect of amending this Ordinance. Map interpretations
shall be based on the rules of this Ordinance and any relevant historical information.
5.06.8. Screening and Lighting Controversies. If any controversy as to the adequacy of any
proposed or existing screening or the creation of any nuisance or annoyance by artificial
lighting occurs, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the right and is hereby given the
authority to interpret and determine the screening and lighting provisions and the purpose
herein sought to be accomplished.
5.06.9. Extension of licenses, permits, or approvals. Upon application, the Board may grant
extensions in the time limits of each license, permit, or approval issued in accordance
with Section III-2.02.
Page 32 of 106
5.06.10. Appeals of Administrative Decisions. The Board may hear and decide appeals when the
appellant alleges that there is error in any order, interpretation, requirement, permit,
decision, or refusal made by the code official in enforcing any provision of this
Ordinance.
5.06.11. Modification and Variance of Ordinance Requirements.
5.06.11.1. Non-use variance. The Board shall be permitted to approve or approve with
conditions by a simple majority vote of the Board a request for a dimensional or nonuse
variance provided that the property owner demonstrates practical difficulty by
showing all of the following:
a. Strict compliance with the area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, or density
requirements of this Ordinance would unreasonably prevent the property
owner from using property for some lawful permitted purpose or would render
conformity unnecessarily burdensome in the particular case.
b. A variance shall do substantial justice to both the property owner and
neighboring property owners in the district or that a lesser requirement would
give substantial relief and be more consistent with justice to others.
c. The plight of the property owner is due to unique circumstances of the
property.
d. The problem of the property owner is not self-created.
If the property owner demonstrates the above criteria, the Board may consider the
following types of non-use variance requests:
a. All matters referred to the Board or upon which the Board shall hear and
decide under this Ordinance.
b. Permit such modification of the height, placement, and area regulations as
may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of
such shape or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical
characteristics that the lot cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without
such modification.
c. Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space
requirements when, in the particular instance, such modifications shall not be
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirement.
d. Permit variances for items such as buffering, screening, fencing, or
landscaping.
5.06.11.2. Use variance. The Board shall be permitted to grant by a two-thirds vote of the
Board a use variance of the literal provisions of this Ordinance to a property owner
provided that the property owner demonstrates all of the following:
a. Showing of unnecessary hardship on the property owner if this Ordinance was
strictly enforced. The landowner shall prove that the land cannot be put to a
reasonable use or yield a reasonable return under its existing zoning
classification.
b. The hardship shall be unique or peculiar to the particular parcel and cannot be
the result of general neighborhood conditions.
c. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable
to the property involved or to the intended use of the property that do not
apply generally to other properties or uses in the same zone.
d. The variance is necessary to the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial
property right possessed by other property in the same zone and proximity.
Page 33 of 106
e. The variance shall not result in the alteration of the essential character of the
neighborhood by impairing an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property, increasing traffic congestion in public streets, increasing the danger
of fire, endangering the public safety, or unreasonably diminishing or
impairing established property values within the surrounding area.
f. The variance is a minimum variance that shall make possible the reasonable
use of the land, building, or structure.
g. The variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Ordinance and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
5.06.12. Time Limitations on a Variance. If the Board approves a variance, the variance shall
remain in effect only so long as the facts and circumstances as presented to the Board and
upon which the variance was granted continue to exist, and that the conditions attached to
the approval are satisfied and maintained. If the variance is not exercised within 12
months from the date the variance is granted (unless the Board establishes a different
time period as a condition), the variance shall lapse. If the variance has lapsed and the
petitioner desires to proceed with the benefits of the variance, the petitioner shall reapply
for the variance and demonstrate that all of the requirements for approval of a variance
have been met, based upon the facts and circumstances in existence when the new request
was submitted. The Board shall have the right to deny the variance if the facts and
circumstances pertaining to the request have changed, if the petitioner is not willing to
satisfy the conditions attached to the original approval, or if the petitioner has not
demonstrated that all of the substantive requirements for the granting of a variance have
been satisfied as of the time the new application for variance is filed.
III – 5.07. Appeals and Hearings.
5.07.1. Filing, time limit. An appeal under this Ordinance shall be commenced by a person filing
notice of appeal or petition as described in the rules and procedures of the Board, within
thirty-five (35) days, and with the appropriate filing fee as annually determined by the
Common Council upon adoption of the budget, with the code official. The notice of
appeal shall specify the specific grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall be
signed by the applicant and property owner. The appeal shall specify the requirement
from which a variance is sought and the nature and extend of such variance. The appeal
shall be accompanied by a fully completed application along with any other information
required by the Board. The code official shall immediately send to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. No
appeal under this Ordinance shall be taken if such applicant is in default to the City and is
not eligible to be issued a permit under this Ordinance.
5.07.2. Notification of hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and give notice of the appeal to the persons to whom real property within 300 feet
of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single and two-family
dwellings within 300 feet. The notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed
to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If a
tenant’s name is not known, the term “occupant” may be used. A person may appear in
person or be represented by a duly authorized agent at the hearing.
5.07.3. Effect of filing. An appeal under this Ordinance stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from unless the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken
Page 34 of 106
certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would in the opinion of the officer or body cause imminent peril to
life or property. If such a certification is filed, the proceedings shall only be stayed by a
restraining order. A restraining order may be granted by the Board or by the circuit
court, on application, on notice to the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
5.07.4. Board to Decide. The Board shall decide the appeal within seventy-five (75) days. The
Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and shall make an order, requirement, decision,
or determination as in the Board’s opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that
end shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken, all
subject to limitations identified in this Ordinance. If there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the Board may in
passing upon appeals grant a variance in any of its rules or provisions relating to the
construction, or structural changes in, equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures,
or the use of land, buildings, or structures, so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
5.07.5. Official Record of Hearing. The Board shall prepare an official record for each appeal
and shall base its decision on this record. The official record shall include the relevant
administrative record and administrative orders issued thereon relating to the appeal, the
notice of the appeal, and such documents, exhibits, photographs, or written reports as
may be submitted to the Board for its consideration, and the minutes of the hearing,
findings of fact, and decisions and order of the Board. The record and decision of the
Board shall comply with the constitution and the laws of the State, be based on proper
procedure, be supported by competent material and substantial evidence on the record,
and represent the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Board.
5.07.6. Appeal to Circuit Court. The decision of the Board is final. However, a person having
an interest affected by this Ordinance may appeal to the circuit court. If the court finds
the record of the Board inadequate to make the review required under state law, or that
additional material evidence exists that with good reason was not presented to the Board,
the court shall order further proceedings before the Board on conditions that the court
considers proper. The Board of appeals may modify its findings and decision as a result
of the new proceedings, or may affirm the original decision. The supplementary decision
shall be filed with the court.
III – 5.08. Limitations on the Powers of the Board.
5.08.1. Common Council decisions. Nothing contained herein shall empower the Board to override
the decisions of the Common Council with respect to the approval or denial of any
decision authorized to be made by the Common Council.
5.08.2. Zoning Map. Nothing contained herein shall empower the Board to change the terms of
this Ordinance, to effect changes in the Zoning Map, or to add to the uses permitted in
any zoning district, except when specifically empowered to do so by this Ordinance.
5.08.3. Variance Conditions. In authorizing a variance or taking any other action within its
jurisdiction, the Board may attach such conditions as may be deemed necessary in the
furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance, provided any conditions are in compliance
with the standards contained herein. The conditions imposed by the Board may include
conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed
Page 35 of 106
land use or activity shall be capable of accommodating increased service and facility
loads caused by the land use or activity, protect the natural environment, conserve natural
resources and energy, ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the
use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do
all the following:
a. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as
the social and economic well-being of those who shall use the land use or activity
under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the
proposed land use or activity and the community as a whole;
b. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are
affected by the proposed use or activity;
c. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations, be related
to the standards established in this Ordinance for the land use or activity under
consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards.
The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be
recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the
mutual consent of the approving authority and the property owner. The Board shall
maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. Any changes in the conditions shall
be filed with the Register of Deeds as provided herein.
5.08.4. Basis of decisions. Every decision of the Board shall be based upon findings of fact, and
every such finding shall be supported in the record and proceedings of the Board.
Page 36 of 106
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP.
Section 1. General.
IV – 1.01. Classification.
To classify, regulate, and restrict the locations of uses and locations of buildings designated for
specific areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open spaces
within or surrounding such buildings, the City is hereby divided into zoning districts as
prescribed in this article. To the extent possible, these zoning districts are established under the
City’s proposed Master Land Use Plan.
IV – 1.02. Zoning Map.
1.02.1. Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the City
of Hamtramck Official Zoning Map, referred hereinafter as “the Map”, which
accompanies this Ordinance as Appendix A, and which Map, with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this
Ordinance as if fully described herein.
1.02.2. Changes to Boundaries. Under this Ordinance, if changes are made in district boundaries or
other matter portrayed on the Map, such changes shall be made on the Map after the
amendment has been approved by the City Council, together with an entry on the Map as
follows: amended date, Ordinance No. ().
1.02.3. Official Copies. Two copies of this Ordinance and the Map are to be maintained and kept
up-to-date. One copy shall be filed with the code official and the other shall be filed with
the city clerk, whose copy shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of
lands, buildings, and other structures in the City.
1.02.4. District Boundaries Interpreted. If, due to the scale, lack of details, or illegibility of the
Map, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any
zoning district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of
district boundary lines shall be determined by the Board upon written application. The
Board, in arriving at a decision on such matters, shall apply the following standards:
a. The boundaries of zoning districts are intended to follow centerlines of alleys,
streets, or other rights-of-way, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such
district boundary lines are otherwise clearly indicated on the Map;
b. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot of
record lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be boundaries;
c. In unsubdivided property, or where a district boundary divides a lot of record, the
location of such boundary, unless shown by dimensions on the Map, shall be
determined by use of the map scale shown thereon.
1.02.5. Zoning Status of Public, Semi-Public, and Parks/Open Space Designations. Where the Map
indicates public, semi-public, or parks/open space, such areas shall be considered to be
zoned in the area that borders the area in question on not less than three sides. If a clear
distinction cannot be made, then the zoning shall be considered R, except as otherwise
indicated in this section. For clarification purposes the following commonly known
locations shall be considered to be placed in the following districts:
a. R District, sites of:
1. Corinthian Baptist Church;
2. Kosciuszko Middle School;
3. Hamtramck Fire Department;
Page 37 of 106
4. Hamtramck Public Library;
5. St. Ladislaus Church properties;
6. Immaculate Conception Church properties;
7. Hamtramck High School and Community Center;
8. Our Lady Queen of Apostles Church properties;
9. Pulaski Park;
10. St. Florian Church properties;
11. St. Peter Zion, A.M.E. Church properties;
12. Hamtramck City Hall;
13. Dickinson Elementary School;
14. St. Joseph Living Center properties;
15. Tau Beta;
16. Veterans’ Memorial Park, Playfair, and Keyworth stadium;
17. Holbrook Elementary School;
18. Eastside of Conant, between Oliver and Dorothy.
b. I District, sites of:
1. Wayne County Jail;
2. Southeast corner of Conant and Holbrook.
1.02.6. Annexed Territory. Any territory hereafter annexed shall automatically, upon such
annexation, be classified as “Residential” and shall be subject to all conditions and
regulations applicable to property in such district.
Section 2. Conformity to Ordinance Regulations.
IV – 2.01. Scope.
Zoning effects every structure and use. No structure, building, or land shall be used, occupied,
erected, constructed, moved, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations specified for
that zoning district. Unless a use is specifically permitted in a particular zoning district, the use
shall be prohibited in that zoning district. If any building, structure, or land is used, erected,
altered, or occupied contrary to law or to the provisions of this Ordinance, such building,
structure, or use shall be declared a nuisance and shall be required to be vacated, torn down, or
abated by any legal means and shall not be used or occupied until the building, structure, or use
has been brought into compliance.
IV – 2.02. Area, Bulk, and Height Requirements.
Except as otherwise provided, regulations governing land and building use, minimum lot size, lot
area per dwelling unit, building height, building placement, required yards, and other pertinent
factors are hereby established as stated in the detailed provisions for each of the zoning districts
and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure, land, or use within the appropriate
district.
IV – 2.03. Application of Regulations.
The regulations set by this Ordinance shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to
each class or kind of structure, land, or use. All buildings, structures, or land may hereafter be
used, constructed, altered, or occupied only when in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located. No building or other structure shall hereafter be
altered to accommodate or house a greater number of persons or families, or to have narrower or
smaller rear yards, front yards, or other side yards than permitted by the district in which it is
Page 38 of 106
located. No lot existing when this Ordinance or subsequent amendment became effective shall
be subdivided or reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements of the district in
which the lot is located. Lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet the
minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.
IV – 2.04. Uses.
2.04.1 General. The principal objective of this Ordinance is to provide for an orderly
arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses and for the proper location of all types
of uses required for the social and economic welfare of the community. To accomplish
this objective, each type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one or more of the
various districts established by this Ordinance. However, in addition to those uses
specifically classified and permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses that
may be allowed because of the unusual characteristics of the service the use provides to
the public. These special land uses require particular consideration as to their proper
location to adjacent, established, or intended uses, or to the planned growth of the
community. The conditions controlling the locations and operation of such special land
uses are established by applicable sections of this Ordinance.
2.04.2. Permitted Uses. In each zoning district a “permitted use” shall be a use of land or
buildings subject to the minimum requirements specified for such use in the zoning
district in which such use is located, plus applicable requirements found elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
2.04.3. Special Land Uses. A special land use shall be a use of land or buildings that may be
permitted in that district only after following special procedures designed to ensure site
and use compatibility with existing or proposed surrounding land uses. In evaluating and
deciding each application for such permission, the Commission shall apply the standards
contained in Article XIII of this Ordinance and any special conditions imposed for that
use. Uses are permitted within the various districts described in this Ordinance and as
otherwise provided herein.
2.04.4. Unclassified Uses. The City recognizes that all possible uses and variations of uses that
might arise cannot reasonably be listed or categorized. Mixed uses/sites or any use not
specifically mentioned or about which there is any question shall be administratively
classified by comparison with other uses identified in the districts described in this
Ordinance. If the proposed use resembles identified uses in terms of intensity and
character, and is consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance and the individual district
classification, the use shall be considered as a permitted use within the appropriate
district classification, subject to the regulations for the use it most nearly resembles. If a
use does not resemble other identified allowable uses within a district, the use may be
permitted as determined by the Board after a public hearing as a variance to this
Ordinance under Article III.
Page 39 of 106
ARTICLE V. RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
Section 1. Residential District (R).
V – 1.01. Intent.
The Residential District (R) is established to encourage integration of a range of housing types
and to enhance individual and neighborhood safety in a workable neighborhood oriented around
the five-minute walk.
V – 1.02. Permitted Uses.
In the R District, only the following uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance:
a. Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this article;
b. Condominiums, provided that more than four unrelated people shall be permitted to
reside in one dwelling unit;
c. Dwellings, single-family detached, provided that more than four unrelated people shall be
permitted to reside in one dwelling unit;
d. Dwellings, two family, provided that more than four unrelated people shall be permitted
to reside in one dwelling unit;
e. Home occupations as permitted in Article IX, Section 11;
f. Public utility stations;
g. Public owned and operated parks and outdoor recreation facilities and open space;
h. Public services;
i. Parochial, private, public, or charter elementary, junior high, and high schools;
j. Religious, cultural, and fraternal activities;
k. Congregate residences.
l. Townhouses
V – 1.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.
In the R district, only the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of the
special land use process as prescribed by this Ordinance:
a. Apartment houses;
b. Bars;
c. Boarding houses;
d. Confectioneries and delicatessens;
e. Day care, family;
f. Day care, group;
g. Grocery stores;
h. Medical and dental clinics;
i. Mortuary, funeral homes;
j. Mixed-use buildings containing a residential single family dwelling or dwellings and no
more than one of the special land uses identified in this section;
k. State licensed residential facilities;
V – 1.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses.
The following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted in the R district:
a. Accessory living quarters
b. Garage, private;
Page 40 of 106
c. Gazebos or arbors;
d. Household pets;
e. Parking lots shall be permitted as an accessory use for special land uses.
f. Private swimming pools;
g. Sheds.
V – 1.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size in square feet: 2,700.
c. Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: 30; depth: 60.
d. Maximum height of building: in stories: 3; in feet: 35.
e. Minimum yard setback in feet: front: 6 and within 2 feet of adjacent structures; rear: 30;
sides: 5.5 combined with a minimum of 2.5 on not less than one side.
f. Minimum floor area per single-family dwelling unit (in square feet): 800.
g. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit in a two- or multiple-family dwelling unit (in
square feet): 700.
h. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 67%.
b. Maximum lot size in square feet: 6,000.
V – 1.06. Structure and Site Requirements.
a. All new dwelling units shall have an unenclosed front porch located close to the
sidewalk, designed as places to sit, socialize, and observe the street.
b. All new single- and two-family dwelling units shall have a two-car garage on the same
lot.
c. Parking lots shall be screened from upper unit views, with trees, trellises, or carports.
d. The street address shall be attached to the back gate.
e. Two garbage cans placed on an elevated rack or in an enclosed building are required for
each dwelling unit; in the event of a semi- or fully-automated system of refuse collection,
this provision is waived.
f. Only vertically oriented windows shall be permitted on the front façade.
g. The front door shall face the front lot line.
h. All new houses shall have a minimum twenty-four inch finished first floor line above
grade.
i. No new driveways or curb cuts in residential zones shall be permitted unless authorized
by this Ordinance.
j. Unless the entire front yard is one hundred square feet or less, not less than fifty percent
of the uncovered lot shall be landscaped with organic materials not prohibited by this
Ordinance or other ordinances of the City of Hamtramck.
k. All detached single- or two-family dwellings shall have a roof pitch of eight-twelve or
greater.
l. Mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
m. All dwelling units shall be consistent with surrounding housing styles.
n. No single-family detached dwelling shall be erected upon a lot with another single-family
detached dwelling.
Page 41 of 106
Section 2. Multiple Family Residential District (RM).
V – 2.01. Intent.
The Multiple Family Residential District (RM) is intended to serve the residential needs of
families and single persons desiring greater density, apartment-type of accommodation with
central services, as opposed to the residential pattern found in the R district.
V – 2.02. Permitted Uses.
In the RM District, only the following uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance:
a. Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this article;
b. Apartment houses;
c. Boarding houses;
d. Condominiums;
e. Day care, family;
f. Day care, group;
g. Recreation, outdoor;
h. Townhouses.
V – 2.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.
In the RM district, only the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the
special land use process as prescribed by Article XIII:
a. Hotel.
b. Parking lots.
c. An apartment house with a grocery store, laundromat, barber shop, beauty salon,
confectionery, or delicatessen on the ground floor that is open to patrons other than
residents of the apartment house.
V – 2.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses.
The following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted in the RM district:
a. Courts;
b. Garage, private;
c. Gazebos, arbors;
d. Household pets;
e. Private swimming pools;
f. Sheds.
V – 2.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size in square feet: 6,000.
b. Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: 60; depth: 60.
c. Maximum height of building: see side yard setback.
d. Minimum yard setback in feet: front: 12; rear: 20; sides: every lot upon which a multiple
family dwelling is erected shall be provided with a side yard on each side of such lot.
Each such yard shall have a minimum width of five feet which shall be increased one
one-half foot for each story by which the height of the main building exceeds two stories,
and also by one-half foot for each ten feet or part thereof by which the length of the main
building exceeds fifty feet in overall dimension along the side yard.
e. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 80%.
Page 42 of 106
V – 2.06. Structure and Site Requirements.
a. All new single- and two-family dwelling units shall have a two-car garage on the same
lot.
b. Any fences to be erected on the side and rear lot lines under Article X.
c. A dumpster shall be provided on site and appropriately screened under Article IX,
Section 8 if the use houses more than two families.
d. All unpaved areas of the lot shall be landscaped and maintained under Article IX, Section
9.
e. The street address shall be attached to the front and back gate.
Page 43 of 106
ARTICLE VI. COMMERICIAL ZONES.
Section 1. Multi-Use District (C2).
VI – 1.01. Intent.
The multi-use district (C2) is established to encourage a diversity of compatible land uses, which
may include a mixture of residential, office, retail, recreational, office research, light
manufacturing, and other miscellaneous uses within an aesthetically attractive environment
conducive to the development and protection against nuisance type uses and combinations.
VI – 1.02. Permitted Uses.
1.02.1. Residential Uses. In the C2 District, only the following residential uses shall be permitted
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance:
a. Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this article;
b. Condominiums;
c. Dwellings, single-family detached;
d. Dwellings, two family;
e. Public owned and operated parks and outdoor recreation facilities and open space;
f. Public services;
g. Parochial, private, public, or charter elementary, junior high, and high schools;
h. Religious, cultural, and fraternal activities;
i. Congregate residences;
j. State licensed residential facilities;
k. Townhouses;
l. Home occupations as defined in Section IX-11.02.
1.02.2. Commercial Uses. In the C2 District, only the following commercial uses shall be
permitted subject to the provisions of this Ordinance:
a. Amusement centers;
b. Bakeries;
c. Bars;
d. Business or financial services, unless specifically addressed as a special land use
in this district or specifically prohibited by this Ordinance;
e. Butchers that do not process live farm animals;
f. Commercial retail sales and services, unless specifically addressed as a special
land use in this district or specifically prohibited by this Ordinance;
g. Commercial schools;
h. Confectioneries;
i. Delicatessens;
j. Grocery stores;
k. Laundromats;
l. Mortuary, funeral home;
m. Motel, hotel.
n. Museums;
o. Professional offices, such as medical and dental clinics, accountants, and
attorneys at law;
p. Restaurants, take-out;
q. Restaurants;
r. Theatres.
Page 44 of 106
s. Establishments with sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks.
VI – 1.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.
In the C2 district, only the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the
special land use process as prescribed by Article XIII:
a. Light manufacturing plants;
b. Mixed-use commercial and residential uses provided that the commercial use is a
permitted use in the C2 district;
c. Parking lots.
VI – 1.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses.
The following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted in the C2 district:
a. Garage, private;
b. Private swimming pools;
c. Courts;
d. Parking lots.
VI – 1.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements.
1.05.1. Residential Uses. The area, height, and bulk requirements in the R district shall apply to
all residential uses in the C2 district.
1.05.2. Commercial Uses. The following area, height, and bulk requirements shall apply to all
commercial uses in the C2 district.
a. All new buildings shall be constructed within one foot of the front lot line. All
new buildings on corner lots shall also be constructed within one foot of the
side lot line.
b. Minimum lot size in square feet: none, provided that the provisions of off-street
loading berth requirements are complied with.
c. Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: none; depth: none.
d. Maximum height of building: 4 stories; 60 feet.
e. Minimum yard setback in feet: front: none, provided that the provisions of offstreet
loading berth requirements are complied with; rear: none, provided that the
provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are complied with; sides: none,
provided that the provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are met.
f. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: none.
VI – 1.06. Structure and Site Requirements.
The structure and site requirements listed in this section shall apply only to commercial uses:
a. All new buildings shall be constructed within one foot of the front lot line and side lot
line on corner lots.
b. All buildings shall have not less than one pedestrian entrance on the front lot line.
c. The street number of not less than three inches in height shall be displayed above the
front door and shall be painted on the rear door of the building.
d. Roof-mounted appliances shall be enclosed on all sides by view obscuring screening so
as not to be visible from off the site from any angle. If such appliances or equipment
shall be placed on the ground, the above screening requirements shall apply.
Page 45 of 106
e. All new buildings, additions, and significant exterior changes or renovations shall be
found to be architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings. In making such a
determination, the following shall be considered:
1. Not less than ninety percent of the exterior finish material on all facades that face
a street shall be limited to the following: glass, brick, cut stone, or coarsely
textured stucco. E.I.F.S. may also be used on the second story and above, but
shall not cover more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the façade.
2. Colors shall be compatible with the majority of the adjacent buildings in the
district.
3. The back of the building shall be constructed of brick or painted or dyed concrete
blocks.
4. Blank walls shall not face a public street. Walls facing a public street shall
include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front façade
of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing, or decorative
materials.
5. Each storefront shall have window openings equal to at least fifty percent of the
façade between two feet and eight feet from the ground. The wood or metal
armature of such storefronts shall be painted, bronze, or powder-coated. The
glazed area of a façade above the ground floor shall not exceed thirty-five percent
of the total window area.
6. Walls, displays, stored merchandise, signs, or other items shall not obstruct views
into the store from street side windows.
7. Windows shall have a light transmission factor of eighty percent or greater.
8. Windows at or above the second story shall not be covered on the exterior.
9. Upper-story windows that are replaced or exposed shall retain their original size,
orientation, and shape so that the configuration of the façade is not changed.
10. Outdoor security fencing shall not be permitted. Roll-up security fencing, if
installed, shall be located within the building. No permanent or nonretractable
security fencing shall be permitted within the building.
11. Metal overhead doors for interior-loading areas or loading docks shall not face a
public street. Loading docks shall be not be permitted on the front of a building.
12. Cantilevered mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
13. All HVAC equipment shall be located on the roof or within the building. If such
equipment is installed on the roof, it shall be screened by a parapet wall so as not
to be visible from street level. Window air conditioners shall not be permitted in
the front façade windows.
f. All new signs shall meet the following standards.
1. A sign shall be integrally designed and planned with the storefront. The signs
shall exemplify a particular architectural style.
2. The light source for signs shall be designed as part of the sign or hidden from
view, with the exception of gooseneck lighting, which shall face the façade and
shall be shielded from traffic.
3. Each business shall be allowed one awning sign or one projecting sign, and one
window sign. The maximum square footage of total signage shall not exceed one
square foot per linear foot of building frontage. Temporary signs shall also be
permitted.
Page 46 of 106
4. Businesses located on corner lots shall be permitted one sign for each street
frontage.
g. No new driveways, service drives, or curb cuts shall be permitted off of any public road.
h. A screenwall shall be built along the front lot line and aligned with the adjacent building
façade for all new parking lots. Screen walls shall be between two and one-half to three feet
in height and made of brick, stone, or other masonry materials matching the building.
Screenwalls may have openings of a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet for existing curb cuts
to allow vehicular and pedestrian access.
i. No new parking lots shall be permitted on corner lots where buildings do not exist. Where a
building does exist on a corner lot, parking shall be permitted. Parking lots shall be
permitted in the area of a maximum of thirty-feet off of the rear lot line and behind the main
building
j. There shall be not less than twenty (20) feet of clear space between every residential building
and another main building on the same lot.
Section 2. Central Business District (CBD).
VI – 2.01. Intent.
The central business district (CBD) is established to encourage a form of development that shall
achieve the physical qualities necessary to maintain and enhance the economic vitality of
downtown Hamtramck, promote the preservation and restoration of historic buildings, ensure
that new buildings are compatible with and enhance the downtown and reflect the City’s cultural,
social, economic, and architectural heritage, and maintain uses that relate to the pedestrian.
VI – 2.02. Permitted Uses.
In the CBD, all business establishments shall be retail or service establishments that deal directly
with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premise. Only
the following uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this Ordinance:
a. Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this article;
b. Amusement centers;
c. Bakeries;
d. Bars;
e. Business or financial services, unless specifically addressed as a special land use in this
district or specifically prohibited by this Ordinance;
f. Butchers that do not process live farm animals;
g. Clothing stores;
h. Coffee houses;
i. Commercial retail sales and services, unless specifically addressed as a special land use
in this district or specifically prohibited by this Ordinance;
j. Confectioneries;
k. Delicatessens;
l. Fabric stores;
m. Florists;
n. Fruit and vegetable stores;
o. Grocery stores;
p. Hardware stores;
q. Restaurants;
r. Restaurants, take-out;
Page 47 of 106
s. Specialty gift stores;
t. Theatres.
u. Establishments with sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks.
VI – 2.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.
In the CBD district, only the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the
special land use process as prescribed by Article XIII:
a. Mixed-use commercial and residential uses provided that the commercial use is a
permitted use in the CBD;
b. City-owned parking lots.
VI – 2.04. Accessory Buildings and Uses.
The following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted in the CBD district:
a. Courts;
b. Parking lots.
c. Garages, private.
VI – 2.05. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size in square feet: none, provided that the provisions of off-street loading
berth requirements are complied with.
b. Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: none; depth: none.
c. Maximum height of building: 4 stories; 60 feet.
d. Minimum yard setback in feet: Front: none, provided that the provisions of off-street
loading berth requirements are complied with; Rear: none, provided that the provisions of
off-street loading berth requirements are complied with; Sides: none, provided that the
provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are met.
e. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: none.
VI – 2.06. Structure and Site Requirements.
a. All new buildings shall be constructed within one foot of the front lot line. All new
buildings on corner lots shall also be constructed within one foot of the side lot line.
b. All buildings shall have not less than one pedestrian entrance on the front lot line.
c. Upper-floor awnings shall be permitted, provided that the awning is only the width of the
window, encroaches upon the front lot line no more than three feet, and is not used as a
backlit sign. Awnings, which shall be straight sheds may supplement facades, except if
used solely to cover entryways. Cubed or curved awnings shall not be permitted.
Awnings shall be between eight and twelve feet above sidewalk grade at the lower drip
edge.
d. The street number of not less than three inches in height shall be displayed above the
front door and shall be professionally painted in appearance on the rear door of the
building.
e. Roof-mounted appliances shall be enclosed on all sides by view obscuring screening so
as not to be visible from off the site from any angle. If such appliances or equipment
shall be placed on the ground, the above screening requirements shall apply.
f. All new buildings and additions or structural alterations to the footprint of existing
buildings shall be found to be architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings. Any
Page 48 of 106
existing building which façade shall be altered after the effective date of this Ordinance
or any subsequent amendment shall conform to the guidelines listed in this subsection,
except that no zoning permit shall be issued until the plan commission has approved of
the proposed changes to the façade and is assured of its compliance with this Ordinance.
This subsection shall not apply to regular maintenance of front facades. In making such a
determination, the following shall be considered:
1. Not less than 90 percent of the exterior finish material on all facades that face
a street shall be limited to glass, cut stone or coarsely textured stucco. On the
second story and above, no more than ten percent E.I.F.S. shall be permitted.
Vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
2. Colors shall be compatible with the majority of the buildings in the district.
3. Blank walls shall not face a public street. Walls facing a public street shall
include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front façade
of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing, or decorative
materials.
4. Each storefront shall have ground level window openings not less than seventy
percent of the façade between two and eight from the ground. The wood or metal
armature of such storefronts shall be painted, bronze, or powder-coated. The
glazed area of a façade above the ground floor shall not exceed thirty-five percent
of the total window area. Window air conditioners shall not be permitted in the
front façade windows.
5. Walls, displays, stored merchandise, signs, or other items shall not obstruct views
into the store from street side windows.
6. Windows shall have a light transmission factor of eighty percent or greater.
7. Façade openings, other than ground floor display windows, including porches,
windows, and colonnades, shall be vertical in proportion.
8. Windows at or above the second story shall not be covered on the exterior.
9. Upper-story windows that are replaced or exposed shall retain their original size,
orientation, and shape so that the configuration of the façade is not changed.
10. Outdoor security fencing shall not be permitted. Roll-up security fencing, if
installed, shall be located within the building. No permanent or nonretractable
security fencing shall be permitted within the building.
11. Metal overhead doors for access to the building or interior-loading area shall not
face a public street. . Overhead doors for any other use shall not have less than
60 % fenestration. If the overhead type door is not less than 60% fenestration,
then such door shall be permissible. Loading docks and service areas shall be
permitted only in the rear yard.
12. Cantilevered mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
13. The back of the building shall be constructed of brick, painted or dyed concrete
block, or the same materials used on the building’s façade. Painted concrete
blocks shall be permitted for the back wall.
14. Public pedestrian entrances shall not be permitted on the side of the building,
with the exception of buildings located on corner lots.
g. In addition to the sign standards identified in Article XI of this Ordinance, these
standards shall apply and shall control if in conflict:
Page 49 of 106
1. A sign shall be integrally designed and planned with the storefront. The signs
shall exemplify a particular architectural style.
2. The light source for signs shall be designed as part of the sign or hidden from
view.
3. Each business shall be allowed one awning sign or one projecting sign, and one
window sign, and that maximum square footage of total signage shall not exceed
one square foot per linear foot of building frontage. Temporary signs shall also
be permitted.
4. Businesses located on corner lots shall be permitted one sign for each street
frontage.
h. All empty lots in the Central Business District shall be sodded and maintained, unless
such lot is specifically allowed for parking. A screenwall shall be provided along the
front lot line under Section IX-7.02 of this Ordinance.
i. A screenwall shall be built along the front lot line and aligned with the adjacent building
façade for all parking lots, vacant lots, and lots in the absence of a building façade.
Screen walls shall be between two and one-half to three feet in height and made of brick,
stone, or other masonry materials matching the building. Screenwalls may have openings
of a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet for existing curb cuts to allow vehicular and
pedestrian access.
j. Parking shall be permitted in the area of a maximum of thirty-feet off of the rear lot line
and behind the main building. In the absence of a building façade along the side lot line a
screenwall shall be constructed in accordance with Section IX-7.03 of this Ordinance.
k. No new driveways, service drives, or curb cuts shall be permitted off any public
road.
Page 50 of 106
ARTICLE VII. INDUSTRIAL ZONES.
Section 1. Industrial District (I).
VII – 1.01. Intent.
1.01.1 General. The industrial district (I) is intended to provide land for the more large-scale and
intense manufacturing, fabricating and assembling uses. While such uses may
occasionally produce external physical effects noticeable to a limited degree beyond the
boundaries of the site, nevertheless, every possible effort shall be made to minimize such
effects. All uses located within this district shall be so designed and operated as to
observe the performance standards and regulations of use contained herein.
1.01.2 Prohibited Uses. The following shall be considered prohibited uses:
a. Any business whose function would create, or have a high potential to create, an adverse
or ongoing environmental impact.
b. Any business whose function has historically demonstrated an adverse or ongoing
negative environmental impact.
c. Any business that emits, releases, or causes to be dispersed a contaminant or toxin in
quantities that cause, alone or in reaction with other contaminants or toxins, either of the
following, and should not be considered complete nor construed as a means of limiting
the inclusion of other businesses:
1. Injurious effects to the public health or safety, animal life, plant life or significant
economic value, or property;
2. Unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
d. This would include, but certainly not be limited to, the following listed types of
businesses and those that perform similar purposes or functions:
1. Incinerators;
2. Commercial or industrial waste processing, injection, dispersion, or storage;
3. Scrap yards;
4. Any business having anything to do with the manufacture, processing, transport,
or storage of nuclear products or waste;
5. Recyclers of hazardous materials or of products containing proportionately large
amounts of hazardous materials.
VII – 1.02. Permitted Uses.
In the I District, only the following uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance, and such uses shall also comply with all applicable county, state, and federal health
and pollution laws and regulations:
a. Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this article;
b. Automobile repair, minor;
a. Automobile repair, major;
b. Commercial, heavy;
c. Industrial or research park;
d. Laboratory;
e. Manufacturing, heavy;
f. Manufacturing, light;
g. Manufacturing, medium;
h. Public services;
i. Public utility station;
Page 51 of 106
j. Recycling facility;
k. Recreation, indoor;
l. School, commercial;
m. Warehouse, wholesale or storage.
VII – 1.03. Uses Subject to Special Land Use Approval.
In the I district subject to the requirements of the special land use process as prescribed by
Article XIII, and such uses shall also comply with all applicable county, state, and federal health
and pollution laws and regulations:
a. Automotive self-service stations;
b. Automotive service stations;
c. Open storage yards of construction contractor’s equipment and supplies, building
materials, sand, gravel, or lumber;
d. Towers (e.g. cell phone, radio, transmitting).
VII – 1.04. Area, Height, and Bulk Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size in square feet: none, provided that the provisions of off-street loading
berth requirements are complied with.
b. Minimum lot dimensions in feet: Width: none; Depth: none.
c. Maximum height of building: 6 stories; 80 feet. A building or structure shall be
permitted to exceed a building height of eighty feet provided that such building or
structure is not less than three hundred feet from any R or RM district.
d. Minimum yard setback: For lots less than three acres in area, the front yard shall have a
minimum depth of twenty-five feet, the rear yard shall have a minimum depth of twenty
feet, and there shall be two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet and
the combined width of both side yards shall not be less than forty feet. For lots greater
than three acres in area, the front yard shall have a minimum depth of forty feet, the rear
yard shall have a minimum depth of twenty-five feet, and the side yards shall be not less
than twenty feet each.
e. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 50%.
VII – 1.05. Accessory Buildings and Uses.
a. Parking lots.
VII – 1.06. Structure and Site Requirements.
a. No owner or lessee, or their respective agents, shall construct or maintain a barbed wire
fence partially or wholly around any area along any street, alley, sidewalk, or public
right-of-way, except that upon the issuance of a proper permit, fences not less than eight
feet high may have barbed wire attached to arms or brackets extending inward over such
private property of the person erecting or paying for such fence, but no such barbed wire
shall be placed at any point closer to grade level than eight feet. Fences may be
constructed only on lot lines enclosing property with industrial uses; provided further,
that when an industrial use adjoins a residential use, the arms shall project over the
industrial use of the lot line only.
b. Upon the issuance of a proper permit, fences enclosing industrial or commercial uses may
be permitted to be twelve feet four inches in height, subject to the consent of not less than
fifty percent of all property owners within five hundred feet from the fence.
Page 52 of 106
ARTICLE VIII. NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES.
Section 1. General.
VIII – 1.01. Intent.
Within the districts established by this Ordinance there may exist structures, lots, uses of land,
and characteristics of uses which were lawful before this Ordinance was adopted or amended,
but which would be prohibited or regulated under the term of this Ordinance or future
amendments. This Ordinance intends to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. With the knowledge that some nonconforming
uses, buildings, or structures shall not disappear, the City desires and requires, in pursuit of the
public interest, to distinguish between nonconforming uses, buildings, or structures which shall
be eliminated as rapidly as possible and nonconforming uses, buildings, or structures which
ought to be given separate treatment.
VIII – 1.02. Board Authority to Permit Some Changes.
In recognition of this fact, the Board shall have the authority to permit some expansion or
changes to lawfully existing nonconforming uses based upon the standards set forth in this
article.
VIII – 1.03. Status of Alleged Nonconformities.
Those alleged nonconforming uses, structures, or uses and structures in combination, which
cannot be proved conclusively to have been lawfully existing before the enactment or
amendment of this Ordinance, shall be declared illegal uses and shall be discontinued. In other
than criminal proceedings, the owner, occupant, or user shall have the burden to show that the
lot, use, or structure was lawfully established.
Section 2. Nonconforming Uses of Land.
If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful use of land exists
that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such use
may be continued, so long as the land remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
a. No such nonconforming use shall be extended, enlarged, or increased to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance;
b. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the
lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance;
c. If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one
year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this
Ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
Section 3. Nonconforming Structures.
If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, a lawful structure exists that
could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot
coverage, height, yards, type of structure, its location on the lot, or other restrictions of the
structure, such structure may be continued so long as the structure remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
Page 53 of 106
a. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its
nonconformity;
b. If such structure or nonconforming portion of the structure be destroyed by any means to
an extent of more than 50% of its state equalized value at time of destruction, the
structure shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance;
c. If such structure be removed for any reason or moved any distance whatsoever, the
structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which the structure
is located after the structure is removed or relocated.
d. If a nonconforming structure exists in a residential zone, the structure may remain
nonconforming as long as the use is converted to a permitted use; therefore, the area,
height, and bulk requirements shall be waived.
Section 4. Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land.
If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, a lawful use of a structure
and land in combination exists that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
Ordinance, such structure and land use may be continued so long as the structure and land use
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in
which the structure is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which the structure is located;
b. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of the building which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use and which existed when this
Ordinance was adopted or amended, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any
land outside such building;
c. Any structure or structure and land in combination in or on which a nonconforming use is
superseded in whole or in part by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to all
regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use
may not thereafter be resumed;
d. When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in combination is
discontinued or ceases to exist for one year or for 12 months during any three year period
or otherwise sooner abandoned, the structure or structure and premises in combination
shall not thereafter be used, except in conformance with the regulations of the district in
which the structure is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted
from this provision.
e. If nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
Section 5. Uses Subject to Special Land Use.
Any use for which a special land use approval is required and is permitted as provided in this
Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be
deemed a conforming use in the district. Such use shall remain subject to all of the provisions of
the special land use section of this Ordinance for use, enlargement, change, or addition of
activities.
Page 54 of 106
Section 6. Change of Non Conforming Use.
Any nonconforming use of a building, structure, or land may be changed to another
nonconforming use upon written findings of the Board that the proposed use meets the following
standards:
a. There is no increase in the intensity of the use of the land, building, or structure involved;
b. Such change in use shall have an equal or less detrimental effect or negative impact on
neighboring property than the existing nonconforming use the change is replacing; and
c. The proposed use is more appropriate to the zoning district than the existing
nonconforming use and is desirable and useful in the pursuit of the public interest.
In permitting such a change in use, the Board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards
in accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, including the upgrading of the premises
to comply as nearly as is practicable with requirements of this Ordinance. Notice of approval of
the change in nonconforming use (including any conditions) shall be recorded with the Wayne
County Register of Deeds before the issuance of any permit or certificate of compliance.
Section 7. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
The Board may permit the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure upon written findings
that the following standards have been met:
a. That the use, building, or structure was lawful when permitted or constructed;
b. Continuance thereof would not be contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare or the
spirit and intent of this Ordinance;
c. That the use, building, or structure does not, and is not likely to, significantly depress the
value of nearby properties;
d. That no useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions or
requirements of this Ordinance with which the use, building, or structure does not
conform; and
e. Expansion shall not have an adverse impact on adjoining property.
In permitting such an expansion of a nonconforming building or use, the Board may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance,
including upgrading the premises to comply as nearly as is practicable with the requirements of
this Ordinance. Notice of approval, including any conditions attached, shall be recorded with the
Wayne County Register of Deeds before the issuance of any permit or certificate of compliance.
Section 8. Repairs and Maintenance to Nonconformities.
VIII – 8.01. General.
This section applies to all nonconforming structures and uses, except those which have been
granted the right to expand by the Board as noted in the above section.
VIII – 8.02. Work Permitted.
When the owner of property upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists desires to
modify or alter the site without increasing the nonconformity of the use or structure, the site shall
be brought into compliance with this Ordinance to the maximum extent possible. On any
structure or building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in
any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of
Page 55 of 106
the state equalized value of the building, but the cubic content of the building or structure, or
area of the use shall not be increased from when this Ordinance was passed or amended. Nothing
in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or structure or nonconforming use or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any
official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
Section 9. Change of Tenancy or Ownership.
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming
use of land, structures, and buildings, but there shall not be a change in the nature or character of
such nonconforming use, except to bring the use into greater conformity.
Section 10. Nonconforming Lots of Record.
VIII – 10.01. Single Family Dwellings.
In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. The yard setback dimensions and all other
requirements not involving area or width or both shall conform to the regulations for the district
in which such lot is located. Variance to yard requirements may be obtained through approval of
the Board.
VIII – 10.02. Nonconforming Lots.
If, when this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment became effective, two or more lots,
combinations of lots, and portions of lots with a continuous frontage and single ownership are of
record and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width or area as
established by this Ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the
purpose of this Ordinance, and no portion of the parcels shall be used or occupied which does not
meet lot width and area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of the
parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirement stated
in this Ordinance.
Section 11. City Acquisition of Nonconformities.
The City may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private property or an interest
in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses and structures, except that the
property shall not be used for public housing. The Common Council may provide that the cost
and expense of acquiring private property be paid from general funds, or the cost and expense or
a portion thereof be assessed to a special district. The elimination of nonconforming uses and
structures in a zoned district as authorized under the City and Village Zoning Act and this
Ordinance is declared to be for a public use. The Common Council may institute and prosecute
proceedings for the condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under the power of
eminent domain under the City Charter or under the Acquisition of Property by State Agencies
and Public Corporations Act, Act No. 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as amended, being sections
213.21 to 213.41 of the Michigan Compiled Laws or any other applicable statute.
Page 56 of 106
ARTICLE IX. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Section 1. Existing Buildings and Uses.
IX – 1.01. General.
Lawfully established buildings and uses in existence when this Ordinance became effective shall
be permitted to have their existing use or occupancy continued, except as otherwise authorized in
this Ordinance or in state law, and such continued use is not dangerous to life.
IX – 1.02. Additions, Alterations, or Repairs.
Additions, alterations, or repairs shall be permitted to be made to any building or use without
requiring the existing building or use to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, and the
addition, alteration, or repair conforms to that required for a new building or use.
IX – 1.03. Maintenance.
All buildings or uses, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained. The
owner or designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and parcels of
land. To determine compliance with this section, the code official shall be permitted to cause
any structure or use to be inspected.
IX – 1.04. Moved and Temporary Buildings, Structures, and Uses.
Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance for new buildings and structures. Temporary buildings, structures, and uses, such as
reviewing stands and other miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies, booths, tents, or fences,
shall be permitted to be erected, and a special approval is received from the code official for a
limited period of time. Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the
expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
IX – 1.05. Illegal Uses.
Uses that were illegally established before the adoption of this Ordinance shall remain illegal and
subject to the penalty provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 2. Accessory Buildings.
IX – 2.01. General.
Accessory buildings shall occupy the same lot as the principal use or main building.
IX – 2.02. Separation from Main Building.
All accessory buildings shall be separated from the main building by no less than ten (10) feet.
Attached private garages shall contain the setback requirements for the main building, and that
such attached private garages are part of condominium developments.
IX – 2.03. Private Garage.
An accessory building used as a private garage shall be permitted to be located in the rear yard or
side yard and that the such structure is setback not less than one foot and no more than three feet
from the rear lot line, not less than ten feet from the principal building, and not less than a
combined six feet on the sides with a minimum of not less than one foot on one side. Private
garages shall not encroach into any recorded easements. A private garage shall be constructed
with access only from a public alley. A garage shall be permitted to be constructed with access
Page 57 of 106
from a public street only if an accessible public alley does not exist or if there is an existing cityauthorized
curb cut and an existing city-authorized driveway. (Please reference definition of
“garage, private” for more details.)
IX – 2.04. Storage Buildings.
No storage building shall be located in the front yard. A storage shed shall be no greater than
eighty square feet.
Section 3. Allowable Projections into Yards.
IX – 3.01. General.
Eaves, cornices, or other similar architectural features shall be permitted to project into a
required yard no more than twelve (12) inches. Chimneys shall be permitted to project no more
than two (2) feet, and the width of any side yard is not reduced to less than thirty (30) inches.
IX – 3.02. Front Yards.
Open, unenclosed ramps, porches, platforms, or landings not covered by a roof shall be permitted
to extend no more than four (4) feet into the required front yard.
IX – 3.03. Rear Yards.
Windows shall be permitted to project into a required rear yard no more than six (6) inches.
Section 4. Passageways.
IX – 4.01. Residential Entrances.
There shall be a passageway not less than four (4) feet in width leading from the public way to
the exterior entrance of each dwelling unit in every residential building. The passageway shall
be increased by two (2) feet for every story over two (2).
IX – 4.02. Location of Passageways.
Passageways shall be permitted to be located in that space set aside for required yards.
Passageways shall be open and unobstructed to the sky and shall be permitted to have such
projections as allowed for yards, and the users of the passageway have a clear walkway to the
public way. Any space between buildings or passageways that has less width than that
prescribed herein shall not be further reduced.
Section 5. Off-Street Parking.
IX – 5.01. General.
When the main building is erected or experiences a change in use or when such buildings is
altered, enlarged, converted, or increased in capacity, there shall be provided minimum off-street
parking space with adequate provision for ingress and egress by standard-sized vehicles under
this requirements of this Ordinance.
IX – 5.02. Parking Space Requirements.
5.02.1. Required Number. The off-street parking spaces required for each use permitted by this
code shall not be less than that found in Appendix B, and that any fractional parking
space be computed as a whole space. No parking spaces shall be required for any uses in
the Central Business District.
Page 58 of 106
5.02.2. Combination of Uses. If there is a combination of uses on a lot, the required number of
parking spaces shall be the sum of that found for each use.
5.02.3. Location of Lot. The parking spaces required by this Ordinance shall be provided on the
same lot as the use or where the exclusive use of such is provided on another lot nor more
than five hundred (500) feet radially from the subject lot within the same or lessrestrictive
zoning district.
5.02.4. Sharing of Parking. If, in the opinion of the code official, sufficient evidence is provided
by a property owner that different uses operating in different structures at different times
have a written agreement to allow for the sharing of parking spaces that shall meet the
parking space requirements and location of lot as identified in this Ordinance, the code
official may consider the required number of parking spaces to have been met. Such
agreement shall be a condition of any certificate of compliance and shall be reviewed
annually by the code official. If such agreement at any time is no longer in effect, the
code official shall have the authority to revoke the certificate of compliance.
IX – 5.03. Parking Stall Dimensions.
5.03.1. Width. A minimum width of nine feet shall be provided for each parking stall, with the
following exceptions:
a. Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight feet wide.
b. Parallel parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight feet wide.
c. The width of a parking stall shall be increased ten inches for obstructions located on
either side of the stall within fourteen feet of the access aisle.
5.03.2. Length. A minimum length of twenty feet shall be provided for each parking stall, with
the following exceptions:
a. Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be eighteen feet in length.
b. Parallel parking stalls shall be a minimum of twenty-two feet in length.
IX – 5.04. Design of Parking Facilities.
5.04.1. Driveway Width. Every parking facility shall be provided with one or more access
driveways, the width of which shall be the following:
a. Private driveways shall be not less than nine feet and no more than ten feet wide.
b. Commercial driveways shall be not less than twelve feet and no more than fifteen feet
wide for one-way traffic and not less than twenty-four feet and no more than twentyseven
feet wide for two-way traffic.
5.04.2. Driveway and Ramp Slopes. The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp shall not exceed
twenty percent. Transition slopes in driveways and ramps shall be provided under the
standards set by the code official and the City’s engineering firm.
5.04.3. Stall Accessibility. Each required parking stall shall be individually and easily accessible.
No automobile shall be required to back onto any public street or sidewalk to leave any
parking stall when such stall serves more than two dwelling units or other than residential
uses. All portions of a public lot or garage shall be accessible to other portions thereof
without requiring the use of any public street.
5.04.4. Compact-to-Standard Stall Ratio. The maximum ratio of compact stalls to standard stalls in
any parking area shall not exceed one (1) to two (2).
5.04.5. Screening. A two-foot high buffer at the lot lines bordering a public way except an alley
shall be provided for all parking areas of five or more parking spaces. The buffer shall be
Page 59 of 106
constructed of the same material used on the front facade of the main building or of
shrubs.
5.04.6. Striping. All parking stalls, except those inside a private garage or parking area for the
exclusive use of a dwelling unit, shall be clearly striped.
5.04.7. Lighting. All parking areas shall be illuminated. All lights illuminating a parking area
shall be designed and located so as to reflect away from any street and adjacent property.
IX – 5.05. Use of Parking Facilities.
5.05.1. Storage. No motor vehicles or trailers shall be stored on any lot if the motor vehicle or
trailer is not properly registered with the State of Michigan or does not display its proper
current license plate as identified by its vehicle registration, unless such a motor vehicle
or trailer is stored within a private garage.
5.05.2. Repair. Except for emergency conditions, no repair of any motor vehicle shall be
conducted outside of a private garage. Repairs of motor vehicles in private garages in
residential zones shall be permitted only if the owner of the motor vehicle is repairing a
motor vehicle of which a title is properly registered in his name, at the address that is
shown on the title, and conducted by a person whose driver’s license has the same
address where the repairs are being performed and where the motor vehicle is registered.
Section 6. Loading Spaces.
IX – 6.01. General.
Loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot for every building in the I district. No loading
space shall be required if prevented by an existing lawful building. The code official shall be
authorized to waive this requirement on unusual lots.
IX – 6.02. Size.
Each loading space shall have a clear height of fourteen (14) feet and shall be directly accessible
through a usable door not less than three (3) feet in width and six (6) feet, eight (8) inches in
height. The minimum area of a loading space shall be four hundred (400) square feet and the
minimum dimensions shall be twenty (20) feet long and ten (10) feet deep.
Section 7. General Screening and Lighting Requirements.
IX – 7.01. Lighting.
All private lights used for the illumination of dwellings or business establishments or for the
illumination of business buildings or areas surrounding them, or the illumination or display of
merchandise or products of business establishments shall be completely shielded from the view
of vehicular traffic using the road or roads abutting such business property. Lighting which is
designed to illuminate the premises shall be installed in a manner which shall not cast direct
illumination on adjacent properties.
IX – 7.02. Screenwalls.
Unless otherwise required in this Ordinance, all screenwalls shall be two and one-half to three
feet in height and made of brick, stone, or other masonry materials matching the adjacent
buildings as nearly as possible. Screenwalls may have openings no larger than the maximum
opening required for pedestrian or vehicular access.
Page 60 of 106
IX – 7.03. Side and Rear Yard Screening.
Except as otherwise required in this Ordinance, all premises used for business, commercial, or
industrial purposes shall be screened from abutting residential zones. Screening shall be any of
the following and shall apply to side yard and rear yards:
a. A natural buffer planted with evergreens or shrubbery which maintains their density and
screening effect throughout the calendar year, not less than four (4) feet in height when
planted, and maintained in a neat and attractive manner commensurate with the adjoining
residential district.
b. An artificial wall or fence of sufficient density or compactness to screen the structures
and activities of the business from the view of occupants of adjoining premises, not less
than five (5) feet in height and maintained in a neat and attractive manner, commensurate
with the adjoining residential district.
c. For side yard screening, no such wall or fence shall terminate closer than twenty (20) feet
from any adjoining street right-of-way (or rear alley into which a lot has vehicular
access/egress), to provide safe visual sight distances.
IX – 7.04. Right-of-Way.
It is unlawful to construct any private fence or barrier within a public right-of-way.
Section 8. Dumpsters.
Outdoor trash containers or dumpsters shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Adequate vehicular access shall be provided to such containers for truck pick-up either
via a public alley or vehicular access aisle which does not conflict with the use of offstreet
parking areas or entrances to or exits from main buildings. The placement of the
dumpster shall be subject to site plan review.
b. A solid ornamental screening wall or fence shall be provided around all sides of such
containers. An access gate shall also be provided and be of such height as to completely
screen the containers. The maximum height of walls, fences, and gates shall be six feet.
c. The container or containers, the screening walls or fences, and gate shall be maintained in
a neat and orderly manner, free from loose rubbish, waste paper, and other debris.
Section 9. Landscaping Requirements.
IX – 9.01. General.
Landscaping is required for all new buildings and additions over 500 square feet. The
landscaping shall be completed within 8 months from the date of the occupancy of the building.
IX – 9.02. Front Yards.
Front yards required by this Ordinance shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas
occupied by utilities, access driveways, paved walks, walls, and structures. No front yard shall
be entirely covered in concrete or a concrete-like material, unless otherwise permitted by this
Ordinance.
IX – 9.03. Street-Side Side Yards.
All side yards flanking a public street shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas
occupied by utilities, access driveways, paved walks, walls, and structures. No side yard
flanking a public street shall be entirely covered in concrete or a concrete-like material.
Page 61 of 106
IX – 9.04. Rear Yards.
All rear yards shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas occupied by utilities, access
driveways, paved walks, walls, and structures. No rear yard shall be entirely covered in concrete
or a concrete-like material.
IX – 9.05. Maintenance.
All live landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be properly maintained. All dead or dying
landscaping shall be replaced immediately and all sodded areas mowed, fertilized, and irrigated
on a regular basis. All animal droppings shall be cleaned up and properly disposed of
immediately upon discovery.
Section 10. Grading and Excavation Regulations.
IX – 10.01. General.
This section is intended to provide the City with fair and equitable grading practices.
IX – 10.02. Grading Responsibilities.
10.02.1. Design Standards. The grading design standards required herein shall be those found in
nationally recognized standards.
10.02.2. Protection of Utilities. Public utilities or services shall be protected from damage due to
grading or excavation operations.
10.02.3. Protection of Adjacent Property. Adjacent properties shall be protected from damage due
to grading operations. A person shall not excavate on land sufficiently close to any
property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or
private property, without supporting and protecting such property from any damage that
might result.
10.02.4. Inspection Notice. The code official shall be notified not less than one full business day
before the start of work.
10.02.5. Temporary Erosion Control. Precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent public
or private property from damage by water erosion, flooding, or deposition of mud or
debris originating from the site shall be put in effect. Precautionary measures shall
include provisions of properly designed sediment control facilities so that downstream
properties are not affected by upstream erosion.
10.02.6. Traffic Control and Protection of Streets. Flaggers, signs, barricades, and other safety
devises to ensure adequate safety when working on or near public streets shall be
provided.
10.02.7. Hazard from Existing Grading. When any existing excavation, embankment, or fill has
become a hazard to life or limb, endangers structures, or adversely affects the safety,
use, or stability of a public way, such excavation, embankment, or fill shall be
eliminated.
10.02.8. Tracking of Dirt into Public Streets. Adequate cleaning of equipment to prevent the
tracking of dirt and debris onto public streets shall be provided. The developer shall
clean any dirt or debris tracked onto a public street within twenty-four hours upon
discovery.
10.02.9. Revegetation. The loss of trees, ground cover, and topsoil shall be minimized on any
grading project. In addition to mechanical methods of erosion control, graded areas
shall be protected to the extent practical from damage by erosion by planting grass or
ground to cover plants or trees. Such plantings shall provide for rapid, short-term
Page 62 of 106
coverage of the slopes as well as long-term permanent coverage. A plan by a registered
design professional shall be provided when required by the code official.
10.02.10. Protection of Trees. During development, building, renovating, or razing operations, the
developer shall erect and maintain suitable protective barriers around all trees specified
to be maintained so as to prevent damage to the trees and shall not allow storage of
equipment, materials, debris, or fill to be placed in this area except as may be necessary
for no more than thirty (30) days, if no other storage space is elsewhere available, as
prescribed in demolition specifications.
Section 11. Home Occupations.
IX – 11.01. Conditions.
Home occupations as identified in this section shall be permitted in all residential zones when the
following conditions are met:
a. A certificate of compliance and general business license shall have been issued by the
appropriate licensing agents of the City;
b. Such use is wholly confined within the dwelling unit (main building);
c. The home occupation is not offensive and does not change the character of the principal
structure;
d. Such use is conducted only by permanent residents of the dwelling;
e. Such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or construction features;
f. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses
off the premises if the occupation is conducted in a single-family dwelling. If the
occupation is conducted in other than a single-family dwelling, such nuisances shall not
be detectable outside the dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises or cause fluctuations in the line voltage off
the premises;
g. Such occupation is clearly incidental to the residential use to the extent that not more than
25% of the floor area of the main building shall be occupied by such occupation,
including the storage of inventory and supplies;
h. There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on the premises, including in
garages or accessory structures unless a special land use permit is obtained;
i. Home occupations involving beauty shops or barbershops shall require a special land use
permit;
j. No sign of any nature shall be displayed;
k. Such use does not generate traffic or a need for parking beyond that required for the
dwelling unit, nor shall such use create any external effect not normally associated with a
residential use, or otherwise adversely effect the pedestrian or vehicular circulation of the
area;
l. Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and scheduled so that not
more than one patron with a vehicle is on the premises at the same time
IX – 11.02. Allowable Home Occupations.
The following home occupations shall be allowed:
a. Accountant;
b. Artist;
Page 63 of 106
c. Author/free-lance journalist;
d. Caterer/cook;
e. Collector/hobbyist;
f. Consultant;
g. Instructor of a craft or fine art (with no more than four pupils at one time);
h. Musician;
i. Office;
j. Photographer;
k. Sales representative;
l. Tailor/dressmaker/seamstress;
m. Technology technician.
IX – 11.03. Home Occupations Not Identified.
The code official shall have the authority, upon application, to determine if a home occupation
not identified in this section shall be permitted. An applicant who has been denied a certificate
of compliance because the code official does not believe that the occupation is permitted by this
Ordinance shall have the right to file an appeal of the code official’s decision with the Board,
whose decision shall be final.
Section 12. Adult Uses.
IX – 12.01. Intent.
The intention of the Common Council is to outlaw any form of adult uses in the City.
IX – 12.02. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this Ordinance, have the meanings
shown herein:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE. An establishment having, as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals, video cassettes,
films and other such visual media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" as defined in this section, or an establishment with a significant segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such material, unless such area is physically separated from the
remainder of such establishment and which is accessible to adults only.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE. Any adult bookstore or video store, adult mini-motion
picture theater, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, massage parlor, adult personal service
businesses, adult novelty businesses or any combination of such uses.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or any part thereof with a capacity
for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas," as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or any part thereof or a drive-in theater
with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized
Page 64 of 106
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESSES. A business that has as a principal activity the sale of
devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation.
ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESSES. A business having as a principal activity the
provision of personal services to another person on an individual basis in a closed room while
nude or partially nude. It includes but is not limited to the following activities and services:
massage parlors, erotic rubs, modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios, and
individual theatrical performances.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and
female breast below a point immediately above the top of areola; and
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female
breast.
IX – 12.03. Adult Uses Prohibited.
No adult use as defined in this section shall be permitted in the City.
Section 13. Medical Marihuana. (Enacted 12-13-11)
IX – 13.01. Purposes and Intent
1. To implement the provisions of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, M.C.L.
§333.26421 et seq and amend Ordinance 2011-4.
2. To help ensure that qualifying patients can safely, practically and without disturbance to
other residents obtain and use marihuana for medical purposes where that medical use
has been approved by a physician in accordance with Michigan law.
3. To help ensure that qualifying patients and their primary caregivers who legally obtain or
legally cultivate marihuana solely for the qualifying patient’s medical treatment are not
subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or penalty in any manner.
4. To protect citizens from the adverse impacts of unregulated medical marihuana
cultivation, manufacture, preparation, distribution, storage and use practices.
5. To establish a new section in the City of Hamtramck Code of Ordinances pertaining to
the permitted cultivation, distribution and use of medical marihuana in the City of
Hamtramck consistent with state law.
Nothing in this ordinance purports to permit activities that are otherwise illegal under state or
local law. Nothing in this ordinance restricts rights of patients or caregivers to grow in any place
where city building codes or ordinances are not violated. The right of patients and caregivers to
Page 65 of 106
grow and use Medical Marihuana in their own residences shall not be curtailed in any manner
except as set forth herein.
IX – 13.02. Review and Approval
The City of Hamtramck Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to add Section 13 to Article IX as
follows:
Medical Marihuana Collectives and Compassion Clubs as defined herein shall be allowed in
Commercial and Industrial zoning districts, subject to review and approval as set forth in this
section and Title XI, Chapter 21 of the Hamtramck City Code. The application fee for required
permits shall be set annually by City Council resolution and shall be reasonably calculated to
reimburse the city for its anticipated expenses associated with processing the application for
permits provided for herein.
IX – 13.03. Definitions
(a) "Debilitating medical condition" means 1 or more of the following:
(1) Cancer, glaucoma, positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, acquired
immune deficiency syndrome, hepatitis C, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Crohn's disease,
agitation of Alzheimer's disease, nail patella, or the treatment of these conditions.
(2) A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition or its treatment that produces 1
or more of the following: cachexia or wasting syndrome; severe and chronic pain; severe
nausea; seizures, including but not limited to those characteristic of epilepsy; or severe
and persistent muscle spasms, including but not limited to those characteristic of multiple
sclerosis.
(3) Any other medical condition or its treatment approved by the Department, as provided
for in section 5(a) of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26425(a).
(b) "Department" means the state of Michigan Department of Community Health or any
successor entity reorganized or established from time to time by the state of Michigan.
(c) "Enclosed, locked facility" means a closet, room, or other enclosed area equipped with
locks or other security devices that restricts access to only a registered primary caregiver
or registered qualifying patient as defined under this ordinance.
(d) "Marihuana" means that term as defined in section 7106 of the public health code, 1978
PA 368, MCL 333.7106.
(e) “Medical Marihuana Collective” or “Collective” means any retail store, store front, office
building, or other structure that dispenses, facilitates the medical use of, or provides, in
any manner, medical marihuana, any product containing medical marihuana, or
paraphernalia reasonably necessary for the medical use of medical marihuana. A
“Collective” as used in this ordinance shall also include those non-residential buildings of
any sort that are approved for the cultivation or growing of medical marihuana under this
ordinance. A collective shall not engage in any sale of medical marihuana or facilitate
the medical use of medical marihuana other than as provided for under state law.
(f) “Medical Marihuana Club” (also known as Compassion Club) means a facility that offers
patients and caregivers the opportunity to connect with others for the purpose of
providing referral services, education, community outreach, and medical use of medical
marihuana in a completely enclosed building allowed under the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act of 2008. This facility shall not be used for storage, dispensing, sale,
growth, cultivation, processing, or packaging of medical marihuana at any time and shall
Page 66 of 106
not share a common entrance with any Collective which shall operate independently from
Compassion Clubs.
(g) "Medical use" means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal
possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to
the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's
debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical
condition: “acquisition” herein implies the right to provide compensation from Registered
Qualifying Patients solely to their Primary Caregivers solely in accordance with state
law.
(h) "Physician" means an individual licensed as a physician under Part 170 of the public
health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17001 to 333.17084, or an osteopathic physician
under Part 175 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17501 to 333.17556.
(i) "Primary caregiver" means a person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to
assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a
felony.
(j) "Qualifying patient" means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a
debilitating medical condition.
(k) “Registered” shall have that meaning ascribed to it under the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act and shall include any person who applies for and receives certification
from the state of Michigan as either a Primary Caregiver or a Qualifying Patient and who
possesses a valid registry identification card.
(l) "Registry identification card" means a document issued by the department that identifies a
person as a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver.
(m) “Sale” as it relates to Medical Marihuana shall be given that meaning assigned to it by
state law.
(m) "Usable marihuana" means the dried leaves and flowers of the marihuana plant, and any
mixture or preparation thereof, but does not include the seeds, stalks, and roots of the
plant.
(n) "Visiting qualifying patient" means a patient who is not a resident of this state or who has
been a resident of this state for less than 30 days.
(o) "Written certification" means a document signed by a physician, stating the patient's
debilitating medical condition and stating that, in the physician's professional opinion, the
patient is likely to receive therapeutic or palliative benefit from the medical use of
marihuana to treat or alleviate the patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the debilitating medical condition.
IX – 13.04. Conditions and Standards:
(a)Medical marihuana collectives and compassion clubs shall not be allowed as home
occupations; however, growth, cultivation, processing and use of medical marihuana in
private homes is explicitly permitted under the following conditions provided that the
medical use does not otherwise create a public nuisance:
1. Patients or their caregivers may grow in the patients home as long as the home has
adequate electrical service to safely operate any electrical equipment necessary for
the growing process and, where required by the City electrical code, the homeowner
obtains a permit and city inspection whenever electrical upgrades are necessary to
safely operate any equipment needed to grow and/or cultivate medical marihuana.
Page 67 of 106
Violations of this subsection will not invalidate otherwise legal growing/cultivation
operations, but may subject violators to penalties set forth in the applicable electric or
building codes;
2. In addition to those standards and conditions imposed under 4(b) caregivers may
grow for their patients as a home business with the following restrictions:
a. A certificate of compliance and general business license shall have been issued by
the appropriate licensing agents of the City;
b. Such use is wholly confined to an enclosed locked facility within the dwelling
unit (main building);
c. The home occupation does not change the architectural character of the principal
structure;
d. Such use is conducted only by permanent residents of the dwelling; or with the
written notarized permission of the property owner;
e. Such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or construction
features;
f. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical interference, or other nuisances
detectable to the normal senses off the premises if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family dwelling. If the occupation is conducted in other than a singlefamily
dwelling, such nuisances shall not be detectable outside the dwelling unit.
In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference in any electronic devices off the premises or
cause fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises;
g. Such occupation is clearly incidental to the residential use to the extent that not
more than 25% of the floor area of the main building shall be occupied by such
occupation, including the storage of inventory and supplies;
h. There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on the premises, including
in garages or accessory structures unless a special land use permit is obtained;
i. No sign of any nature shall be displayed;
j. Such use does not generate traffic or a need for parking beyond that required for
the dwelling unit, nor shall such use create any external effect not normally
associated with a residential use, or otherwise adversely affect the pedestrian or
vehicular circulation of the area.
(b) No medical marihuana collective or compassion club shall be located within 500 feet of
any school, within 500 feet of any church or other place of religious worship, or within
500 feet of another collective or compassion club and, further, must be sufficiently
buffered from any residences as to prevent adverse impact to these residences.
(c) The maximum size of a medical marihuana collective or compassion club in a
Commercial District shall be 6,000 square feet;
(d) For all collectives located in a Commercial District, at least ten (10%) percent of the total
area of the building shall be an area dedicated to allow the Qualifying Patients, or their
primary Caregivers, to pick up authorized packages of medical marihuana. The
Page 68 of 106
cultivation or processing of medical marihuana shall be prohibited in this dedicated pickup
area. This area shall be located at the front (street side) of the building and reasonable
steps shall be taken to prevent the spread of contaminants from the pick-up area of the
facility to the cultivation and processing area of the facility.
(e) There shall be no area for the retail sale of medical marihuana in collectives located in
Industrial Districts unless;
i. public access to any area used for growing, processing or storing marihuana is
restricted in accordance with security protocols to be established and published by
the Hamtramck Police Department and available for inspection and copying with
the city clerk which shall contain rules of access to these areas consistent with
state law; and
ii. the operator(s) of the collective take reasonable steps to prevent the spread of
contaminants from the pick-up area of the facility to the area dedicated to growth,
production, cultivation and processing of medical marihuana.
(f) All marihuana plants cultivated or processed at any medical marihuana collective shall be
grown or processed indoors in an area that this not accessible to the public. The growing
and/or processing area shall remain locked at all times. Said area shall be clearly labeled
with signs notifying that access to the area is limited. Only registered Qualifying Patients
and their Primary Caregivers shall be allowed access to the plant growing areas, but only
in accordance with security protocols to be established and published by the Hamtramck
Police Department and available for inspection and copying with the city clerk. Outdoor
cultivation or processing of medical marihuana plants is strictly prohibited.
(g) Each collective and compassion club shall comply with security protocols to be
established and published by the Hamtramck Police Department and available for
inspection and copying with the city clerk. The security protocols provided for in this
ordinance shall require, at a minimum, that operators of retail and industrial facilities take
appropriate security measures to protect the health and safety of workers, patrons and the
general public whether they are on premises or in proximity to the facility, including but
not necessarily limited to staff training, control of access, proper indoor and exterior
lighting, alarm system, video closed circuit recording systems and a safe. All exterior
doors to any facility, whatever its lawful purpose hereunder, shall be made of steel and
have automatic locking mechanisms; in addition, doors which provide access to growing
areas shall be a security door constructed of steel and have automatic locking
mechanisms. Windows shall have fixed placements and be constructed of materials to be
specified in regulations promulgated by the Hamtramck Police Department as part of the
security and safety protocols required under this sub-section. The City Council for the
City of Hamtramck shall change, amend or approve by resolution these security protocols
which shall not conflict with the minimum requirements set forth herein before they are
implemented and at least once per year thereafter to insure that they are clearly written
solely for the purpose of protecting public safety and do not unduly restrict the legal
activities permitted under this ordinance and state law. If the Hamtramck Police
Department fails to provide these additional security protocols for Council approval
Page 69 of 106
within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance, Council shall take the necessary
steps to promulgate, by resolution, its own additional security protocols in conformity
with the requirements set forth herein;
(h) Adequate, legible signs shall be posted advising clientele of collectives and compassion
clubs that:
1. Consumption of medical marihuana inside or on the property where a collective is
located is strictly prohibited;
2. Patients under the age of eighteen (18) are not allowed in the collective or
compassion club except in the presence of his/her parent, guardian or licensed
attending physician.
(i) Only operators and their employees, patients, Primary Caregivers, and parents or
guardians of patients under 18 years of age may be permitted to enter a medical
Marihuana Collective for lawful purposes. All entrances to the facility shall remain
locked at all times and individuals may be allowed entry onto the premises only after
presenting proof of their legal right to be there.
(j) Collectives shall maintain records of the registry identification numbers of all qualifying
patients and primary caregivers who enter the facility to utilize its services and the dates
of their visits. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the Hamtramck
Police Department upon demand so that, acting under authority of MCL 333.26426(h)(3),
the Department may make appropriate application to the Michigan Department of
Community Health to insure that the collective is dispensing medical marihuana to
individuals legally-entitled to receive it.
(k) No retail sales of drug paraphernalia as defined elsewhere in the Hamtramck City Code
shall be permitted at collectives and compassion clubs except to Patients and or their
Primary Caregivers for medical use only.
(l) Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday thru Saturday, 10:00 AM to 8:00 PM;
Sunday, Noon to 7:00 PM. City Council shall periodically review this subsection but
may amend it no more than one time in any consecutive twelve month period.
(m)The City shall have the right to impose additional operating procedures and measures as
may be imposed by the City Manager or City Council in order to insure that the operation
of the Collective is consistent with protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, qualified patients, and caregivers.
(n) No collective shall be permitted to purchase marihuana for sale anywhere on the property
where the collective is located.
(o) Signs displayed on the exterior of the property shall conform to existing regulations; No
imagery of any part of or whole marihuana plant is allowed.
Page 70 of 106
(p) The location shall be monitored at all times by closed circuit video recording system for
security purposes. The camera and recording system must be of adequate quality, color
rendition and resolution to allow the ready identification of any individual committing a
crime anywhere on the site, and with off-site storage of recordings kept for at least 30
days.
(q) The location shall have a centrally-monitored alarm system; written security policy and
staff security training shall include measures to deter and prevent unauthorized entrance
into any facility or any theft, and shall also include safety and security procedures for
personal safety and other crime prevention techniques.
(r) Interior building lighting, exterior building lighting and parking area lighting must be in
compliance with applicable regulations, and must be of sufficient foot-candles and color
rendition, so as to allow the ready identification of any individual committing a crime on
site at a distance of no less than forty feet (a distance that should allow a person
reasonable reaction time upon recognition of a viable threat);
(s) Windows and roof hatches shall be secured so as to prevent unauthorized entry, and be
equipped with latches that may be released quickly from the inside to allow exit in the
event of emergency:
1. Absolutely no cultivated marihuana or dried marihuana product may be visible from
the building exterior;
2. Any beverage or edible produced or provided at the collective which contains
marihuana shall be so identified, as part of the packaging, with a prominent and
clearly legible warning advising that the product contains marihuana and that it is to
be consumed only with a physician’s recommendation; Any such beverage or edible
product shall state the weight or marihuana, oil, extract, tincture or other preparation,
and shall be measured only by that stated weight for purposes of compliance with
Michigan law.
(t) At any given time, no collective may possess more marihuana or marihuana plants than
would reasonably meet the immediate and future needs of its registered patient members.
(u) No dried medical marihuana shall be stored in structures without at least four walls and a
roof, or stored in an unlocked vault or safe, or other unsecured storage structure; nor shall
any dried medical marihuana be stored in a safe or vault that is not bolted to the floor or
structure of the facility;
(v) Medical marihuana may be consumed on-site at a compassion club (but not a collective)
only as follows:
1. The smoking or vaporizing of medical marihuana shall be allowed provided that
appropriate seating, restrooms, drinking water, ventilation, air purification system,
and patient supervision are provided in a room or enclosed area separate from other
collective service areas.
2. The maximum occupancy of the separate room or enclosed area shall meet local
occupancy requirements.
Page 71 of 106
3. The medical marihuana compassion club shall use an activated charcoal filter, or
other devise sufficient to eliminate all odors associated with medical marihuana use
from adjoining businesses and public walkways. The fan used to move air through
the filter shall have the capacity sufficient to ventilate the square footage of the
separate room or enclosed area in which medical marihuana use is permitted.
(w)Medical marihuana patient collectives and compassion clubs must verify that each
member has a valid and unexpired letter of recommendation for the use of medical
marihuana written by a physician licensed to practice medicine in Michigan. The
collective may accept an unexpired Michigan medical marihuana identification card as
proof of the member’s status as a legal patient, in lieu of personal contact with the
recommending physician or his or her agent. Medical Marihuana Patient Collectives may
also service visiting qualifying patients as provided by law.
(x) Medical marihuana collectives and compassion clubs shall not directly or, through their
operators, employees, managers, caregivers, or caregivers’ registered patients, members
or agents, indirectly sell, barter, give away or furnish medical marihuana to anyone who
is not a qualifying patient or primary caregiver, registered as a member of the collective,
and entitled to possess marihuana under Michigan law. All collective operators,
employees, managers, members, or agents shall be qualifying patients of a designated
primary caregiver who lawfully performs his or her services at the location.
(y) Medical marihuana patient collectives must have at least one security guard on duty
during operating hours.
(z) The total number of plants cultivated may not exceed the amount allowed by law. Copies
of qualifying patient medical authorizations or medical marihuana cards must be
available on site justifying the total number of plants grown.
(aa) A functional portion or each facility shall be wheelchair accessible and other reasonable
disability accommodations shall be provided as necessary.
(bb) All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained as
required by city code.
(cc) Each collective shall obtain site plan approval from the Building Department.
(dd) Each collective shall obtain and maintain business licenses required by the Hamtramck
City Council, which shall be prominently displayed inside the collective.
(ee) Any growing location is required to shield any light emitting from the inside of a facility
so it is not visible from the exterior of the facility.
(ff) Illegal use or storage of any pesticides or chemicals is prohibited. Organic farming
methods are to be encouraged and community composting shall be allowed. Other legal
herbs may be sold or consumed on the premises unless otherwise prohibited. All medical
marihuana handled by a Patient Collective must be grown in Michigan.
Page 72 of 106
(gg) Each collective shall be open for inspection upon reasonable advance request of at least
24 hours from ay official including building, planning, the Fire Department, the Police
Department, the Mayor, the City Manager or any member of the City Council.
(hh) No tobacco may be smoked by any person on the premises of any Patient Collective, or
within 25 feet of the entry door during business hours.
IX – 13.05 Civil Forfeiture
Any marihuana or drug paraphernalia used, sold or possessed with intent to sell in violation of
this Ordinance shall be seized and forfeited to the City of Hamtramck along with any proceeds
received from any such illegal sales.
IX – 13.06 Criminal Penalty
Any illegal use, possession, purchase, sale or distribution of marihuana without the proper
authorization required by this ordinance and state law shall be punishable in accordance with §
10.999 of the Hamtramck Code of Ordinances.
IX _ 13.07 Police Department Procedures and Training
1. Within six months of the date that this chapter becomes effective, the training materials,
handbooks, and printed procedures of the Police Department shall be updated to reflect
its provisions. These updated materials shall be made available to police officers in the
regular course of their training and service.
2. Medical marihuana related activities shall be the lowest possible priority of the Police
Department.
3. Qualified patients, their primary caregivers, and medical marihuana collectives and
compassion clubs who come into contact with law enforcement will not be subject to any
civil or criminal penalty including forfeiture, not cited nor arrested, and dried cannabis or
cannabis plants in their possession will not be seized if they are in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
4. Qualified patients, their primary caregivers, and medical marihuana collectives and
compassion clubs who come into contact with law enforcement and cannot establish or
demonstrate their status as a qualified patient, primary caregiver, or medical marihuana
collective or as compassion club, but are otherwise in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, will not be cited or arrested and usable marihuana or marihuana plants in
their possession will not be seized if (1) based on the activity and circumstances, the
officer determines that there is no evidence of criminal activity; (2) the claim to be a
qualified patient, primary caregiver, or medical marihuana patient collective is credible;
and (3) proof of status as a qualified patient, primary caregiver, or medical marihuana
patient collective can be provided to the Police Department within three business days of
the date of contact with law enforcement.
Page 73 of 106
ARTICLE X. FENCES.
Section 1. General.
X – 1.01. Scope.
The respective owners of all lots in the City shall construct and maintain fences between their
own and adjoining lots owned by other persons.
X – 1.02. Responsibility.
Fences shall be between four feet four inches and six feet four inches high. Each owner shall
construct only one fence along the side lot line between the rear property and front building line
at his own expense. If the parcel runs North and South, the owner is responsible for the West
fence line. If the parcel runs East and West, the owner is responsible for the North fence line.
For odd shaped parcels, the code official shall determine the responsibility for fence construction
and maintenance. Fences enclosing a property shall provide adequate access for fire fighting
purposes, with not less than one access at the front lot line and not less than one access at the rear
lot line, except that access can be provided on the side lot line for corner lots.
X – 1.03. Mixed-Use Adjoining Properties.
In the absence of a building façade within five (5) feet of the lot line, owners of properties with
nonresidential uses abutting properties with residential uses shall erect and maintain a privacy
fence of six feet four inches along such property lines. If the nonresidential use is an industrial
use, an eight foot four inch privacy fence may be permitted by the code official.
X – 1.04. Bodies of Water.
Any swimming pool, pond, or other artificially installed body of water, all of which may contain
not less than twelve inches of water in depth at any point, shall be enclosed by a fence not less
than four feet four inches in height. Gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the
latch on the inside of the gate so that the latch is not readily accessible for children to open.
Gates shall be capable of being securely locked. If the entire premises is enclosed, then the code
official may waive this provision upon proper application and approval.
X – 1.05. Maintenance, Repair, and Removal.
All fences shall be maintained in a neat and safe condition. Fences erected between residential
uses and other uses shall be maintained in a neat and safe condition at the expense of the owner
of the other use under the terms of any waiver granted under to this Ordinance. Fences shall be
kept free of weeds, trees, and other nuisance vegetation. The respective owners of all lots shall
also be responsible for the care, repair, and upkeep of all fences contiguous to or bordering upon
streets, alleys, and other public areas. Fences erected on or between residential uses shall be
maintained in a neat and safe condition at the expense of the owner legally responsible for the
fence. If ownership and responsibility of the fence, in the opinion of the code official, is not
reasonably and readily ascertainable, the code official shall have the authority to require that any
or all property owners abutting the fence maintain or repair the fence. This Ordinance shall not
require the City to secure a survey to determine responsibility or property ownership. In the
absence of any other agreement, the fence owner shall, if necessary, be allowed by the adjoining
property owner access to that fence not less than two days twice a year for the purpose of
periodic maintenance work, and at any time and as long as required for emergency repair work.
In the case of a disagreement between the two property owners, the code official shall make a
Page 74 of 106
determination. If a fence falls into such disrepair that the fence becomes a threat to public
health, safety, or welfare, the City shall have the authority to replace or repair the fence and the
cost of such replacement or repair shall be that of the property owner who is legally responsible
for maintaining the fence. The City shall have the authority to place the cost of such replacement
or repair on the tax rolls.
X – 1.06. Nonconforming Fences.
Any fence legally existing when this Ordinance or subsequent amendment became effective that
does not conform in use, location, height, or size with the regulations of this Ordinance shall be
considered a legal nonconforming fence and shall be permitted to continue in such status while it
is either abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following limitations:
a. Structural alterations, enlargement, or re-erection are permissible only if such changes
shall not increase the degree of nonconformity of the fence.
b. Any legal nonconforming fence shall be replaced without increasing the existing height
or area if its is damaged, or removed if allowed to deteriorate to the extent that the cost of
repair or restoration exceeds fifty percent of the replacement cost of the fence as
determined by the code official.
c. Fences that comply with either item a or b above need not be permitted.
X – 1.07. Prohibited Fences.
The following fences shall be specifically prohibited:
a. Any fence charged or connected with an electric current.
b. Any fence constructed in whole or in part with barbed wire.
c. Any fence with a protruding or projecting instrument, spike, nail, or other sharp points or
any other materials that may endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
d. Any fence made out of “chicken wire” or other similar material.
e. Any fence made out of coil or concertina wire.
Section 2. Permits.
X – 2.01. Permit Required.
Unless specifically exempted, a permit shall be obtained from the code official for the erection of
all fences erected within the City and under other ordinances of the City. Exemptions from the
necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the fence
involved from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner and in a manner
under all the other provisions of this Ordinance. No permit shall be issued to any person who is
in default to the City. By way of illustration, a person in default could owe the City income tax,
property tax, water bill, or a business license fee. If a written payment plan has been accepted by
the chief executive officer, the code official shall issue a conditional permit if all other provisions
of this Ordinance are met. All rights and privileges acquired under this Ordinance are mere
licenses and may be revoked by the City by a letter to the permit holder upon the violation of any
of the conditions herein, whereupon the code official may revoke the fence with costs of removal
charged to the permit holder. If the work authorized under a fence permit has not be started
within six months, and then finished within thirty days after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void.
Page 75 of 106
X – 2.02. Permit Fees.
A fee for services shall be charged. All fees shall be established by resolution of the Common
Council during the adoption of the annual budget. Failure to apply for the appropriate fence
permit shall result in a municipal civil infraction and a doubling of the permit fee.
X – 2.03. Construction Documents.
Before any permit is granted for the purpose of erecting a fence requiring such permit,
construction documents shall be filed with the code official showing the dimensions, materials,
and details of fence construction, the location of the parcel of land upon which the fence is to be
erected with the property line and the position of the fence in relation to nearby buildings or
structures, and any other pertinent data required by the code official. The permit application
shall be accompanied by written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the
fence is to be erected and a written agreement between the adjoining property owners as to the
location of the lot line or a certified land survey by a licensed land surveyor showing the location
of the property line.
Section 3. Specific Standards.
X – 3.01. Types of Fences.
The following types of fences shall be permitted to be erected or re-erected, subject to the
following limitations:
a. Partition fences may be erected for the purpose of separating, enclosing, or protecting
property within its perimeter.
b. Privacy fences may be erected to constitute a complete visual barrier to persons outside
of the perimeter. All privacy fences shall have posts, cross-members, bolts, or any other
frame support placed on the side of the fence facing the property of the erector. Privacy
fences shall be permitted along the rear lot line. Privacy fences constructed along a side
lot line shall be permitted to extend from the rear lot line to the front building line.
c. Decorative fences out of metal, wood, pipe, or rail as a non sight-obstructing structure
may be erected as a landscape treatment to enhance, accent, beautify, or protect the site.
X – 3.02. Vegetation.
Hedges, shrubs, bushes, and evergreen trees shall be considered legal fences if they do not
enclose swimming pools, ponds, or other bodies of water. When fully grown, the hedges,
shrubs, bushes, and evergreen trees shall not exceed six feet four inches in height and shall be
planted not closer than two feet from the lot line. No vegetation considered a legal fence shall
obscure the line of sight for drivers on an abutting public right-of-way or private driveway.
X – 3.03. Building Lines.
Fences erected along established front building lines and along rear lot lines shall not exceed the
height of six feet four inches above grade level, except that in residential zones, no fence shall be
constructed along the front building or lot line that exceeds two feet four inches in height. Along
the side lot lines, no fence shall be constructed between the established front building lines and
the front property lines with the exception of a four foot four inch high fence of decorative nonsight
obscuring material. On a corner lot abutting a public right-of-way, a non-sight-obscuring
fence may be permitted not to exceed four feet four inches in height at the established building
line, tapering down to a height of two feet four inches at the front lot line.
Page 76 of 106
X – 3.04. Construction.
Any fence post hereinafter erected shall consist of posts that may be one and five-eighths inches
(1 5/8”) diameter galvanized steel pipe, four inch reinforced concrete, or four inch treated wood,
spaced a maximum of ten feet apart, embedded in concrete footings not less than three feet deep
in the ground, and shall allow for the erection of a fence as authorized by this Ordinance that is
four inches off of the ground to the fence height of four feet four inches to six feet four inches
above grade level. All fence posts shall be within the lot line of the person responsible for the
maintenance of the fence. Fences shall be made of galvanized woven wire, metal, or decay
resistant wood boards. If the fence is erected on the lot line, the junction line of the posts and
wire or boards shall be considered to coincide with the property line.
Section 4. Appeals and Variances.
X – 4.01. Appeals.
Any person denied a permit to erect or re-erect a fence shall have the right to appeal the decision
of the code official to the Board upon filing the appropriate fee. The Board shall, after a public
hearing conducted under this Ordinance and the rules of the Board, be authorized to grant
dimensional and use variances if the applicant demonstrates upon a finding that all of the
following conditions are met:
a. The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the property
would render compliance with the requirements of this section difficult and would likely
result in a particular hardship on the person causing the fence to be erected. No variance
shall be granted to anyone who deems a waiver based on the mere inconvenience of the
requirements of this Ordinance or to increase financial gain or avoid the financial
expense of compliance.
b. Strict enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would serve no useful purpose.
c. The type of fence and the location proposed would not pose a significant risk to the
public health, safety, and welfare.
d. The benefit of the fence to the general public outweighs any risk to public health, safety,
and welfare.
e. A waiver would be in the best interest of the City and not against the spirit and intent of
this Ordinance.
X – 4.02. Variances.
A dimensional variance shall require a simple majority vote of the Board, and a use variance
shall require a two-thirds majority vote of the Board.
Page 77 of 106
ARTICLE XI. SIGN REGULATIONS.
Section 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the safe and orderly development of the City through the
regulation of signs and sign structures.
Section 2. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this Ordinance, have the meanings
shown herein.
ABANDONED SIGN. A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the owner intends no
longer to have used, for the display of sign copy, or as otherwise defined by state law.
ANIMATED SIGN. A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion. Animated signs,
which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated by this Ordinance,
include the following types:
a. Electrically activated. Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of
electronic, electrical, or electro-mechanical input or illumination capable of simulation
movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications
noted below:
1. Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs when illumination is
characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either
the same as or less than the period of nonillumination. For the purposes of
this Ordinance, flashing shall not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period
between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
2. Patterned illusionary movement. Animated signs or animated portions of
signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through
alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the
purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form
of constant motion.
b. Environmentally activated. Animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal
changes, or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant
strings, or other devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motivation.
c. Mechanically activated. Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion or rotation
activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically
induced means.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection that is not intended for occupancy and that
extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but that does not include signs as
defined herein. See also, “Awning”; “Back-lit awning”; and “Canopy, attached and
freestanding.”
AWNING. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior
wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or nonrigid materials or fabric on a
supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable, including such structures that
are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
Page 78 of 106
AWNING SIGN. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an
awning. See also, “Wall” or “Fascia sign.”
BACKLIT AWNING. An awning with a translucent covering material and a source of
illumination contained within its framework.
BANNER. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
BANNER SIGN. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
BILLBOARD. See “Off-premise sign” and “Outdoor advertising sign.”
BUILDING ELEVATION. The entire side of a building, from ground level to the roofline, as
viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
CANOPY (ATTACHED). A multisided overhead structure or architectural projection supported
by attachments to a building on one or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or
also supported by columns at additional points. The surface(s) or soffit of an attached canopy
may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. See also, “Marquee.”
CANOPY (FREESTANDING). A multisided overhead structure or architectural projection
supported by columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) or soffit of an attached canopy
may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
CHANGEABLE SIGN. A sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or
remote input, including signs which are:
a. Manually activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
manually.
b. Electrically activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or
pictographic components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to
the components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may
be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component
display. See also, “Electronic message sign or center.”
COMBINATION SIGN. A sign that is supported partly by a pole and partly by a building
structure.
COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos, and graphic elements comprising the
content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying a street address only.
DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN. A freestanding sign identifying a multiple-occupancy
development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park, which is controlled by a
single owner or landlord.
Page 79 of 106
DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of providing
direction or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces, back to back.
ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER. An electronically activated changeable sign
whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed.
EXTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed outside a building.
FAÇADE. See “Building façade.”
FASCIA SIGN. See “Wall sign.”
FLASHING SIGN. See “Animated sign, electrically activated.”
FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to the ground, and
not supported by a building, including signs supported by one or more columns, poles, or braces
placed in or upon the ground.
FRONTAGE (BUILDING). The length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single
premise oriented to the public way or other properties that it faces.
FRONTAGE (PROPERTY). The length of the property line(s) of any single premise along
either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
GROUND SIGN. See “Freestanding sign.”
ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projection
through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off its surface(s) (externally
illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed within a building, but not including “window signs” as
defined by this Ordinance. Interior signs, with the exception of window signs as defined, are not
regulated by this Ordinance.
MANSARD. An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to an exterior building
façade.
MARQUEE. See “Canopy (attached).”
MARQUEE SIGN. See “Canopy sign.”
Page 80 of 106
MENU BOARD. A freestanding sign oriented to the drive-through lane for a restaurant that
advertises the menu items available through the drive-through window, and which has no more
than twenty percent of the total area for such a sign used for business identification.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN. A sign containing three or more faces.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN. See “Outdoor advertising sign.”
ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign erected, maintained, or used in the outdoor environment for the
purpose of display of commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
PARAPET. The extension of a building façade above the line of the structural roof.
POLE SIGN. See “Freestanding sign.”
POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement, cause, or
candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign shall not be considered to be a
political sign.
PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a building or
building surface.
PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects more than
eighteen inches from a building face or wall or from a structure whose primary purpose is other
than the support of a sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental or the property or
premises upon which it is located.
REVOLVING SIGN. A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis. See also, “Animated sign,
mechanically activated.”
ROOF LINE. The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended façade or parapet, the
uppermost point of the façade or parapet.
ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a building, or
above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which such a building wholly or
partially supports. Sign mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves, and architectural projections
such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs.
SIGN. Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial or noncommercial
messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations.
Noncommercial flags or any flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs shall not be considered to be
signs.
Page 81 of 106
SIGN AREA. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the combination of
regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The area of any double-sided or “V”
shaped sign shall be the area of the largest single face only. The are of a sphere shall be
computed as the area of a circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as
fifty percent of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
SIGN COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos, and graphic elements comprising
the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals identifying a street address only.
SIGN FACE. The surface upon, against, or through which the sign copy is displayed or
illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural features of a building or sign structure,
nonstructural or decorative trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface
upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
a. In the case of a panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall include the entire area of
the sign panel, cabinet, or face substrate upon which the sign copy is displayed or
illustrated, but not open space between separate panels or cabinets.
b. In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the sign face shall include
the entire area of the surface that is routed, except where interrupted by a reveal, border,
or a contrasting surface or color.
c. In the case of signs pained on a building, or individual letters or graphic elements affixed
to a building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the sum of the geometric figures or
combination of regular geometric figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or
separate graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but not the open space between
separate groupings of sign copy on the same building or structure.
d. In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border, or displayed on
a background contrasting in color with the color of the building or structure, the sign face
shall comprise the area within the contrasting background, or within the painted or
illuminated border.
SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure supporting a sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign intended to display either commercial or noncommercial
messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs or any sign not permanently
embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is
permanently embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN OR UNDER MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to the underside of a
canopy or marquee.
V SIGN. Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected upon common or
separate structures, positioned in a “V” shape with an interior angle between faces of not more
than ninety degrees with the distance between the sign faces not exceeding five feet at their
closest point.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a
building or structure and that projects not more than 18 inches from the building or structure
wall, including signs affixed to architectural projections from a building if the copy area of such
Page 82 of 106
signs remain on a parallel plane to the face of the building façade or to the face or faces of the
architectural projection to which it is affixed.
WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message intended to be
visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent property.
Section 3. Permits.
XI – 3.01. Permit Required.
Unless specifically exempted, a permit shall be obtained from the code official for the erection
and maintenance of all signs erected or maintained within the City and under other ordinances of
the City. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be construed to
relieve the owner of the sign involved from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a
safe manner and in a manner under all the other provisions of this Ordinance. No permit shall be
issued to any person who is in default to the City. By way of illustration, a person in default
could owe the City income tax, property tax, water bill, or a business license fee. If a written
payment plan has been accepted by the chief executive officer, the code official shall issue a
conditional permit if all other provisions of this Ordinance are met. All rights and privileges
acquired under this Ordinance are mere licenses and may be revoked by the City by a letter to the
permit holder upon the violation of any of the conditions herein, whereupon the code official
may revoke the sign with costs of removal charged to the permit holder. If the work authorized
under a sign permit has not be started within six months, and then finished within thirty days
after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
XI – 3.02. Permit Fees.
A fee for services shall be charged. All fees shall be established by resolution of the Common
Council during the adoption of the annual budget. Failure to apply for the appropriate sign
permit shall result in a municipal civil infraction and a doubling of the permit fee.
XI – 3.03. Construction Documents.
Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure requiring such permit,
construction documents prepared by a design professional shall be filed with the code official
showing the dimensions, materials, and required details of construction, including loads, stresses,
anchorage, and any other pertinent data he may require. The permit application shall be
accompanied by the written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign
is to be erected and by engineering calculations signed and sealed by a registered design
professional if required by the State Construction Code.
XI – 3.04. Bond Required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, install, remove, or rehang any sign for which a permit
is required under this Ordinance until an approved bond shall have been filed with the code
official in an amount to be determined by annual resolution of the Common Council upon
adoption of the budget. Such bond shall bear no interest and shall indemnify, save, and keep
harmless the City from any and all costs, damages, or expenses of any kind whatsoever which
may be suffered by the City, or which it may be put to, or which may accrue against it by
charging to or recovering from the City from or by reason of the granting of permission to erect
the signs, or by reason of any acts or things done under or by authority or permission granted by
the code official to erect such signs in the City, or by reason of the negligence, failure, or refusal
Page 83 of 106
of any person, firm, or corporation to comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
The obligation herein specified shall remain in force and effect during the life of every sign and
shall not be cancelled by the principal or surety until after thirty days’ notice to the code official.
XI – 3.05. License Required.
Every person, firm, or corporation desiring to erect signs for which a permit is required under
this Ordinance shall apply to the code official for a sign erector’s license, and shall furnish such
other information as the code official shall require. A Sign erector’s license shall be good for the
same period of time as a contractor’s registration in the City. The Common Council shall by
resolution annually set the fee for a sign erector’s license upon the adoption of the budget. The
code official shall examine the qualifications of each applicant and shall cause a license to be
issued to all those properly qualified after their bonds have been filed and approved by the City
Attorney. Holders of sign erector licenses shall notify the code official immediately upon any
material changes to the information that was previously given to the code official. At any time
the bond of any sign erector lapses, his license shall be automatically revoked. If the holder of a
sign erector’s license shall fail to comply with any notice of the code official relative to the
improper construction or erection of any sign, the code official shall immediately notify, in
writing, the senior official in charge of such firm or corporation, at the address shown upon the
sign erector’s application, to appear before him at a stated time and show cause why his firm’s
license shall not be revoked. After such hearing if the code official is not satisfied that the
defects identified by the code official shall not be addressed in a timely fashion, the code official
shall recommend to the Common Council that such sign erector’s license shall be revoked. Such
license shall automatically be revoked if the notified senior officer does not appear for such
hearing or if he cannot be found after a diligent search at the address on the license application.
The Common Council shall revoke the license of any sign erector who does not comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 4. General Provisions.
XI – 4.01. Changes to Signs.
No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged, or relocated except in conformity to the provisions
herein, nor until a proper permit, if required, has been secured. The changing or maintenance of
moveable parts or components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the
changing of copy, business names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display, or graphic matter, or the
content of any sign shall not be deemed a structural alteration.
XI – 4.02. Conformance to Codes.
Any sign hereinafter erected shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of
the State Construction Code, and any other ordinances of the City.
XI – 4.03. Signs in Rights-of-Way.
No sign other than an official traffic sign or similar sign shall be erected within two feet of the
lines of any street, or within any public way, unless specifically authorized by the code official.
XI – 4.04. Projections over Public Ways.
Signs projecting over public walkways shall be permitted to do so subject to the projection and
clearance limits either defined herein or, if not so defined, at a minimum height of eight feet
from grade level to the bottom of the sign. Signs, architectural projections, or sign structures
Page 84 of 106
projecting over vehicular access areas shall conform to the minimum height clearance limitations
imposed by the City for such structures.
XI – 4.05. Traffic Visibility.
No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to
obstruct the free and clear vision, nor at any location if by its position, shape, or color, it may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or
device.
XI – 4.06. Computation of Frontage.
If a premises contains walls facing more than one property line or encompasses property frontage
bounding by more than one street or other property uses, the sign area(s) for each building wall
or property frontage shall be computed separately for each building wall or property line facing a
different frontage. The sign area(s) thus calculated shall be permitted to then be applied to
permitted signs placed on each separate wall or property line footage, as long as an egress is
located in the wall facing the side street.
XI – 4.07. Maintenance, Repair, and Removal.
Every sign permitted by this Ordinance shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any
sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the code official,
or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained in violation of any provision of
this Ordinance, the owner thereof or the person or firm using the sign shall, upon written notice
by the code official immediately in the case of immediate danger, and in any case within not
more than ten days, make such sign conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, or shall remove
it. If within ten days the order is not complied with, the code official shall be permitted to
remove or cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the owner or user of the sign or both.
IX – 4.08. Obsolete Sign Copy.
Any sign copy that no longer advertises or identifies a use conducted on the property on which
the sign is erected shall be covered or removed by the property owner within thirty days upon
written notification by the code official; and upon failure to comply with such notice, the code
official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign copy, and any expense incident
thereto shall be paid by the owner of the sign, or the building or structure on which the sign is
located.
IX – 4.09. Nonconforming Signs.
Any sign legally existing when this Ordinance or subsequent amendment became effective that
does not conform in use, location, height, or size with the regulations of the zone in which such
sign is located, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use or structure and shall be permitted
to continue in such status until it is either abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the
following limitations:
a. Structural alterations, enlargement, or re-erection are permissible only if such alterations
shall not increase the degree of nonconformity of the signs.
b. Any legal nonconforming sign shall be removed or rebuilt without increasing the existing
height or area if its is damaged, or removed if allowed to deteriorate to the extent that the
cost of repair or restoration exceeds fifty percent of the replacement cost of the sign as
determined by the code official.
Page 85 of 106
c. Signs that comply with either item above need not be permitted.
Section 5. Specific Sign Standards.
XI – 5.01. Animated and Changeable Messages.
Animated signs, except as those prohibited in Article XI, Section 7, are permitted in commercial
and industrial zones only. Changeable signs, manually activated, are permitted for
nonresidential uses in all zones. Changeable signs, electrically activated, are permitted in all
nonresidential zones.
XI – 5.02. Awning Signs.
Awning signs shall be permitted for ground or second floor uses only in commercial districts,
subject to the following limitations:
a. Awning signs shall be straight sheds or curved.
b. Awning signs shall be limited to one awning sign per first or second story business
tenant, on either awning or valance, but not on both.
c. Awning signs shall include only the name of the business.
d. If acting as the main business sign, the awning sign shall not be in addition to a sign on
the band.
e. The distance from the sidewalk to the lower drip edge of the awning shall be between
eight feet and twelve feet.
f. The vertical drip of an awning may be stenciled with signage a maximum of eight inches
in vertical dimension by any horizontal length.
XI – 5.03. Billboards.
Billboards shall be permitted only in industrial districts and shall be no closer than three hundred
feet from any residential district. Existing nonconforming billboards may be maintained, but
cannot be expanded, enlarged, or extended.
XI – 5.04. Canopy and Marquee Signs.
None at this time.
XI – 5.05. Directional Signs.
All directional signs required for the purpose of orientation, when established by the City,
county, state, or federal governments, shall be permitted in all districts.
XI – 5.06. Freestanding Signs.
The location of all free standing signs within fifty feet of any intersecting right-of-way lines shall
be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Safety or his designee.
XI – 5.07. Menu Boards.
Menu boards shall not be permitted to exceed fifty square feet.
XI – 5.08. Projecting Signs.
Projecting signs shall be permitted for ground or second floor uses only in commercial districts,
subject to the following limitations:
a. No more than one projecting sign for each business tenant shall be permitted.
Page 86 of 106
b. Projecting signs shall be spaced no less than twenty feet apart horizontally and no less
than ten feet apart vertically.
c. The distance from the ground to the lower edge of the signboard shall be eight feet or
greater.
d. The area of the projecting sign shall not exceed six square feet.
e. The distance from the primary face of building to the signboard shall not exceed six
inches.
f. Projecting signs over County roads shall meet conditions established by Wayne County.
XI – 5.09. Temporary Signs.
5.09.1. General. For purposes of clarification, a “real estate sign”, “development and
construction sign”, “special promotions, event, and grand opening signs”, “special event
signs in public ways”, and “political signs” as described in this section are subject to
these standards.
5.09.2. Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted when located on the land or
building intended to be rented, leased, or sold. The signs shall not exceed a dimension of
nine square feet total area in a residential district, or forty square feet in all other districts,
and shall be removed within thirty days of the date of the renting, leasing, or sale. No
permit for legal real estate signs shall be required.
5.09.3. Development and Construction Signs. Signs advertising developments or subdivisions shall
be permitted to be erected upon the issuance of a building permit for the development or
subdivision. The permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed two years, but is
subject to renewal upon application.
5.09.4. Special Promotions, Event, and Grand Opening Signs. Temporary exterior signs displayed to
advertise special promotions, events, and grand openings shall be permitted for
nonresidential uses in a residential district, and for all commercial and industrial districts
subject to the following limitations:
a. A sign, banner, or advertising device constructed of cloth, canvass, fabric, plastic,
wood, or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, or any
other portable sign, intended for a limited period of display, but not including
decorative displays for a holiday or public demonstration, shall be permitted by the
code official for thirty days at a time for each business place. No business may have
a temporary sign for more than two months in a single calendar year.
b. No temporary sign advertising a business opening or change in ownership shall
exceed an area of sixteen square feet.
c. No temporary sign may have a single face greater than thirty square feet in area, have
a greater total surface area more than sixty square feet, or be a greater height than ten
feet above the ground. The lower edge of a temporary sign shall be of a height not
less than eighteen inches above the surrounding grade level.
d. No more than one temporary sign shall be displayed on any property.
e. Temporary signs shall be removed as soon as torn or damaged, or promptly at the end
of the display period.
5.09.5. Special Event Signs in Public Ways. Signs advertising a special community event shall be
permitted to be displayed in or over public rights-of-way, subject to approval by the code
official as to the size, location, and method of erection. The code official shall not
approve any special event signage that would impair the safety and convenience of use of
public rights-of-way, or obstruct traffic visibility.
Page 87 of 106
5.09.6. Portable Signs. Portable signs shall be permitted only in commercial and industrial
districts, as designated in this Ordinance, subject to the following limitations:
a. No portable sign shall be displayed before obtaining a sign permit.
b. No portable sign shall be displayed on City property, unless the City provides such
sign for official City business. No permit shall be required.
c. No more than one portable sign shall be displayed on any property, and shall not
exceed a height of three feet or an area of nine feet.
d. No sign shall be displayed for more than thirty days in any calendar year.
e. Any electrical portable signs shall comply with the electrical code as adopted by the
City.
5.09.7. Political Signs. Political signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the
following limitations:
a. All political signs shall be no larger than sixteen square feet.
b. All political signs may be displayed for a period of sixty days preceding the election
to which the message pertains and shall be removed within ten days after the election,
Signs promoting successful candidates or ballot propositions in a primary election
may remain displayed until not more than ten days after the general election.
c. Such signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way or obstruct traffic visibility.
d. No political sign shall be displayed on or in any vacant or abandoned property in the
City of Hamtramck.
e. No permit shall be required.
XI – 5.10. Wall Signs.
No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening. No wall sign shall be erected to
extend above the top of the wall to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to
which it is attached. The total surface area of any wall sign placed on the front of a building
shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage, and all wall signs shall
not exceed a total surface area of one hundred square feet. All wall signs of a total surface area
greater than fifty square feet shall have a surface or facing of incombustible material. No wall
sign shall project more than eighteen inches from the building or structure wall. In any
commercial district, one wall sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, shall be permitted on
any side or rear entrance open to the public. Service entrances may be identified with one sign
not exceeding two square feet. Only the business name and address or phone number shall be
permitted.
XI – 5.11. Window Signs.
Window signs shall be permitted in all districts, subject to the following limitations:
a. The storefront window or door may be stenciled with signage including store hours not to
exceed one and one-half feet in vertical dimension and four feet in horizontal dimension.
b. The sign shall be silk screened, professionally hand painted, or made of applied vinyl
letters. Colored vinyl letters shall be consistent with the overall color scheme and
character of the storefront.
c. A window sign is limited to one sign per building business tenant, painted on either the
window or the door, but not on both, with the exception of store hours, which may
displayed on the door apart from the business sign in the store window.
d. A window sign on the door may include business hours in addition to the business name.
Page 88 of 106
e. Compact neon signs shall be permitted within the interior of shop fronts if they do not
exceed a maximum of four square feet in area per fifty square feet of window area.
f. One open/closed sign not exceeding two square feet may be displayed in the window or
door, but not both.
Section 6. Exempt Signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance; however, no sign
shall be exempt from the section related to traffic visibility:
a. Official notices authorized by a court, public body, or public safety official.
b. Directional, warning, or information signs authorized by federal, state, or municipal
governments.
c. Memorial plaques, building identification signs, and building cornerstones when cut or
carved into a masonry surface or when made of noncombustible material and made an
integral part of the building or structure.
d. The flag of a government or noncommercial institution, such as a school.
e. Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate public holiday season.
f. Works of fine art displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise if the enterprise
does not receive direct commercial gain.
g. Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address signs that contain no
advertising copy and which do not exceed six square feet in area.
Section 7. Prohibited Signs.
The following devices and locations shall be specifically prohibited:
a. Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with an official traffic
sign, signal, or device, or obstruct or interfere with a driver’s view of approaching,
merging, or intersecting traffic.
b. Except as authorized elsewhere in this Ordinance, signs encroaching upon or overhanging
public right-of-way.
c. Signs attached to any utility pole, light standard, street tree, or any other public facility
located within the public right-of-way.
d. Signs that blink, flash, or are animated by lighting in any fashion that would cause such
signs to have the appearance of traffic safety signs and lights, or municipal vehicle
warnings from a distance.
e. Portable signs except as allowed for temporary signs.
f. Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public or private
property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
1. The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs.
2. The signs are magnetic, decals, or painted upon an integral part of the vehicle or
equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do not break the
silhouette of the vehicle.
3. The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to
operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used or available for use in
the daily function of the business to which signs relate.
g. Vehicles and trailers not used primarily as static displays, advertising a product or
service, used as storage, shelter, or distribution points for commercial products, or
services for the general public.
Page 89 of 106
h. Balloons, streamers, or pinwheels, except those temporarily displayed as part of a special
sale, promotion, or community event. For the purposes of this subsection, “temporarily”
means no more than twenty days in any calendar year.
i. Under canopy signs.
j. Roof signs.
k. Abandoned signs.
l. Any sign painted on the exterior of a building or structure.
Page 90 of 106
ARTICLE XII. SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
Section 1. General.
XII – 1.01. Scope.
In every zoning district, no building or structure shall be demolished or razed, except for
dangerous or condemned buildings, erected, converted to other use, or structurally altered, except
as may be otherwise provided in this Ordinance, until the Commission has reviewed and
approved a site plan for such use. Each action taken with respect to site plan review and approval
shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the Commission. One and two family residential
structures shall be exempted from the application of the provisions of this section.
XII – 1.02. Purpose.
The purpose of site plan review is to provide flexibility in the placement and interrelationship of
the buildings and uses within each building site subject to plan approval, and to provide for the
implementation of design concepts while at the same time maintaining the overall intensity of
land use, density of population, and amounts of light, air, access and landscaped open space as
required in this Ordinance. The objectives of site plan review are to:
a. Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious developments, and
poor quality;
b. Conserve the City's natural beauty and visual character and charm by ensuring that
structures, signs, and other improvements are properly related to their sites, and to
surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural
terrain and landscaping, and that proper attention is given to exterior appearance of
structures, signs, and other improvements;
c. Stabilize and improve property values and prevent blighted areas;
d. Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality and quantity of
citizen participation in local government and in community growth, change and
improvement;
e. Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility, and contentment of residents and attract new
residents by reason of the City’s favorable environment;
f. Provide for consultation and cooperation between the developer and the Commission so
that both parties might realize maximum utilization of land and minimum adverse effects
upon the surrounding area.
Section 2. Site Plan Review Process
XII – 2.01. Scope.
The City has established a two-tier site plan review process: preliminary site plan review and
final site plan review. This process has been established so that an applicant can receive City
comments on the general conformity of a proposed site plan to City requirements before
preparing a complete package of engineering, drawings, landscape plans, construction details,
etc. Questions regarding this process may be directed to Building Code Official or the
Commission.
XII – 2.02. Preliminary Site Plan Review.
2.02.1. Scope. A site plan submitted to the City for preliminary site plan review shall contain all
of the information set forth in the preliminary site plan data checklist included in this
section. Adequate engineering data to establish engineering feasibility of utilities
Page 91 of 106
proposed is required, however, detailed engineering plans and detailed landscaping plans
are optional at this stage in the process.
2.02.2. Fees. A fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the Common Council shall
accompany any application for site plan approval, preliminary or final. Such fee may be
utilized by the City to determine if the development shall conform to the applicable City
ordinances, policies and standards, and for investigation and report of any objectionable
elements.
2.02.3. Initiating the Process. To initiate the preliminary site plan review process, the applicant
shall submit the following information to the Building Code Official fifteen (15) days
prior to the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting:
a. Ten (10) copies (please fold) of the site plan;
b. Ten (10) copies of the site plan application form;
c. Ten (10) copies of the completed preliminary site plan data checklist;
d. Payment of all applicable fees.
Completed application packets shall be distributed by the Building Code Official to the
Commission and other appropriate a departments and agencies.
2.02.4. Plan Commission Approval, Conditional Approval, or Denial of Preliminary Site Plan. The
Commission shall grant approval, conditional approval, or deny approval, of the
preliminary site plan within sixty-five (65) days of receipt of site plan. If the
Commission does not act upon a preliminary site plan within said sixty-five- (65) day
period, the preliminary site plan shall be forwarded to the Common Council for review
without recommendation.
2.02.4.1.Approval. Upon determination by the Commission that a preliminary site plan is in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, and other applicable standards and
requirements, preliminary site plan approval shall be granted and such approval shall be
indicated on the plan. The applicant may then proceed to the final site plan review
process described below.
2.02.4.2.Conditional approval. Upon determination of the Commission that a plan is in
compliance except for minor required revisions, preliminary site plan approval,
conditional upon such revisions being made, shall be granted and that the required
changes shall be stated in writing. The applicant may then proceed to the final site plan
review process described below, provided that the required changes are incorporated in
the final site plan.
2.02.4.3. Denial. If extensive revisions to the preliminary site plan are necessary to meet
applicable standards and requirements, preliminary site plan approval shall be denied
and the applicant requested to provide an alternative site plan. In this case, “DENIED”
shall be written on the plan and the reasons for denial indicated in writing. If the
applicant desires to prepare an alternative plan, the same procedures as outlined above
beginning with submittal to the Building Code Official shall be followed.
2.02.5. Failure of Applicant to Appear. The applicant or his representative(s) shall attend all
meetings at which the development is scheduled for discussion or action. Failure to
appear at the meeting may cause the item to tabled to the next meeting.
XII – 2.03. Final Site Plan Review.
2.03.1. Fees. A fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the Common Council shall
accompany any application for site plan approval, preliminary or final. Such fee may be
utilized by the City to determine if the development shall conform to the applicable City
Page 92 of 106
ordinances, policies and standards, and for investigation and report of any objectionable
elements.
2.03.2. Initiating the Process. Within six months of the granting of preliminary site plan approval,
the applicant may initiate the final site plan review process by submitting the following
information to the Building Code Official fifteen (15) days prior to the next regularly
scheduled Commission meeting:
a. Ten (10) copies (please fold) of the site plan;
b. Ten (10) copies of the site plan application form;
c. Ten (10) copies of the completed preliminary site plan data checklist;
d. Payment of all applicable fees.
2.03.3. Public Hearing. Upon receipt and review of a final site plan, the Commission shall
establish a public hearing thereon in any of the following events:
a. When at least three (3) members of the Commission deem it necessary;
b. When requested by the applicant seeking site plan review and approval;
c. When the Commission receives a petition signed by twenty percent (20%) of the
property taxpayers, within three hundred (300) feet.
2.03.4. Review Process. After submission of a complete final site plan review package pursuant to
the requirements listed above, and within sixty (60) days after completion of review and
recommendation by the Building Code Official and other departments and agencies, the
application shall be placed on regular agenda of a meeting of the Commission to consider
final site plan approval. The applicant shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the
meeting at which the Commission shall consider the application. The Commission shall
consider all review letters and reports from the Building Code Official and other
departments and agencies, together with statements, evidence, or arguments as the
applicant may present concerning the application. The Commission shall determine
whether the site plan is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and all applicable
standards and requirements, and shall make a recommendation to the Common Council
to grant, conditionally grant, or deny final site plan approval. If the Commission does not
act upon the final site plan within said sixty (60) day period, the final site plan shall be
forwarded to the Common Council for review without recommendation.
2.03.5. Council Authority. After the Commission has acted on the application, it shall be
forwarded to the Common Council for review and action, or the applicant may revise the
application and resubmit it to the Building Code Official for additional review at the staff
and Commission levels. If the application is sent to the Common Council for review and
action, the application shall be placed on the agenda of a meeting of the Common
Council. The applicant shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the meeting at
which the Common Council shall consider the application. A decision for approval,
conditional approval, or denial of approval of the final site plan shall be made within
thirty (30) days after the Common Council has received the recommendation of the
Commission and reviewed letters and reports from the Building Code Official and other
reviewing departments and agencies, together with such statements, evidence, or
arguments as the applicant may present concerning the application. Upon approval of the
final site plan by a majority vote of the Common Council following determination that
the final site plan is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, and other
applicable standards and regulations, such approval shall be indicated on the plan. If
revisions to the final site plan are necessary to meet Ordinance requirements and
standards, approval of the final site plan shall be denied and the applicant requested to
Page 93 of 106
prepare an alternative site plan. In this case “DENIED” shall be written on the plan and
the reasons for denial indicated in writing. If the applicant desires to prepare an
alternative plan, the same procedure as outlined above beginning with submittal to the
Building Code Official shall be followed. All final site plans shall go before the
Common Council for approval or denial.
2.03.6. Failure of Applicant to Appear. The applicant or his representative(s) shall attend all
meetings at which the development is scheduled for discussion or action. Failure to
appear at the meeting may cause the item to be tabled to the next meeting.
2.03.7. Expiration of Site Plan Approval. The approval of any preliminary site plan under the
provisions of this Ordinance shall expire and be considered revoked six (6) months after
the date of such approval unless final site plan approval has been granted or is in an
active stage of review. Approval of any final site plan under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall expire and be considered revoked one (1) year after the date of such
approval unless actual construction has commenced in accordance with the issuance of a
valid building permit. Upon expiration of a final site plan approval, all preliminary site
plan approvals shall expire.
2.03.8. Outside Agency Approval Required. Final site plan approval shall not be granted until all
approvals have been obtained from outside agencies.
Section 3. Site Plan Review Criteria.
XII – 3.01. General.
In reviewing site plans, the Building Code Official, Commission, and Common Council shall
consider and endeavor to assure the following:
a. The location of development features, including principal buildings, and open spaces, and
the location, design, width, and adequacy of all curb cuts, parking areas, driveways, and
sidewalks within the site and their relationship to nearby connecting streets and sidewalks
providing access to and egress from the site, are such as to minimize possible adverse
effects on adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian vehicular traffic
safety;
b. On-site circulation of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall achieve both safety and
convenience of persons and vehicles using or visiting the site;
c. Landscaping, earth berms, fencing, signs, and obscuring walls are of such a such a design
and location that the proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and is harmonious
with nearby existing or future developments;
d. Utility service, including proposed water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater runoff systems
are sufficient to fulfill the projected needs of the development and the recommendation of
the City Engineer and the Director of Public Safety. Approval by a state or county
department having jurisdiction may also be a prerequisite to approval;
e. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the City may require as a
condition of final site plan approval, landscaping, berming, fencing, construction of
walls, marginal access drives or other appurtenances as necessary or desirable to promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the community, to provide adequate protection to
surrounding properties, to preserve and promote the character of the district and to
achieve a lasting and desirable improvement to the community.
Page 94 of 106
XII – 3.02. Preliminary and Final Site Plan Application Form Contents.
The following information shall be included on all preliminary and final site plan application
forms:
a. Applicant’s name, address, and phone number;
b. Name of proposed development;
c. Common description of property and complete legal description;
d. Land acreage and frontage on public roads or rights-of-way;
e. Existing zoning and zoning of adjacent properties;
f. Detailed description of the proposed use of the land;
g. Name, address, and phone number of the firm or individual who prepared the site plan
and legal owner of the property;
h. Signature of applicant and legal owner of the property, if not the applicant.
XII – 3.03. Preliminary Site Plan Data Required.
The following information shall be included on all preliminary site plans submitted for
consideration:
a. Name of development and title block;
b. Location map at a scale of one (1) inch equals two-thousand (2,000) feet, showing section
number(s), site location, major roads, and railroads;
c. A scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet if the subject property is less
than three (3) acres, and one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet if there are three (3)
acres or more;
d. Date, north point, and scale (graphic and written);
e. Property identification number(s) and the dimensions of all lot and property lines,
showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties;
f. Location of all existing and proposed structures, uses, number of stories, gross building
area, setback lines, distances between structures, and location of loading areas on the
subject property;
g. Location of all existing structures within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property
lines;
h. All existing and proposed aisles, drives, pedestrian paths, roadways, parking areas, and
number of parking spaces on the subject property lines;
i. All existing and proposed roadways, drives, parking areas, and pedestrian paths within
one hundred (100) feet of the subject property;
j. Location and height of all walls, fences, and screen planting, including a plan for
landscaping of the development and the method by which landscaping is to be
accomplished and maintained;
k. Location and width of all abutting streets, rights-of-way, easements, and pavements;
l. Types of surfacing, such as asphalt or concrete paving, turfing, sod, or stone to be used;
m. Types of facing materials to be used on structures;
n. Elevations (front, sides and rear views) of all sides of the building(s);
o. A floor plan drawing showing the specific use areas of all existing and proposed building
on-site;
p. Seal of registered architect, landscape architect, land surveyor, or, civil engineer that
prepared the plan. In cases of minor structural alterations where professional services are
not required, additions of three hundred (300) square feet or less, or for changes in the
use of existing buildings, the Building Code Official may waive this requirement;
Page 95 of 106
q. Density calculations (for multiple family projects);
r. Principal and accessory buildings;
s. Designation of units by type of buildings;
t. Interior walks and pedestrian or bicycle paths within the right-of-way;
u. Exterior lighting locations, type of fixtures, and methods of shielding them from
projecting onto adjoining properties;
v. Trash receptacle and transformer locations and method of screening;
w. Drive or street approaches including acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes where
appropriate;
x. All utilities located on or serving the site, including sizes of water and sewer lines;
y. Loading and unloading areas;
z. Designation of fire lanes;
aa. Estimated number of full-time and part-time employees;
bb. Address location an building and size of numbers;
cc. Where large equipment or machinery is to be installed as part of the development, the
location, type, horse-power, fuel, dimensions, noise, vibration, and emission levels and
other data of all such equipment or machinery;
dd. General location and types of proposed signs for all buildings and uses on site;
ee. Such other reasonable and relevant information as may be required by the City to assist in
the review of the proposed development.
XII –3.04. Final Site Plan Data Required.
In addition to the preliminary site plan data specified above, the following minimum information
shall be added for final site plan review and approval:
a. Site engineer plans prepared by a registered civil engineer. Such plans shall be submitted
to the Building Code Official for review and recommendation prior to Commission
consideration of final site plan approval, and for final review and approval following the
granting of final site plan approval by the Common Council. Plans shall include the
following:
1. A proposed grading and drainage plan. The plan shall show proposed finished
floor elevations, finished grades at structures, proposed storm collection system,
storm outlet(s), ultimate downstream outlets and, when required
retention/detention basin design calculations. Any areas of filled or reclaimed
land shall be identified and all development shall detain stormwater so that the
runoff from the property does not negatively impact upon adjacent properties or
public and private rights-of-way;
2. All utilities located on or serving the site, including sizes of water and sewer lines,
proposed hydrants, proposed meter size, and proposed fire suppression line into
building. Proposed sanitary leads, disposal systems shall also be shown, as
applicable;
3. Proposed streets and drives showing type of surfacing, whether public or private,
and grade elevations.
b. Proposed fire lanes and fire lane signs;
c. Proposed signs and specifications for control of traffic;
d. Seal and signature of registered design professional responsible for preparation of the
plans;
Page 96 of 106
e. Measures to be taken to protect existing on-site trees not proposed for removal as part of
the development;
f. Landscaping plan showing species, spacing, and size of each tree and plant material and
ground cover;
g. Proposed signs for all buildings and uses on site, including character, size, letters,
symbols, and lighting.
Section 4. Combining Preliminary and Final Site Plans.
An applicant may, at the applicant's discretion and risk, with approval of the Commission
combine a preliminary and final site plan in an application for approval. The Commission shall
have the authority to require submittal of a preliminary site plan separate from a final site plan,
where, in its opinion, the complexity or size of the proposed development so warrants. A
preliminary and final site plan shall not be combined for any development consisting of two (2)
or more phases.
Section 5. Phasing of Development.
An applicant may divide the proposed development into two (2) or more phases. In such case,
the preliminary site plan shall cover the entire property involved and shall clearly indicate the
location, size, and character of each phase. A final site plan shall be submitted for review and
approval for each phase.
Section 6. Inspection.
The Building Code Official shall be responsible for inspecting all improvements for
conformance with the approved final site plan. All sub-grade improvements, such as utilities,
sub-base installations for drives and parking lots, and similar improvement shall be inspected and
approved prior to covering. The applicant shall be responsible for requesting the necessary
inspections. The Building Code Official shall notify the Commission in writing when a
development for which a final site plan is approved has passed inspection with respect to the
approved final site plan. The Building Code Official shall notify the Common Council and the
Commission in writing, of any development for which a final site plan was approved, which does
not pass inspection with respect to the approved final site plan, and shall advise the Common
Council and the Commission of the steps taken to achieve compliance. In such case the Building
Code Official shall periodically notify the Common Council and Commission of progress
towards compliance with the approved final site plan and when compliance is achieved.
Section 7. Violations.
The approved final site plan shall become part of the record of approval, and subsequent action
relating to the site in question shall be consistent with the approved final site plan, unless the
Common Council agrees to such changes. Any violation of the provisions set forth above,
including any improvements not in conformance with the approved final site plan, shall be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to all penalties herein.
Page 97 of 106
ARTICLE XIII. SPECIAL LAND USE REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
Section 1. General.
XIII – 1.01. Intent.
The formulation and enactment of this Ordinance is based upon the division of the City into
districts, in each of which are specified permitted uses which are mutually compatible. In
addition to such permitted uses, however, there are certain other uses which may be necessary or
desirable to allow in certain locations in certain districts; but because of their actual or potential
impacts on neighboring uses or public facilities, there is a need to carefully regulate them with
respect to their location for the protection of the community. These uses, due to their peculiar
locational need or the nature of the service offered may have to be established in a district where
they cannot be reasonably allowed as a permitted use.
XIII – 1.02. Authority.
The Commission shall have the sole power to approve or disapprove all special land uses. In
consideration of all applications for special land use, the Commission shall review each case
individually as to its appropriateness and consider the following standards as it relates to the
proposed land use. Such uses shall be subject to conditions, restrictions, and safeguards deemed
necessary to the interest of public health, safety, and welfare.
Section 2. Submission Requirements.
XIII – 2.01. Fee Required.
A fee for services shall be charged. All fees for special land use requests shall be established by
resolution of the Common Council during the adoption of the annual budget and which shall be
paid when the application for special land use approval is filed.
XIII – 2.02. Application.
An application for the approval of a special land use shall be made by an owner, lessee, or other
person with a legal interest in the property and who has the owner’s consent to file the
application. The application form shall contain such information as the Building Code Official or
Plan Commission may require. The necessary fees shall accompany such application. The
applicant shall also submit a color photograph of the site and existing front elevation for each
special land use request submitted to the City for review. Such photographs shall be submitted
with the application. With the application, the applicant shall submit the requisite number of
folded site plans as required by this Ordinance. The application shall not be considered received
by the City until all required application conditions are met.
XIII – 2.03. Notification Required.
2.03.1. Process. Upon receipt of an application for a special land use, one notice that a request
for special land use has been received shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City and shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of
property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants
of all structures within 300 feet, except that the notice shall be given not less than five
and not more than 15 days before the application shall be considered. If the name of the
occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification.
Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a
Page 98 of 106
structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of each unit
or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than
four dwelling units, or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the
manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure.
2.03.2. Content. The notice shall describe the nature of the special land use request; indicate the
property that is the subject of the special land use request; state when and where the
special land use request shall be considered; indicate when and where written comments
shall be received concerning the request; indicate that a public hearing on the special land
use request may be requested by a property owner or the occupant of a structure located
within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for a special use.
XIII – 2.04. Request for Public Hearing.
At the initiative of the Commission, upon the request of the applicant for special land use
authorization, or upon the request of a property owner of a structure located within 300 feet of
the boundary of the property being considered for a special land use, a public hearing with
notification as required for a notice of a request for special land use approval as prescribed above
shall be held before a decision is made on the special land use request, which request is based on
discretionary grounds. If the applicant or the Commission requests a public hearing, only
notification of the public hearing need be made. A decision on a special land use request which
is based on discretionary grounds shall not be made unless notification of the request for special
land use or notification of a public hearing on a special land use request is given as required by
this section.
Section 3. Standards.
XIII – 3.01. General Standards.
The following general standards shall be applied by the Commission to all special land use
requests:
a. The proposed special land use shall be of such location, size, and character that it shall be
in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding
neighborhood and vicinity and applicable regulations of the zoning district (including but
not limited to any applicable performance standards) in which it is to be located.
b. The proposed use shall be of a nature that shall make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no
more hazardous than is normal for the district involved, taking into consideration
vehicular turning movements in relations to routes of traffic flow, proximity and
relationship to intersections, adequacy of sight distances, location and access of off-street
parking, and provisions for pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing
child-vehicle interfacing.
c. The proposed use shall be designed as to the location, size, intensity, site layout, and
periods of operation of any such proposed use to eliminate any possible nuisance
emanating therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby
permitted uses, whether by reason of dust, noise, fumes, vibration, smoke, or lights.
d. The proposed use shall be such that the proposed location and height of buildings or
structures and location, nature, and height of walls, fences, and landscaping shall not
Page 99 of 106
interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and
buildings or unreasonably affect their value.
e. The proposed use shall relate harmoniously with the physical and economic aspects of
adjacent land uses.
f. The proposed use offers a service or benefit for the public convenience at the proposed
location.
g. The proposed use is so designed, located, planned, and to be operated that the public
health, safety, and welfare shall be protected.
h. The proposed use shall not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood within which
it is to be located, nor shall such use operate as a deterrent to future land uses permitted
within the zoning district, and shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this Ordinance.
XIII – 3.02. Eligible Uses and Activities.
The following additional standards shall be applied by the Commission to uses if authorized as a
special land use in a district:
a. Apartment houses in the R district shall not be permitted to have more than six dwelling
units.
b. Automotive self-service stations shall be permitted if the combined number of
automotive-self service stations and automotive service stations within the City does not
exceed five, and the use shall be on a lot that had a legal automotive self-service or
service station within the year previous to its future use. Automotive self-service stations
shall not abut a residential use.
c. Automotive service stations shall be permitted if the combined number of automotiveself
service stations and automotive service stations within the City does not exceed five,
and the use shall be on a lot that had a legal automotive self-service or service station
within the year previous to its future use. Automotive service stations shall not abut a
residential use.
d. Bars with a Class C liquor license without a dance/entertainment permit shall be
permitted in the R district if such bar is not less than 800 feet away from public owned
and operated parks, recreation centers, swimming pools, and playgrounds, public
governmental services such as administrative facilities, police and fire stations, libraries,
schools and colleges, parochial, private, or charter elementary, junior high, and high
schools, religious, cultural, and fraternal activities, congregate residences, and state
licensed residential facilities, and any other establishment holding Class C liquor
licenses.
e. Boarding houses in R districts shall be permitted if there is one on-site parking location
per each rented unit and that a boarding house shall have no more than four rented units.
f. Confectioneries and delicatessens shall be permitted in the R district if its gross floor area
does not exceed 800 square feet.
g. Family and group day care centers and state licensed residential facilities shall be
permitted if there are no dormitory facilities on the premises, the outdoor play area is
fenced in or screened by a heavily planted greenbelt from any abutting residential use,
and that for each child cared for, there shall be provided, equipped, and maintained on the
premises a minimum of 150 square feet of useable outdoor play area with a minimum
total area of fifteen hundred square feet per facility, such facility shall be no closer than
1,000 feet from a similar facility.
Page 100 of 106
h. Grocery stores without a SDM liquor license shall be permitted in the R district if the
gross floor area does not exceed 800 square feet.
i. Light manufacturing uses shall not be directly adjacent to a residential use in a C2
district.
j. Medical and dental clinics shall only be permitted in the R district in buildings that are
not less than three stories high.
k. Mortuary and funeral homes in the R district shall be permitted if it is within 500 feet of a
religious institution.
l. Open storage yards of construction contractor’s equipment and supplies, building
materials, sand, gravel, or lumber, if such use is located not less than two hundred feet
from any R or RM district.
m. Parking lots cannot abut a residential use, be greater than sixty feet wide, or no two
parking lots may abut each other.
n. Towers in the I district shall be setback, from the nearest building not associated with the
tower directly, one foot for every one foot in height of the tower.
o. Townhouses in a residential district shall not be required to have front or side yard
setbacks, and townhouses shall not be bordered on each end by single- or two-family
dwellings.
Section 4. Powers and Duties of the Commission.
XIII – 4.01. Conditions.
The Commission, before approving a special land use request, shall determine that the conditions
set for the special land use have been satisfied unless the Board has granted a variance for such
conditions. The Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, requests for a
special land use. The Commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting
approval as may be permitted by state law and this Ordinance if the Commission deems
conditions necessary to fulfill the spirit or purpose of this Ordinance. The conditions imposed
with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the
approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the Commission
and the landowner. The Commission shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions.
The conditions may include, conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities
affected by a proposed land use or activity shall be capable of accommodating increased service
and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment, to
conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to
promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed
shall do all the following:
a. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as the
social and economic well-being of those who shall use the land use or activity under
consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or
activity, and the community as a whole;
b. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by
the proposed use or activity;
c. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations, be related to the
standards established in this Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration,
and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards.
Page 101 of 106
XIII – 4.02. Decision.
4.02.1. General. The Commission shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions requests for a
special land use. The Commission shall approve the any special land use request when
the applicant demonstrates that all of the standards contained in this Ordinance have been
met. The basis of a decision for a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement of
conclusions relative to the special land use under consideration. The decision shall
specify the basis of the decision, and any condition imposed. Any changes in the
conditions shall be filed with the Wayne County Register of Deeds as provided herein.
4.02.2. Approval. If the particular special land use is in compliance with the standards set forth in
this Ordinance, the requirements specific to the particular zoning district in which the
special land use is proposed, and the conditions imposed under this Ordinance, the
special land use request shall be approved. Upon approval of a special land use, the
applicant shall submit a site plan under this Ordinance. Subsequent amendments to an
approved site plan for a special land use shall not require Commission approval unless
the amendments significantly impact factors considered by the Commission in approving
the special land use, as determined by the Building Code Official. Thereafter, the
Building Code Official shall issue a building permit in conformity with the particular
special land use so approved. In all cases where a particular special land use has been
granted as provided herein, application for a building permit in pursuance thereof shall be
made and received by the City not later than one year thereafter or such approval shall
automatically be revoked. The Building Code Official may grant an extension thereof for
good cause shown under such terms and conditions and for such period of time not
exceeding six months as he shall determine to be necessary and appropriate. Any special
land use that is discontinued or abandoned for a period exceeding one year shall have its
approval revoked. No special land use approval shall be effective until a notice of such
approval, including all applicable conditions, are filed with the Wayne County Register
of Deeds. Any subsequent changes to a special land use shall also be filed with the
Wayne County Register of Deeds.
4.02.3. Denial. If the Commission shall determine that the particular special land use(s)
requested does not meet the standards of this Ordinance or otherwise shall tend to be
injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or orderly development of the City, the
Commission shall deny the application in writing which clearly sets forth the reason(s)
for such denial in its minutes.
4.02.4. Appeal. Any person who is denied a special land use request by the Commission may
appeal the decision to the Board. In hearing the appeal, the Board shall examine the
record of the Commission and determine if the Commission properly applied the
conditions established by this Ordinance. If the Board determines that the Commission
properly applied the conditions established by this Ordinance, then the Board shall
uphold the decision of the Commission. If the Board determines that the Commission
failed to properly apply the conditions established by this Ordinance, then the Board shall
so state the perceived deficiency and remand the request to the Commission for further
examination.
Page 102 of 106
ARTICLE XIV. ZONING CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
Section 1. Code Official to Process.
XIV – 1.01. General.
All requests for amendments or changes to the comprehensive plan, this Ordinance, or Map shall
be submitted to the code official for processing.
XIV – 1.02. Rezoning Upon Request.
A property owner may request the Commission to recommend the rezoning of his parcel. The
request shall be filed with the code official along with any other documentation that the
Commission or the code official deems necessary. The Common Council shall by resolution
establish a fee for a rezoning request during the adoption of the annual budget, which shall be
paid at the time the rezoning request is filed. The Commission shall consider the rezoning
request as a normal amendment to this Ordinance.
Section 2. Plan Commission to Review.
The Common Council shall not amend this Ordinance or Map until the proposed amendment has
been submitted to the Plan Commission, which has held not less than one public hearing and
made report thereon. Following the public hearing by the Commission and upon the Common
Council’s receipt of the Commission’s report, the Common Council may adopt the ordinance and
maps with or without amendments or refer the ordinance and maps again to the Commission for
further report.
Section 3. Public Hearing Procedure.
Not less than fifteen days’ notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall first be
published in a newspaper of general circulation. Not less than fifteen days’ notice of the time
and place of the public hearing shall be given by mail to each public utility company and each
railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the zones affected and
the airport manager of each airport that registers its name and mailing address with the city clerk
for the purpose of receiving the notice. If an individual property or several adjacent properties
are proposed for rezoning, notice of the proposed rezoning and hearing shall be given to the
owners of the property in question not less than fifteen days before the hearing. An affidavit of
mailing shall be maintained. A hearing shall be granted to an interested person at the time and
place specified on the notice.
Section 4. Effect of Protest to Proposed Amendment.
Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements of this subsection, an
amendment to this Ordinance that is the object of the petition shall be passed only by a twothirds
vote of the Common Council. The protest petition shall be presented to the Common
Council before final legislative action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the
following:
a. The owners of not less than twenty percent (20%) of the area of land included in the
proposed change.
b. The owners of not less than twenty percent (20%) of the area of land included within an
area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on the boundary of the
land included in the proposed change.
Publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the twenty percent (20%) land area
requirement.
Page 103 of 106
ARTICLE XV. VIOLATION, PENALTY, AND PUBLIC NUISANCES.
Section 1. Violation of Law.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or land or cause or
permit the aforementioned to be done in violation of this Ordinance. When any building or
parcel of land regulated by this Ordinance is being used contrary to this Ordinance, the code
official shall be permitted to order such use discontinued and the structure, parcel of land, or
portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be discontinued.
Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the code official after receipt
of such notice to make the structure, parcel of land, or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 2. Nuisance Declaration.
Any building or structure which is erected, altered, or converted or any use of premises or land
which is begun or changed after the time of passage of this Ordinance and in violation of any of
the provisions thereof is declared to be a public nuisance per se and shall be abated by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 3. Infraction Type.
XV – 3.01. Municipal Civil Infraction.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished for a municipal civil infraction. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
XV – 3.02. Misdemeanor.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with any provision of this Ordinance for any time after the second repeat offense (third offense),
then such person shall be punished for a misdemeanor violation.
Section 4. Sanctions.
The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the
amount as prescribed by resolution of the Common Council, plus any costs, damages, expenses,
and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as
amended, and other applicable laws.
a. Unless otherwise specifically prescribed for a particular municipal civil infraction
violation by this Ordinance or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less
than an amount prescribed by resolution of the Common Council, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each infraction.
b. Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations of any requirement or
provision of this Ordinance by a person. As used in this Section, “repeat offense” means
a second municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision
committed by a person within one year (unless some other period is specifically
prescribed by this Ordinance) and for which the person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically prescribed by this Ordinance
for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for the first repeat
Page 104 of 106
offense shall be not less than an amount prescribed by resolution of the Common
Council, plus costs.
c. Any person, firm, or corporation that violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with any provision of this Ordinance as any offense after a second repeat offense
(third offense), shall be punished for each offense upon conviction, by a fine of not more
than $500.00, and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90
days, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
ARTICLE XVI, SEVERABILITY, SAVING CLAUSE, REPEALER, AND PUBLICATION.
Section 1. Severability.
The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this Ordinance shall not affect the
validity of the remaining parts of this Ordinance.
Section 2. Saving Clause.
XVI – 2.01. Prosecutions.
A prosecution which is pending on the effective date of this Ordinance or any subsequent
amendment and which arose from a violation of an ordinance repealed by this Ordinance, or a
prosecution which is started within one (1) year after the effective date of this Ordinance or any
subsequent amendment arising from a violation of an ordinance repealed by this Ordinance and
which was committed before the effective date of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment,
shall be tried and determined exactly as if the ordinance had not been repealed.
XVI – 2.02. Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
If preliminary site plan approval granted under Ordinance No. 437 as amended is properly
granted before the effective date of this Ordinance, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to
require any change in the planned or designed use of any such building, structure, or land if a
building permit shall be applied for and granted within one year of the effective date of this
Ordinance and such building shall be entirely completed for its planned or designed use within
two years from the effective date of this Ordinance. Final site plan approval shall be granted
under the procedure established by this Ordinance.
Section 3. Repeal Clause.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Page 105 of 106
Section 4. Publication and Effective Date.
XVI – 4.01. Publication.
Following adoption of this Ordinance and subsequent amendments, one notice of adoption shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within fifteen days after adoption.
In the first instance of adopting this Ordinance, the following statement shall be included: “A
zoning ordinance regulating the development and use of land has been adopted by the Common
Council of the City of Hamtramck.” In the case of an amendment to this Ordinance, either a
summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area affected, or
the text of the amendment shall be published. The notice of adoption shall include the effective
date of the ordinance, and the time and place where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or
inspected. The filing and publication requirement contained herein shall supercede any charter
provisions relating to the filing and publication of city ordinances (MCL 125.584(8)).
XVI – 4.02. Effective Date.
This Ordinance is effective twenty days after publication of this Ordinance.
ORDINANCE #497
Enacted: February 3, 2004
Published: February 12, 2004
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE #523
Enacted: June 13, 2006
Published: June 21, 2006
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE #2011-7
Enacted: December 13, 2011
Published: December 23, 2011
Table of Parking Requirements (Appendix B)
Page 106 of 106
Use Spots Standard Exception
automotive self-service station,
service station, repair shop
2 per service stall
automotive self-service station,
service station, repair shop
2 per pump (includes the pump)
bar with dance entertainment permit,
over 3,600 square feet
1 per two people of maximum
capacity
car wash (automatic) 1 per employee
car wash (self-service) 2 per stall (includes stall)
dwelling unit 1 per dwelling unit
financial institutions 2 per drive up windows (includes
the window)
financial institutions 1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
hotels/motels 1 per guest room
hotels/motels 1 per 500 square feet of common
area
industrial/manufacturing/research/war
ehousing establishment
1 per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
C2
laundromat 2 per set washer/dryer
medical/dental office 1 per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
C2
mortuary/funeral home 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor
area
newly constructed professional
office/personal service over 3,600
square feet
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
religious cultural, and fraternal
activities
1 per every two seats based on
maximum seating capacity
religious cultural, and fraternal
activities
1 per every fifty-four inches of
bench seating
schools (all) 1 per faculty member
schools with assembly halls 1 per every two seats based on
maximum seating capacity
theatres, assembly halls over 5,000
square feet
1 per every two seats based on
maximum seating capacity
No parking requirements for the
Central Business District for any use
 
 
 
 




 


