Chapter C
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Holland, mindful of the ideals and labors of
our fathers in founding and developing this community, grateful to Almighty
God for the blessings of freedom, peace, health, safety, and justice, and
desirous of further securing these blessings to ourselves and our posterity,
do hereby ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Holland.
C:1

CHAPTER 1
Boundaries and Subdivision of City
Sec. 1.1. Boundaries.
The following described territory, together with all territories that may be
annexed thereto, shall be and remain a body corporate under the official
name and title of "City of Holland," and shall be subject to the municipal
control of said city:
That part of the Township of Holland, in the County of Ottawa, as is
embraced in the following description, to-wit: Commencing at the southeast
corner of section thirty-two; thence north on the east line of said section
thirty-two to the northeast corner of said section thirty-two; thence east
along the south line of section twenty-eight, to the west, north and south
one-eighth line of section twenty-eight; thence north along the west oneeighth
line of said section twenty-eight, and along the west one-eighth line
of section twenty-one until it strikes the center of the main channel of Black
River; thence along said channel of Black River and of Lake Macatawa
in a westerly and southwesterly direction until it strikes the west line of
section thirty; thence south along the west line of said section thirty to the
southwest corner of said section thirty; thence east along the south line
of said section thirty to the quarter post common to sections thirty and
thirty-one; thence south along the north and south quarter line of section
thirty-one to the south line of said section thirty-one; thence east along the
south line of sections thirty-one and thirty-two to the southeast corner of
section thirty-two, being the place of beginning, all in township five north,
of range fifteen west, the above description being the boundaries of the
City of Holland, as heretofore established by the legislature of the State of
Michigan.
Sec. 1.2. Wards established and described.
The City of Holland shall consist of six wards, as follows:
(1) First ward. The first ward shall embrace and include all that portion of
the said city lying north of the center line of 10th Street within the
limits of the City of Holland.
(2) Second ward. The second ward shall embrace and include all that
portion of the said city lying between the center line of 10th Street and
the center line of 16th Street and the section line between sections 30
and 31 west of the center line of River Avenue within the limits of the
City of Holland.
(3) Third ward. The third ward shall embrace and include all that portion of
the said city lying between the center line of 10th Street and the center
line of 16th Street and east of the center line of River Avenue within the
limits of the City of Holland.
Sec. 1.1 CHARTER Sec. 1.2
C:3
Sec. 1.3. Alteration of ward boundaries.
In the event that the population of any ward or wards of the city shall be
shown to exceed that of any other ward by 50%, according to any regular
or special federal census, the council shall have the power, by ordinance, to
change, alter, or determine the boundaries of any ward or wards of the city
in such a manner as to equalize reasonably the population thereof. Territory
annexed to the city shall become a part of the ward or wards to which such
territory is contiguous as soon as such annexation becomes effective.
Sec. 1.4. Election precincts.
The council shall, by ordinance, establish convenient election precincts
which shall comply with the provisions of state law. Until the council shall
otherwise ordain, the election precincts of the city as constituted at the time
of the adoption of this Charter, shall constitute the election precincts of the
city.
(4) Fourth ward. The fourth ward shall embrace and include all that portion
of the said city lying south of the center line of 16th Street and west of
the center line of Maple Avenue within the limits of the City of Holland.
(5) Fifth ward. The fifth ward shall embrace and include all that portion of
said city lying between the center line of Maple Avenue and the center
line of Central Avenue and south of the center line of 16th Street within
the limits of the City of Holland.
(6) Sixth ward. The sixth ward shall embrace and include all that portion of
said city lying east of the center line of Central Avenue and south of the
center line of 16th Street within the limits of the City of Holland.
Sec. 1.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 1.4
C:4
CHAPTER 2
General Municipal Powers
Sec. 2.1. General powers of city. [Amend. No. 18, 8-2-1983]
The City of Holland and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and
all powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities
and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise under the
constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, it being the intent of the
Charter commission, in framing this Charter, and of the people of the city,
in adopting it, to include all such powers, privileges, and immunities within
the scope of the powers granted to the City of Holland by the provisions
of this Charter. The city and its officers shall have power to exercise all
municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and
in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers
be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests
of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and
its inhabitants, and, through its regularly constituted authority, to pass
and enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating to its municipal
concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and the
provisions of this Charter.
In addition to the powers possessed by the City of Holland under the
constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan, and those set forth
throughout and, under proper headings, within this Charter, the City of
Holland shall have power with respect to and may, by ordinance and other
lawful acts of its officers, provide:
(1) Streets, alleys, etc. — use, regulation, etc., generally. For the use,
regulation, improvement, and control of the surface of its streets,
alleys, and public ways, and of the space above and below them;
(2) Same—Use by others than owner. For the use, by others than the owner,
of property located in streets, alleys, and public places of the city in the
operation of a public utility, subject to any limitations imposed by state
law;
(3) Same—Plan. For a plan of streets and alleys within the city and for a
distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits;
(4) Streams, waters and watercourses. For the use, control, and regulation
of streams, waters, and watercourses within its boundaries, subject to
any limitations imposed by law;
(5) Sabbath observance. For preventing and punishing violations of the
Sabbath day, commonly known as Sunday, and for regulating or
forbidding the conduct of business on that day; provided, that any
ordinance passed by the council to enforce the provisions hereof shall
specifically exempt from its provisions any person who conscientiously
believes that the seventh day of the week ought to be observed as the
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:5
Sabbath and who actually refrains from secular business and labor on
that day, provided he disturbs no other person;
(6) Maintaining the peace, etc. For maintaining the peace within the city,
and preventing and punishing the disturbance of any religious meeting,
congregation, or society, or other meeting which is assembled for any
lawful purpose;
(7) Storage and parking of vehicles. For the acquiring, establishment,
operation, extension, and maintenance of facilities for the storage and
parking of vehicles within its corporate limits, including the fixing and
collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility
basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation,
or otherwise, the land necessary therefor;
(8) Docks for pleasure boats, etc. For the acquiring, construction,
establishment, operation, extension, and maintenance of facilities for
the docking of pleasure water crafts or hydroplanes, or both, within its
corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for use
thereof, and, for such purpose or purposes, to acquire by gift, purchase,
condemnation, or otherwise, the land necessary therefor;
(9) Service stations. For regulating, restricting, and limiting the number
and locations of oil and gasoline stations;
(10) Buildings and zoning regulations; setback lines. For establishing
standards to govern the construction, alteration, equipment, or removal
of buildings and structures within the city; the zoning of the city in the
manner and for the purpose permitted by law; and, in any zoning
ordinance passed or effective in the city, or independently thereof, to
regulate and establish the line upon which buildings may be erected on
any street, lane or alley in said city, and to prevent such buildings being
erected nearer the street than such line;
(11) Trades, occupations and amusements. For the regulation of trades,
occupations, and amusements within the city, not inconsistent with
state and federal laws, and to prohibit such trades, occupations, and
amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare of its
inhabitants;
(12) Dangerous, offensive, etc., acts, conditions, etc.; nuisances. For
preventing injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city from
anything which is dangerous, offensive, or unhealthful, and to prevent
and abate nuisances and punish those occasioning them or neglecting
or refusing to abate, discontinue, or remove the same;
(13) Signs and billboards. For licensing, regulating, restricting, and limiting
the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards
within the city;
(14) Airports and aircraft. For establishing, acquiring, and operating
airports, either within or without its corporate limits, and for regulating
Sec. 2.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2.1
C:6
Sec. 2.2. Exercise of powers.
All powers granted to and possessed by the city shall be exercised as
provided in this Charter, by ordinance of the council, or by state law. Where
no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any power
granted to or possessed by the city and its officers, the council may provide
a procedure for the exercise thereof by ordinance or resort may be had to
any procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan which has
been enacted for the government of any political subdivision of the state or
for the exercise of such powers by the state itself.
all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of
promoting and preserving the public peace, safety, and welfare, for the
control and regulation of the use of the air above the city by aircraft of
all types, subject to the limitations imposed by law and the limitations
expressly hereinafter set forth:
A. No city revenues or funds shall be expended for the acquisition,
improvement; maintenance, or operation of an airport, owned by
the city, without voter approval except revenues or funds received
from any of the following sources or any combination thereof;
(i) Revenues derived by the city from airport operations;
(ii) State and/or federal funds, grants, or reimbursements
designated specifically for airport use;
(iii) Monies donated or contributed by business, industry, or the
public in general (other than contributions or donations from
the city itself or affiliated city agencies);
B. No airport shall be operated or maintained by the city except
pursuant to a lease or other contractual agreement with a fixed
base operator approved by the city;
C. No acquisition, improvement, or construction of an airport shall
commence, or federal or state grants or monies applied for until
legally enforceable pledges from business, industry, or the public in
general (other than contributions or donations from the city itself
or affiliated city agencies) are received by the city representing the
aggregate city contribution for such acquisition, improvement, or
construction;
(15) House trailers. For the prohibition or regulation of the use, occupancy,
sanitation, and parking of house trailers within the city, and the right of
the city to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because
of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on,
or attaching it to the ground by means of any temporary or permanent
foundation, or in any manner whatsoever.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.3
C:7
Sec. 2.3. Intergovernmental contracts.
The city shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency,
or with any number of combination thereof, by contract or otherwise as
may be permitted by law, to perform jointly, or by one or more, for or on
behalf of the other or others, any power or duty which is permitted to be so
performed by law or which is possessed or imposed upon the city and each
such governmental unit or agency.
Sec. 2.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2.3
C:8
CHAPTER 3
General Provisions Affecting Officers of the City
Sec. 3.1. Officers to be elected. [Amend. No. 20, 11-6-1984]
The elective officers of the city shall be the mayor and eight councilmen.
The mayor and the councilmen at large shall be elected by the vote of the
electors of the entire city, and the councilmen representing the wards of the
city shall be elected by the vote of their respective wards.
Sec. 3.2. Officers to be appointed.
The appointive officers of the city shall be a city manager, a city attorney,
a city auditor, a clerk, a treasurer, an assessor, a fire chief, a police chief,
a city engineer, and a constable. Upon the recommendation of the city
manager, and to assure the proper administration of city affairs, the council
may create additional appointive offices of the city, or may combine any
administrative offices in any manner not inconsistent with state law, and
prescribe the duties thereof. The creation of any additional administrative
office or combination thereof shall not directly or indirectly abolish or
diminish the office of city manager, or the responsibilities of that office, as
set forth in this Charter. The council shall set the compensation of the city
manager and the city attorney. The city manager shall set the compensation
of all other appointive officers, within and subject to budget appropriations.
Sec. 3.3. City employees generally.
All personnel employed by the city, who are not elected officers or declared
to be appointive officers by or under authority of this Charter, shall be
deemed to be employees of the city.
Sec. 3.4. Eligibility for office in city. [Amend. No. 11, 4-7-1969]
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, an elector of the city shall be
eligible to hold elective or appointive office, if he shall be a resident of the
city for two (2) years, and shall not be in default to the city or to any school
district located within the city; provided, however, that no person shall be
eligible for reappointment to the board of public works, library board or
the hospital board if he is then serving his second consecutive full term on
such board. A councilman elected from a ward shall have been a resident
thereof not less than 20 days prior to his nomination for election to such
office. In the case of appointive officers, the council may, by a 2/3 vote,
waive the requirement of residence in the city at the time, of appointment;
provided, that any person, for whom such requirement is waived, shall
become a resident of the city within 90 days following his appointment and
shall remain a resident of the city during the entire time that he shall hold
office in the city government. Failure so to become a resident of the city and
thereafter to be a resident of the city shall create a vacancy in the office to
which any such person was appointed.
Sec. 3.1 CHARTER Sec. 3.5
C:9
Sec. 3.5. Vacancies in office generally.
Any city office shall become vacant before the expiration of the term of such
office for any one or more of the following reasons:
Sec. 3.6. Removals by council.
The council may remove any elected officer of the city, or the city attorney,
for any one or more of the following reasons:
Sec. 3.7. Resignations.
Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the
clerk and shall be acted upon by the council at its next regular meeting
following receipt thereof by the clerk. Resignations of appointive officers
shall be made in writing to the city manager, in the case of officers
appointed by him, and shall be immediately acted upon by the council or the
city manager, as the case may be.
(a) The occurrence of any event or the doing of any act specified by state
law to create a vacancy, or authorizing the governor to remove from
public office;
(b) The absence from the city of any officer continuously for more than 60
days without permission of the council;
(c) In the case of the mayor and the members of the council, absence from
four consecutive regular meetings of the council, or 25% of such
meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be
excused by the council at the time it occurred and the reason therefor
entered in the proceedings of the council;
(d) Assumption by the officer of any office which is incompatible with the
city office held by him.
(a) When, after a hearing thereon, it shall be satisfied from sufficient
evidence submitted to it that such officer has failed to perform the
duties of his office for 90 days because of physical or mental disability.
(b) When it shall be satisfied from sufficient evidence submitted to it that
such officer has been guilty of official misconduct, wilful neglect of, or
gross inefficiency in the performance of his duties as officer of the city.
The council shall take no action under this provision upon any charges
against any officer of the city, until certified copies of such charges and
of all supporting affidavits and exhibits have been personally served
upon such officer and an opportunity, after at least 15 days' notice,
given him to be heard in his defense. No officer who has been removed
from office under authority of this provision shall be eligible to election
or appointment to any city office for a period of three years from the
date of such removal.
Sec. 3.5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 3.8
C:10
Sec. 3.8. Filling vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, or in any office the appointment
to which is made by the council, the council shall, within 30 days after such
vacancy occurs, except in the case of the city manager, appoint a person
who possesses the qualifications required of holders of said office until the
next city election, in the case of elective officers, and for the balance of the
term in the case of the city attorney.
If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office other than that of city manager,
city attorney, or supervisor, the city manager shall, within 30 days
thereafter, appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy in the manner
provided for making the original appointment.
Sec. 3.9. Shortening or extending terms of office.
Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of the elective
officials of the city and of officers of the city appointed for a definite term
shall not be shortened. The terms of officers of the city may not be extended
beyond the period for which any such officer was elected or appointed
except that an elective officer of the city shall, after his term has expired,
continue to hold office until his successor is elected or appointed, and has
qualified.
Sec. 3.10. Additional compensation; increase or decrease of
compensation.
The council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any city
officer, elective or appointive, to any employee, agent, or contractor after
the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. Nor shall the
salary of any officer, elective or appointive, be increased or decreased after
his election or appointment during any fixed term of office for which he was
elected or appointed.
Sec. 3.11. Oath of office.
Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his
office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by section 2 of article XVI of
the constitution of the state and shall file the same with the clerk, together
with any bond which he may be required by this Charter or by the council
to give. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section
within 10 days from the date of his election or appointment, such office shall
thereupon become vacant unless the council shall, by resolution, extend the
time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth.
Sec. 3.12. Surety bonds generally.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council may require
any officer or employee to give a bond, to be approved by the council,
conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the
office or employment concerned, in such sum as the council shall determine.
Sec. 3.8 CHARTER Sec. 3.12
C:11
All such officers or employees who receive, distribute, or are responsible
for the city funds shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge
of any officer or employee, or appointment of another person to such office
or employment, shall not exonerate such officer or employee or any sureties
of such officer or employee from any liability incurred by such officer,
employee, or sureties. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds
and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter. Unless otherwise determined by a 2/3 vote of
the council, bonds required by this section shall not be renewed upon the
expiration of the terms for which issued, but, in each case, a new bond shall
be furnished. No official bond shall be issued for a term exceeding three
years. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the clerk,
except that of the clerk himself, which shall be filed with the treasurer.
Sec. 3.13. Business dealings with city.
An officer of the city, who intends to have business dealings with the city,
either directly or indirectly, whereby he may acquire from the city any
income or benefits other than that provided as remuneration for his official
duties, shall file with the city clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth
the nature of his interest therein and that his participation therein is to
the general welfare of the city; such statement shall be transmitted to the
council or the board of the city having to do with such contract, and shall be
spread upon the proceedings of the council or such board and published in
full therewith. Confirmation of such contract shall be made by a 2/3 vote of
the council or the board having jurisdiction thereof. Any contract made with
such person other than as above provided shall be void.
Sec. 3.14. Giving of surety bonds, etc., forbidden.
No officer of the city shall give recognizance or give or become surety.
Any officer who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
misconduct in office.
Sec. 3.15. Delivery of office and its effects to successor.
Whenever any officer or employee shall resign, or be removed from office,
or the term of office for which he has been elected or appointed has expired,
he shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in the office or to his superior,
all books, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody which were necessary
to or which were obtained as a part of or were necessary to the performance
of his duties as such officer or employee. Any person violating this provision
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted therefore
in the same manner as public officers generally for the like offense under
the general laws of the state. Every officer and employee of the city shall be
deemed an officer within the meaning and provisions of such general laws
of the state for the purpose of this section.
Sec. 3.12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 3.15
C:12
CHAPTER 4
City Council
Sec. 4.1. City governing body; composition.
All legislative or policy forming powers of the city shall be vested in,
exercised, and determined by the council consisting of the mayor and the
eight councilmen of the city. In all cases where the word council is used
in this Charter, the same shall mean the "common council" of the City of
Holland and shall be synonymous with any term employed in any state or
federal law referring to legislative or governing bodies of cities.
Sec. 4.2. Nomination, election and terms of office of mayor and city
councilmen. [Amend. No. 20, 11-6-1984; amend. of 11-19-2004]
Unless modified by a primary election pursuant to Sec. 11.5 of the Charter,
at each regular city election, there shall be elected, by the electors of the
city at large, a mayor and one councilman from the city at large. One
councilman shall be nominated and elected from each of the three of the six
wards of the city. Councilmen to be elected from the wards of the city at any
election shall be nominated by the electors of their respective wards at the
primary election preceding such election. The mayor and one councilman
from the city at large shall be nominated by the electors at large at the
primary election preceding such regular city election. At the regular city
election held in the year 1953, and at the regular city election every fourth
year thereafter, councilmen shall be elected from the first, third, and fifth
wards of the city. At each other regular city election, councilmen shall be
elected from the second, fourth, and sixth wards of the city. The person
elected to the office of mayor shall hold office for a term of two years. Each
councilman shall hold office for a term of four years. All such terms of office
shall commence on and date from the Monday next following the date of the
regular city election at which they are elected or on the date the regular
city election would have been conducted except for the provisions of Sec.
11.5 of the Charter.
Sec. 4.3. Judge of qualifications of members.
The council shall be the judge of the eligibility and qualification of its own
members, subject only to review by the courts.
Sec. 4.4. Remuneration of members of council and mayor.
The mayor and each councilman shall be compensated for his service to
the city at the rate of $5 per meeting of the council actually attended by
him, but not to exceed the sum of $180 in any fiscal year of the city. The
mayor shall also receive $100 per year in addition to the compensation
received by him as a member of the council. Such compensation shall
be paid quarterly in each case, and, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid to the
Sec. 4.1 CHARTER Sec. 4.4
C:13
mayor and to members of the council for the discharge of any official duty
for or on behalf of the city during their terms of office.
Upon authorization of the council, reasonable expenses may be allowed to
its members when actually incurred on behalf of the city.
Sec. 4.5. Functional duties and powers of mayor.
Sec. 4.6. Mayor pro tem.
The council shall, at its first regular meeting following each regular biennial
city election, select one of its members to serve as mayor pro tem. The
mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor when, on account
of absence from the city, disability, or otherwise, the mayor is temporarily
unable to perform the duties of his office, and shall succeed to the office
of mayor in case of vacancy in that office. The mayor pro tem shall preside
over the meetings of the council during the absence of the mayor, at the
call of the mayor, and when the council is convened as a committee of the
whole. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor pro tem,
through advancement to the office of mayor, the council shall appoint one of
its elected members to fill such vacancy. Until such time as the council shall
so appoint a mayor pro tem, the line of succession of persons who shall act
as mayor shall be councilmen according to the numerical order of the wards
from which they were elected.
Sec. 4.7. Meetings; quorum; rules; journal; voting; public access to
records.
(a) Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the mayor
shall be recognized as the executive head of the city and shall preside
over all meetings of the council and preserve order thereat and shall
have and exercise all powers granted to mayors of cities by state law
and by this Charter.
(b) He shall be a conservator of the peace, and may exercise within the city
the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder, and shall have
the power to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid
in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, and to suppress riot
and disorderly conduct.
(c) He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as the council,
this Charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States
shall require.
(a) Regular meetings. The council shall provide by resolution for the time
and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular
meetings each month. If any time set for the holding of a regular
meeting of the council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting
shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which
is not a holiday.
Sec. 4.4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4.7
C:14
(b) Special meetings—Generally. Special meetings of the council may be
called by the clerk on the written request of the mayor, the city
manager, or any two members of the council, on at least six hours
written notice to each member of the council, designating the time,
place, and purpose of such meeting and served personally or left at his
usual place of residence by the clerk or someone designated by him.
Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements for the calling of special
meetings, any special meeting of the council at which all members of
the council are present, or, in the event that one or more of the
members may be absent, such member or members have, upon receipt
of notice, waived in writing, the requirement that notice may be given
at least six hours prior to the time specified for the holding of such
meeting, shall be a legal meeting; provided, that a quorum of the
council is present.
(c) Same—Transaction of business. No business shall be transacted at any
special meeting of the council unless the same has been stated in the
notice of such meeting.
(d) Meetings to be public; citizens to be heard. All regular and special
meetings of the council shall be open to the public and the rules of
order of the council shall provide that citizens shall have a reasonable
opportunity to be heard.
(e) Quorum. Five members of the council shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business at all meetings of the council, but in the absence
of a quorum, any number of members less than a quorum may adjourn
any regular or special meeting to a later date.
(f) Rules; journal; voting; public access to records. The council shall
determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal
in the English language of all its proceedings which shall be signed by
the clerk, and by the mayor after approval thereof by the council. The
vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all
resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" votes and entered upon the
record, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be
necessary to so state. The public shall have access to the minutes and
records of all regular and special meetings of the council at all
reasonable times.
(g) Each councilman shall be required to attend all meetings of the council.
The council may compel the attendance of its members and other
officers of the city at its meetings, and may enforce such fines for
nonattendance, in such manner as may, by ordinance, be prescribed.
Any member of the council, or other officer of the city, who refuses to
attend such meetings or conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat
shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The police chief, or such
other person as the council shall designate, shall serve as the sergeantat-
arms of the council in the enforcement of the provisions of this
section and of section 4.5(a) of this chapter.
Sec. 4.7 CHARTER Sec. 4.7
C:15
Sec. 4.8. Powers and duties generally—Providing for public health,
safety, etc.
Through the established departments and agencies of the city government,
together with any such departments or agencies as may be created under
authority of this Charter, the council shall provide for the public peace,
health, and recreation, and for the safety of persons and property.
Sec. 4.9. Same—Council as board of health.
The council shall constitute the board of health of the city, and shall possess
all powers, privileges, and immunities granted to boards of health by state
law. The mayor shall be president and executive officer and the clerk shall
be the secretary of the board of health. All actions taken by the council in
the exercise of the powers herein conferred shall be deemed to be actions
in its capacity as the board of health.
Sec. 4.10. Same—Licenses.
The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions upon
which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked, and may require
and exact payment of such reasonable sums for licenses, as it may deem
proper, of persons receiving such license from the city. When required by
ordinance, the person or persons receiving any such license shall, before
the issuance thereof, execute a bond to the city in such sum and with such
securities as shall be prescribed in such ordinance, conditioned for the
faithful observance of the ordinance under which the license is granted and
each other ordinance of the city, the provisions of which may be applicable
to the exercise of such license.
Sec. 4.11. Same—Public works generally.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council shall be charged
and entrusted with all responsibilities for the control of the parks, sewers,
sewage system and plants, and other public improvements and works of the
city, whether the same were in existence at the time this Charter became
effective or may be thereafter acquired.
Sec. 4.12. Same—Cemeteries.
The council shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary
for the establishment, maintenance, and protection of cemeteries, together
with improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter
acquired by the city either within or without its corporate limits. All
ordinances pertaining to public health and welfare in the regulation and
protection of public cemeteries shall apply equally to all cemeteries within
the city belonging to or under the control of, any church or religious society,
(h) Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, a councilman shall vote on
each question before the council for a determination, unless excused
therefrom by a vote of at least seven of the members of the council.
Sec. 4.7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4.12
C:16
or any corporation, company, or association. The city may cause any bodies
buried within the city, in violation of any rule or ordinance made in respect
to such burials, to be taken up and reburied in such a manner as shall
conform to the ordinances of the city. A plan for the platting, sale, and
perpetual care of all lots, plots, and lands therein shall be provided.
Sec. 4.13. Same—Streets, alleys, bridges, etc.
Except insofar as limited by state law and the provisions of this Charter, the
council shall have power to establish, vacate, use, control, and regulate the
use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, whether such public
places be located within or without the limits of the city, and the space
above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to,
the proper policing and supervision thereof; the licensing and regulation,
or the prohibition of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other
things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use
of sidewalks or streets of the city; and the licensing and regulation of the
construction and use of openings in the sidewalks or streets, and all vaults,
structures, and excavations under the same. When the council shall deem it
advisable to vacate, discontinue, or abolish any public place, street, or alley
or any part thereof, it shall, by resolution, so declare and, in such resolution,
shall appoint a time, not less than 30 days thereafter, when the council
shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of such hearing and of the
purpose thereof shall be published not less than once in each of the three
calendar weeks preceding such hearing in one of the newspapers of the city.
Objections to such declared action of the council may be filed with the clerk,
in writing. If any such objection shall be filed, such public place, street,
or alley, or part thereof, shall not be vacated, discontinued, or abolished,
except by affirmative vote of six members of the council.
Sec. 4.14. Same—Gifts and trusts.
The council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any gift or bequest
made to the city or any officer, board, or department thereof for any
municipal purpose and shall apply the same in accordance with the terms
and conditions, if any, of such gift and may, by contract or otherwise, if
permitted by or consistent with the terms of the gift or bequest, transfer any
such gift or bequest to or permit such gift or bequest to remain in the hands
of any person, group of persons, or corporation to administer the same for
the benefit of the city or any board or department thereof in accordance
with the terms and conditions of such gift or bequest.
Sec. 4.15. Same—Acquisition of property.
The council shall have the power to acquire for the city by purchase, gift,
condemnation, lease, construction, or otherwise, either within or without
the County of Ottawa, property of every type and nature which may be
required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purposes,
powers, and duties of the city government established in this Charter.
Sec. 4.12 CHARTER Sec. 4.16
C:17
Sec. 4.16. Same—City contracts and purchases.
The council shall be responsible for the control of letting and making
of contracts and shall provide by ordinance the necessary procedures
governing purchasing and making of contracts. Such ordinance shall specify
an amount below which and the purposes for which purchases may be made
by the city administration, either without specific authorization, or without
the necessity of formal competitive bidding, or both. The council, in its
discretion, shall have the right to reject any and all bids on work or on the
furnishing of materials for the city.
Sec. 4.17. Same—Restrictions on powers of the council.
Sec. 4.18. Investigations.
The council, or any committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have
the power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer
of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for
that purpose may summon witnesses to appear before the council or such
committee of the council to give information under oath pertinent to such
inquiry, administer oaths, and require the production of books, papers, and
other evidence. Any officer or employee of the city who shall fail or refuse
to obey such summons or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as
ordered under the provisions of this section, shall, on conviction thereof in
any court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$100, or imprisonment, for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the court.
(a) The council shall not have the power to make any contract with or give
any official position to any person who is in default to the city. Further,
the council shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery, or any
part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official
master plan of the city, or any property bordering on a water front, or to
engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in
excess of $0.10 per capita, unless approved by 3/5 of the electors voting
thereon at any general or special election.
(b) Except in those cases where a larger majority is required by state law
or the provisions of this Charter, no ordinance or resolution shall be
adopted or passed, nor shall any appointment be made, nor any person
removed from office, as required or permitted by this Charter, except by
the affirmative vote of at least five members of the council.
(c) There shall be no standing committees of the council; but this provision
shall not be construed to prohibit the appointment by the mayor, with
the approval of the council, of any temporary special committee to
make or perform any investigation or act required by the council to be
made or performed.
Sec. 4.16 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4.18
C:18
CHAPTER 5
City Legislation
Sec. 5.1. Status of Charter.
This Charter shall constitute the basic law of the City of Holland, subject
only to the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan and of the
United States of America.
Sec. 5.2. Existing legislation preserved.
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City of Holland,
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter and which are
in force and effect on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full
force and effect until repealed or amended.
Sec. 5.3. City legislation defined.
All legislation of the City of Holland, other than this Charter, shall be by
resolution or by ordinance. The word "resolution" as used in this Charter
shall be the official action of the council in the form of a resolution or a
motion, which does not constitute an ordinance or a step in the adoption
of an ordinance and such action shall be limited to matters required or
permitted to be done by resolution by this Charter or by state or federal
law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city
government. All other acts of the council, and all acts carrying a penalty for
the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance.
Sec. 5.4. Ordinances generally; ordinance book.
Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each
proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The
style of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "The City of Holland
Ordains:". Except in the case of any ordinance which the council, with the
approval of not less than six of its members, has voted to be an emergency
ordinance, no ordinance shall be finally passed by the council until at least
two weeks have elapsed following the introduction thereof. Any ordinance
of the city may be repealed by reference to its number and title. The section
or sections of any ordinance which is revised, altered, or amended shall be
reenacted, and published at length. All ordinances, when enacted, shall be
immediately recorded by the clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance
Book"; and it shall be the duty of the mayor and clerk to authenticate such
record by their official signatures thereon.
Sec. 5.5. Publication of ordinances.
Each ordinance passed by the council shall be published at least once after
its adoption by the council before it shall become operative. The date upon
which an ordinance shall become operative shall be specifically provided
in the ordinance itself. When the ordinance imposes a penalty, unless such
ordinance be declared to be an emergency ordinance by the council, such
Sec. 5.1 CHARTER Sec. 5.5
C:19
operative date shall not be less than 21 days from the date of its passage.
Publication of any ordinance as required herein may be accomplished by
publication of such ordinance, after its final passage, as a part of the
published proceedings of the council.
Sec. 5.6. Penalties. [Amend. of 11-2-1999]
Each person who violates any provision of this Charter shall be subject to
punishment by fine or imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment,
in the sound discretion of the court having jurisdiction. The council may
provide in ordinances passed by it for the punishment of violations of
the provisions thereof by fine or imprisonment, or by both fine and
imprisonment. No punishment for the violation of any city ordinance, any
provisions of this Charter, or for the commission by any officer of the
city of any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office,
shall exceed the maximum penalty provided by state statute, MCL 117.4i;
MSA 5.2082, as may be amended from time to time, and as the council in
compliance therewith may so provide in ordinances that it passes.
Sec. 5.7. Prosecution of ordinance violations—Time limit.
Prosecution for violations of the ordinances of the city shall be commenced
within two years after the commission of the offense.
Sec. 5.8. Same—Proceedings.
Except as the same may be inconsistent with or otherwise provided in
chapter 7 of this Charter, all proceedings relative to the arrest, custody,
and trial of persons accused of violation of the provisions of the laws and
ordinances of the city, shall be governed by, and conform to, as nearly as
may be, the provisions of law relating to the proceedings in criminal cases
cognizable by justices of the peace.
Sec. 5.9. Adoption of technical codes, etc., by reference.
The council may adopt, as a city ordinance, any provision of state law or any
detailed technical code or set of regulations which has been promulgated by
the State of Michigan, or by the [any] department, board, or agency thereof,
or by any organization or association which is organized and conducted
for the purpose of developing any such code or set of regulations, by
reference thereto in an adopting ordinance and without publishing such
technical code or set of regulations in full; provided, that such code or set of
regulations is fully identified in said ordinance and that the purpose of said
code or set of regulations shall be published with the adopting ordinance
and that printed copies thereof are kept in the office of the clerk, available
for distribution to the public at all times. Such publication shall contain
notice to the effect that a complete copy of said code or set of regulations is
available for public use and inspection in the office of the clerk.
Sec. 5.10. Compilation or codification of Charter and ordinances.
Sec. 5.5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 5.10
C:20
(a) Copies of all ordinances enacted and amendments to the city Charter
adopted after the effective date of this Charter shall be available at the
office of the clerk.
(b) Within two years after the adoption of this Charter, and at least once in
every 10 years thereafter, the council shall direct and complete the
compilation or codification and the publication of the Charter and of all
ordinances of the city then in force, in loose-leaf or pamphlet form, and
may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. The placing of
not less than 500 copies of such compilation or code in the office of the
clerk for public inspection and distribution shall constitute publication
of such compilation or code. No further publication of any such
compilation or codification of the ordinances of the city shall be
required for the validity thereof. In case the codification or compilation
shall have been maintained current and up-to-date during any ten-year
period, no recompilation or recodification of the ordinances of the city
shall be required during or at the end of such period.
(c) Copies of ordinances and of any compilation code, or codes referred to
in this chapter may be certified by the clerk, and, when so certified,
shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established
tribunals as to the matters contained therein.
Sec. 5.10 CHARTER Sec. 5.10
C:21

CHAPTER 6
Administrative Service
Sec. 6.1. City manager generally; acting city manager.
The council shall designate a qualified person to perform the duties of city
manager. He shall be selected by the council on the basis of training and
ability alone and shall serve at the pleasure of and be subject to removal
by the council at any time. With the consent and approval of the council,
the city manager may designate an administrative officer or employee of
the city to act as city manager if he is temporarily absent from the city or
unable to perform the duties of his office. No person who holds or has held
any elective city office shall be eligible for appointment as city manager or
acting city manager during a vacancy in that office, until two years have
elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he was elected.
Sec. 6.2. Functions of city manager.
The city manager shall carry out the policies formulated by the council.
In conformity with the provisions of this Charter, he shall be charged with
and be responsible to the council for the supervision and management of
all of the services, works, and undertakings of the city, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
ordinances of this city, the administrative provisions of this Charter, and
the applicable laws of the state, the administration of the annual budget
of the city and the efficient administration of all departments of the city
government. He shall keep the council fully advised at all times as to the
financial condition and needs of the city. He shall make all reports to the
council required by this Charter, the ordinances, and resolutions of the
council, and, in addition thereto, such as he may deem advisable. He shall
propose to the council an administrative plan for the administration of the
affairs of the city government and may propose amendments thereto at
any time, which plan and amendments, when approved by resolution of the
council shall constitute the administrative plan of the city. He shall have
the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
council, but shall have no vote thereon. He shall recommend to the council
for adoption by it such measures as he may deem expedient. In addition
to the duties prescribed by this Charter, the city manager shall perform
such other administrative duties as may be required of him by ordinance or
resolution of the council.
Sec. 6.3. Appointment, removal and terms of administrative
officers; relationship of council with administrative service.
The city manager shall appoint and remove all appointive officers of the
city, except the city manager and the city attorney; provided, that any
such appointment to or removal from the office of the clerk, city auditor,
treasurer, and assessor shall be effective only when formally approved by
resolution of the council. Each appointive officer of the city, except the
city attorney, shall hold office for an indefinite term. On or before the
Sec. 6.1 CHARTER Sec. 6.3
C:23
first Monday in May following each regular city election, the mayor shall
appoint the city attorney with the advice and consent of the council. The city
attorney shall hold office for a term of two years, beginning on and dating
from the first day of July of the year in which he is appointed to such office.
The council and its members shall deal with the administrative service
solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member
thereof shall give orders as to the performance of his duties to any
subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. Any violation of
the provisions of this section by a councilman shall constitute misconduct in
office.
Sec. 6.4. Relationship between administrative officers and city
manager.
All administrative officers of the city, except the city attorney, and the clerk
insofar as he serves as the clerk of the council and of the boards of the
city, shall be subordinate to and responsible to the city manager in the
performance of the duties of their several offices.
Sec. 6.5. Functions of the clerk.
(a) The clerk shall be the clerk of the council and shall attend all its
meetings and keep a permanent journal of every session of the council
in the English language;
(b) He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of the
council, which record shall be public;
(c) He shall have power to administer all oaths required for municipal
purposes by state law, this Charter, and the ordinances of the city;
(d) He shall be custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records
pertaining to the City of Holland, the custody of which is not otherwise
provided for by this Charter;
(e) He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents
and instruments requiring the seal of the city, and shall attest the same;
(f) He shall give ample notice to the proper officials of the city of the
expiration or termination of any franchise, contract, or agreement to
which the city is a party, and to city officers personally of the expiration
of the terms of their respective offices and of any official bonds required
of them;
(g) He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted
or passed by the council and perform any other duties required of him
by state or federal law, this Charter, the city manager, or the ordinances
and administrative plan of the city;
Sec. 6.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6.5
C:24
Sec. 6.6. Functions of the treasurer.
Sec. 6.7. Deputies of clerk and treasurer.
The clerk and the treasurer may appoint their own deputies, subject to
the written confirmation of the city manager. The clerk and treasurer may
terminate the status of their deputies at their pleasure, upon written notice
to the city manager. Such deputies shall, in each case, possess all the
powers and authorities of their superior officers, except as the same may be
from time to time limited by their superiors or by the city manager.
Sec. 6.8. Functions of the auditor.
(h) He shall be the recording clerk of the boards of the city and shall attend
all their meetings and keep a permanent journal, in the English
language, of every session thereof;
(i) He shall issue all licenses required to be issued by the ordinances of the
city;
(j) He shall be the chief election officer of the city.
(a) The treasurer shall have custody of all moneys of the city, the clerk's
bond, if any, and all evidences of value belonging to the city or held in
trust by the city;
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, he shall receive all
moneys belonging to and receivable by the city, that may be collected
by any officials or employees of the city, including license fees, taxes,
assessments, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the city,
and shall in all cases, give a receipt therefor;
(c) He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only
in such places as the council may determine and shall report the same
in detail to the city auditor;
(d) He is hereby vested with and shall exercise all powers, duties,
immunities, and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of
state, county, school district, and city taxes, assessments, charges, and
moneys as are conferred by law upon township treasurers to enforce
the collection of state, county, township, and school district taxes upon
real and personal property;
(e) He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by
state or federal law, this Charter, the ordinances and administrative
plan of the city, or by the city manager.
(a) The auditor shall keep and shall be the custodian of the books of
account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of all departments of
the city;
Sec. 6.5 CHARTER Sec. 6.8
C:25
Sec. 6.9. Functions of the assessor.
Sec. 6.10. Functions of the city attorney; special compensation.
The city attorney shall be the corporate counsel of the city. He shall give
his opinion in writing when requested to do so by the council, the city
manager or any board of the city. He shall act as attorney for the city
in all actions or hearings in all courts and before all legally constituted
tribunals or commissions whenever the city is a party thereto or requires
legal representation. He shall prepare or officially pass upon, in writing,
before execution, all contracts, franchises, bonds, or other instruments
in which the city is concerned. The salary, as set by the council, shall
be in contemplation of the normal duties of the office of city attorney.
The council may pay additional special compensation for extraordinary or
special undertakings, provided the special compensation is agreed to by
(b) He shall prescribe a method of keeping accounts for all departments
and offices of the city, which method shall be uniform as near as
practicable and shall conform to the laws of the state;
(c) He shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the city,
except claims for unliquidated damages. He shall not issue or sign any
draft, check, or warrant, until he has verified the correctness of the
account for which the same is issued. He shall not allow the payment of
any account unless the money has been appropriated therefor; nor shall
be issue or sign any draft, check, or warrant for any account against the
city, unless sufficient money is in the fund against which it is drawn;
(d) He shall examine and audit all books of account of the city treasurer
and of the municipal court at least once each month. At the end of each
fiscal year, and at any other time upon the direction of the council, he
shall examine and audit all books of account kept by each officer, board,
or department of the city;
(e) He shall prepare the annual budget of the city under the direction of,
and in the manner prescribed by, the city manager;
(f) He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by this
Charter, or by the city manager.
(a) The assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be
charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by state
law.
(b) He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in
the manner prescribed by this Charter, the ordinances of the city, or by
state law.
(c) He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by
state law, this Charter, the ordinances or administrative plan of the city,
or by the city manager.
Sec. 6.8 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6.10
C:26
the council and the attorney before the service for which such special
compensation is to be paid has been rendered.
Sec. 6.11. Special legal counsel.
The council may retain and compensate special legal counsel in relation
to any special project, undertaking, or litigation. Such counsel may be
employed to work independently in the special matter or in cooperation
with or as assistant to the city attorney.
Sec. 6.12. City police.
The police forces of the city shall have and exercise all the immunities,
privileges, and powers of police officers under the common law and statutes
of the state for the preservation of quiet, good order, and for the safety
of persons and property in the city. They shall arrest upon view, and with
or without process, any person found in the act of committing any offense
against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city amounting to a
breach of the peace and shall forthwith take such person before the proper
magistrate or court for examination or trial.
Sec. 6.13. Fire fighting and prevention.
The fire fighting and prevention forces of the city shall be responsible for
the use, care, and management of the city's fire fighting apparatus and
property and shall conduct such supervisory and educational programs
within the city and with its inhabitants and industrial and business interests
as will diminish the risk and potentiality of fires within the city. The Fire
Chief, or any person lawfully acting in his stead, may command any person
present at a fire to aid in the extinguishment thereof and to assist in the
protection of property thereat. If any person shall wilfully disobey any such
lawful requirement or other lawful order of any such officer, he shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter, which Charter constitutes the
governing law of the City of Holland, and shall be subject to punishment
therefor as in this Charter provided. The chief executive officer of the
fire forces of the city, or any person lawfully acting in his stead, with the
concurrence of the mayor, or of the city manager, or of any two councilmen,
may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed
necessary in order to arrest the progress of fire. Reimbursement by the city
for the cost of any such building to persons having an interest therein shall
be made in the manner provided by section 11 of chapter XXIX of Act No.
215 of the Public Acts of 1895, which section, insofar as it establishes the
procedure for such reimbursement, is hereby adopted and made a part of
this Charter by reference.
Sec. 6.14. Functions of other administrative officers.
The duties of all administrative officers, not otherwise provided for herein,
shall be those established by law and the administrative plan proposed by
the city manager and approved by the council.
Sec. 6.10 CHARTER Sec. 6.15
C:27
Sec. 6.15. Public welfare and safety.
The council shall maintain within the administrative service of the city such
city departments or agencies as may be required to provide for the public
peace and health and for the safety of persons and property.
Sec. 6.16. Merit system of personnel management.
The council may provide by ordinance for a merit system of personnel
management for the city. Such ordinance shall provide a professional and
impartial approach to municipal personnel problems based solely upon the
fitness, training, and experience of the individual with no discrimination on
account of political or religious opinion. It is the intent of this section to
secure the establishment of a merit system program as an integral part of
the administrative service of the city to the end that the handling of the
personnel activities will be done in a manner equitable to the city employee,
satisfying for the administrative officials to use, and, by increased efficiency
and improved administration, economical to the citizens.
Sec. 6.17. Pension plan.
The council may maintain for the benefit of the administrative officers and
employees of the city, either with the State of Michigan, or by a plan of its
own, a sound pension and retirement plan. No such plan, established by
the city, shall contain pension and retirement benefits to such officers and
employees which are less than the standards set by the state-wide pension
plan for municipal officers and employees established and administered by
the State of Michigan.
Sec. 6.18. Employees group benefits.
The council shall have the power to make available to the administrative
officers and employees of the city and its departments, and boards, federal
social security, if available, and recognized standard plans of group life,
hospital, health, or accident insurance.
Sec. 6.15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6.18
C:28
CHAPTER 7
Municipal Court
Editor's Note: The former Municipal Court of the city was abolished
pursuant to M. S. A., §§ 27A.9921 to 27A.9930. Accordingly, the provisions
of this chapter, relating thereto, have not been set forth in this volume.
CHARTER Sec. 6.18
C:29

CHAPTER 8
Supervisors
Editor's Note: The provisions of this chapter have been superseded by state
law. (See M. S. A., § 5.359(1) et seq.). Accordingly, these provisions are not
set forth in this volume.
CHARTER Sec. 6.18
C:31

CHAPTER 9
Budget and Finance Generally
Sec. 9.1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal and budget year of the city shall begin on the first day of July.
Sec. 9.2. Budget procedure generally.
On or before the 15th day of February in each year, each city officer and
department head shall submit to the city manager an itemized estimate of
the expenditures for the next fiscal year, for the department or activities
under his control. The city manager shall prepare a complete itemized
budget proposal for the next fiscal year of the city and shall submit it to the
council on or before the first day of April, preceding the fiscal year of the
city.
Sec. 9.3. Contents of budget document.
The budget proposal shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing
fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information:
Sec. 9.4. Budget hearing; notice; public inspection of budget.
A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption, at
such time and place as the council shall direct, and notice of such public
hearing shall be published at least one week in advance thereof by the clerk.
(a) Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department
and office of the city, showing the expenditures for corresponding items
for the current and last preceding fiscal years, with reasons for
increases and decreases recommended, as compared with
appropriations for the current year;
(b) Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city showing
the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized
and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any;
(c) Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the city from sources
other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the
amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources
for the last preceding and current fiscal years;
(d) A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case may be, for
the end of the current fiscal year;
(e) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and
delinquent taxes, and the amount to be raised from bond issues which,
together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the
proposed expenditures;
(f) Such other supporting schedules as the council may deem necessary.
Sec. 9.1 CHARTER Sec. 9.4
C:33
A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public for
inspection during office hours at the office of the clerk for a period of not
less than one week prior to such public hearing.
Sec. 9.5. Adoption of budget; appropriation; tax levy and limit.
Not later than the first meeting of the council in the month of May, the
council shall, by resolution, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and
shall in such resolution make an appropriation of the money needed for
municipal purposes during the ensuing fiscal year of the city and provide
for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and
personal property for municipal purposes, which levy shall not exceed 1 3/
4% of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city;
provided, that such levy may be increased by a majority of the electors of
the city voting at the election at which the proposition to do so shall be
so submitted, but such increase shall be limited to an amount which will
not cause the total levy under authority of this section to exceed 2% of the
assessed value of the real and personal property in the city.
Sec. 9.6. Funds for public improvements.
The council may establish and maintain a fund or funds for the purpose
of appropriating, providing, setting aside, and accumulating moneys to be
used for acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing public improvements
which the city is authorized by law to acquire, alter, or enlarge. Moneys
so appropriated, set aside, or accumulated shall not be transferred,
encumbered, or otherwise disposed of, except for the purpose for which
they were appropriated, set aside, or accumulated, unless approved by a
vote of 3/5 of the electors of the city voting thereon, at a regular or special
municipal election.
Sec. 9.7. Adherence to budget; transfer of operating
appropriations.
After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the
treasury of the city nor shall any obligation for the expenditures of money
be incurred, except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The council may,
however, transfer any unencumbered operating appropriation balance, or
any portion thereof, from one city operating fund to another, upon the
written recommendation of the city manager by a vote of not less than
six members of the council; provided, that any such appropriation balance
under the control of any board of the city may be transferred only with
the consent of such board. The balance in any budget appropriation, except
such as may be appropriated for the payment of any debt of the city, which
has not been encumbered at the end of each fiscal year shall revert to the
general fund and shall be subject to the allocations made in the budget of
the next fiscal year.
Sec. 9.4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 9.8
C:34
Sec. 9.8. Budget control.
At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more
often if required by the council, the city manager shall submit to the council
data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and
expenses to date. If it shall appear that the income of the city is less
than anticipated, the council may reduce appropriations, except amounts
required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be
necessary to keep expenditures within the income of the city.
Sec. 9.9. City deposits and depositories.
The council shall designate the depository or depositories for the city funds,
and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The council shall
provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by
the general laws of the state, except that personal surety bonds shall not be
deemed proper security.
Sec. 9.10. Withdrawal of funds.
Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all funds drawn from the
treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority and appropriation of
the council and by checks signed by either of two officers of the city, to
be designated by resolution of the council, and countersigned by the city
auditor. Each such check shall specify the fund or funds from which it is
payable and shall be paid from no other fund or funds.
Sec. 9.11. Independent audit.
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government
at least annually or more frequently if deemed necessary by the council.
Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants experienced in
municipal accounting and shall be completed within 90 days following the
close of the fiscal year. The results of such audit shall be made public in
such manner as the council may determine.
Sec. 9.12. Municipal borrowing and bonds generally.
Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this Charter, the
council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing
of money on the credit of the city and the issuing of bonds therefor, for
any purpose within the scope of its powers. The net bonded indebtedness
incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed 10% of the
assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city; provided,
that in case of fire, flood, or other calamity, the council may borrow for the
relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal
property, a sum not to exceed 3/8% of the assessed value of all the real
and personal property in the city, due in not more than five years, even if
such loan would cause the indebtedness of the city to exceed the limit fixed
in this Charter. In computing the net bonded indebtedness for the purpose
hereof, the following shall not be included:
Sec. 9.8 CHARTER Sec. 9.12
C:35
(1) Bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments,
even though they are also a general obligation of the city;
(2) Mortgage bonds, which are secured only by a mortgage on the property
or franchise of a public utility;
(3) The principal and interest of revenue bonds which are payable solely
from net revenues derived from the operation of the public
improvement purchased, acquired, constructed, improved, enlarged,
extended, or repaired, or any combination thereof, by the proceeds of
such bonds;
(4) Bonds issued to refund moneys advanced or paid on special
assessments for water main extensions.
The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any
outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of the
bonded indebtedness. No bond of the city, regardless of type or
purpose, shall bear interest at a rate to exceed 6% per annum.
The council may borrow money and issue the bonds of the city therefor
in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, which bonds
shall be either solely an obligation of the special assessment district,
or both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general
obligation of the city. All collections on special assessment rolls shall
be set apart in a special fund and shall be used for the purpose
for which they were levied and for the payment of the principal and
interest on any bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such
special assessments. If there be any deficiency in the special
assessment fund to meet the payment of any such principal and
interest, moneys shall be advanced from the general funds of the city
to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in such general fund
when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor.
Subject to the applicable provisions of state law, the city may borrow
money and issue its bonds therefor, the principal and interest of which
bonds shall be payable solely from the net revenues of the public
improvement purchased, acquired, constructed, improved, enlarged,
extended, or repaired, for the purpose of defraying the whole or a
part of the cost of purchasing, acquiring, constructing, improving,
enlarging, extending, or repairing any public improvement of the city
which the city is permitted by law to acquire, own, or operate.
Sec. 9.12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 9.12
C:36
Sec. 9.13. Unissued bonds.
No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any
purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and, if
any such bonds are not issued or sold within three years after authorization,
such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void.
The city may issue mortgage bonds beyond the general limit of
indebtedness prescribed by law for the purpose of acquiring,
extending, or improving any public utility, for supplying water, light,
heat, or power, owned or operated by it, or which it is authorized
to acquire; provided, that such mortgage bonds issued beyond the
general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law shall not
impose any liability upon the city, but shall be secured only upon the
property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise,
stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser
may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a
longer period than 20 years from the date of the sale of such utility
and franchise on foreclosure. Such mortgage bonds shall be sold to
yield not to exceed 6% per annum. In the event that any such mortgage
bonds are sold by the city, there shall be created a sinking fund by
setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public
utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage at
maturity.
The council may also borrow money on the faith and credit of the city,
to provide for the refunding from time to time of moneys advanced
or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions as
buildings shall be connected with such water main extensions, and for
the issuance of bonds therefor due in not more than 30 years in the
amount not to exceed $15,000 and at the rate of interest, which shall
not exceed 6%.
Sec. 9.12 CHARTER Sec. 9.13
C:37

CHAPTER 10
Taxation Generally
Sec. 10.1. Power to tax.
In order to carry out the purposes, powers, and duties of the city
government, established by this Charter, the city may assess, levy, and
collect taxes, rents, tolls, and excise or specific taxes.
Sec. 10.2. Subjects of ad valorem taxation; tax procedure generally;
exemptions.
The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the
same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law.
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied,
collected, and returned in the manner provided by state law. No exemptions
from taxation shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or
permitted to be made by state law.
Sec. 10.3. Assessment generally.
The assessor shall place a value, in accordance with state law, upon all
property, both real and personal, in the city, which is subject to taxation in
accordance with established assessment rules, techniques, and procedures.
Sec. 10.4. Assessment roll generally.
Prior to the first meeting of the board of review in each year, the assessor
shall make and complete an assessment roll in the manner and form
provided in the general tax law of the state.
Sec. 10.5. Board of review—composition; appointment,
qualifications, terms and compensation of members.
The board of review shall be appointed by the council and shall be
comprised of two officers of the city, other than the city assessor or the
city clerk, and three persons who are taxpayers of the city and have been
residents of the city for not less than three years. Such members who are
appointed from among the officers of the city shall be appointed annually in
the month of January to serve for one year. The remaining three members
shall be appointed in the first instance, one to serve for a term of one year,
one to serve for a term of two years, and one to serve for a term of three
years; and the council shall, annually thereafter in the month of January,
appoint one such member of the board to serve for a full term of three years.
The council shall set the compensation of the board of review.
Sec. 10.6. Same—Meetings generally.
The board of review shall meet on the first Tuesday following the first
Monday in March in each year at such place as shall be designated by the
council, and shall continue in session from day to day, for the purpose of
Sec. 10.1 CHARTER Sec. 10.6
C:39
considering and correcting the roll, for four days, and as much longer as
may be necessary. The board shall remain in session during such hours as
the council may designate, but not less than six hours on each of said four
days. If, for any cause, a quorum of the board of review does not assemble,
or in the event that such board shall fail or refuse to act, during the days
above mentioned, the roll, as prepared by the assessor, shall stand as if
approved by the board of review. The board of review shall hold a meeting
on or before the first Monday of April and at that meeting, shall complete
the review of the assessment roll submitted to it and shall endorse and
approve the same as provided by law.
Sec. 10.7. Same—Notice of meetings.
The clerk shall give notice to the public of the time and place of each
meeting of the board of review by publication at least once not less than two
weeks immediately preceding such meeting.
Sec. 10.8. Same—Organization, functions and proceedings
generally; oath of members; quorum; unauthorized changes, etc., of
assessment roll.
On the first day of its first meeting in each year, the board of review
shall elect one of its members Chairman. The clerk shall be secretary of
the board and shall attend its meetings. It shall be the duty of the clerk
to keep a permanent record of all the proceedings of the board and to
enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the board. It shall be the duty
of the assessor to attend all meetings of the board with the privilege of
participating therein, but without the right to vote upon any decision of the
board. The members of said board shall take the constitutional oath of office
which shall be filed with the clerk. A majority of the members of the board
shall constitute a quorum. For the purpose of reviewing and correcting
assessments, the board of review shall have the same powers and perform
like duties in all respects as are by the general tax law conferred upon
and required of boards of review in townships, in reviewing assessments in
townships for township, state, and county taxes. It shall hear the complaints
of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and, if it
shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or
omitted from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it
shall deem fit. In all cases, the assessment roll shall be reviewed according
to the facts existing on the assessment day and no change of the status of
any property after said day shall be considered by the board in making its
decision. Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person other than
the board of review shall make or authorize any change upon or additions
or corrections to the assessment roll.
Sec. 10.9. Same—Endorsement of assessment roll; validity.
After the board shall have completed its review of the assessment roll,
a majority of its members shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a
statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for
Sec. 10.6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 10.9
C:40
the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement
shall not affect the validity of such roll. Upon the completion of said roll and
from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the board of
review, the same shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school,
and city taxes and for any other taxes on real and personal property that
may be authorized by law and shall be conclusively presumed by all courts
and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set
forth in the general laws of the state.
Sec. 10.10. Clerk to certify levy.
Within three days after the council has adopted the budget for the ensuing
year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the
council determines shall be raised by general tax.
Sec. 10.11. City tax roll generally.
After the last day for the meeting of the board of review, the assessor shall
prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "city tax roll," and
upon receiving the certification of the amount to be raised, as provided in
the preceding section, the assessor shall proceed to spread the amounts of
the general city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations
set forth in said assessment roll. For the purpose of avoiding fractions in
computation on any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amount of the
several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by state
law. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. For
convenience, the city tax roll may be divided into volumes.
Sec. 10.12. Tax roll certified for collection. [Amend. No. 3,
4-6-1953]
After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the 1st day of July in
each year, the assessor shall certify said tax roll, and the mayor shall annex
his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the treasurer to collect from
the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein
opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and granting to him,
for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such
roll, all the power and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the
collection of taxes under the general laws of the state.
Sec. 10.13. Taxes constitute lien on property. [Amend. of 1-28-1997]
The city taxes thus assessed against personal property shall become at once
a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and
the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the thirtyfirst
day of December, prior to the levy of such taxes, become a lien upon
such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and
other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal
taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior and paramount, upon all
personal property of the persons so assessed from and after the thirty-
Sec. 10.9 CHARTER Sec. 10.13
C:41
first day of December, prior to the levy of such taxes, and shall so remain
until paid, which said tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims,
encumbrances and liens upon said personal property, whatsoever, whether
created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and
whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal property
taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall
operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal property
is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade.
Sec. 10.14. Notification of taxes due.
The treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the
payment of taxes, but notice shall be given to the taxpayers of the city, by
forwarding a statement of taxes due by first class mail, addressed to the
several owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed according
to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax
roll, which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes
on said roll. Failure on the part of the treasurer to give said notice shall
not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release any person or property
assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of nonpayment of
the same.
Sec. 10.15. Tax payment schedule; collection fees and interest.
City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the fiscal year when
levied. All taxes paid on or before the fifteenth day of August of such year
shall be collected by the city treasurer without the addition of any fee for
collection. There shall be added to all taxes remaining unpaid after the said
fifteenth day of August, a collection fee of 2%. All taxes not paid on or
before the tenth day of September of such year shall be certified by the
city treasurer to the city assessor, and such unpaid taxes and collection
fees shall then be spread upon the December general tax roll against the
descriptions of property and the several persons therein named for payment
and collection. To all such there shall be added for interest the sum of 4%
for the period from September tenth to January first next thereafter. An
additional collection fee of 3% shall be added to all charges on the tax roll
remaining unpaid on January tenth of the fiscal year in which such taxes
are spread. Such interest and collection fees shall be collectible in the same
manner as the taxes, assessments, and charges to which they are added.
All such collection fees, and all interest on city taxes shall be paid into the
general fund of the city.
Sec. 10.16. State, county, and school taxes.
For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the city for state,
county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as
a township, and all provisions of state law relative to the collection of
such taxes and fees to be paid therefor, the accounting therefor to the
appropriate taxing units, and the returning of property to the county
treasurer for nonpayment thereof shall apply to the performance thereof
Sec. 10.13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 10.16
C:42
by the treasurer, who shall perform the same duties and have the same
powers as township treasurers under state law. So long as school taxes or
any part thereof are collected at the same time as city taxes, they shall be
collected subject to the same privileges and conditions as city taxes under
the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 10.17. Clerk to certify unpaid taxes and special assessments to
assessor. [Amend. No. 4, 4-6-1953]
On or before the first day of November in each year, the clerk shall certify
to the assessor, all amounts which are required by this Charter or which
the council requires or orders to be assessed or reassessed in any street
district, sewer district, or other special assessment district, or upon any
description of real property, or against any person, as a special assessment
or otherwise within the city, together with a description of the land or name
and address of the person upon which or to whom the several sums are to
be assessed or reassessed with such further description and directions as
will enable the assessor to assess the several amounts upon the property
and persons chargeable therewith.
Sec. 10.18. Assessor to certify taxes, etc.; treasurer's bond, etc.
The assessor, upon completing the several rolls, shall certify to the clerk
the amounts of taxes levied in the roll for state and county purposes, and
for city and school taxes, special assessments, and other purposes; and
the clerk shall charge the said amounts to the treasurer. The treasurer
shall give bond to the county treasurer in the same manner as township
treasurers are required to do; and thereupon, and on or before the first day
of December, the assessor shall deliver certified copies of the several tax
rolls, with the taxes extended therein as aforesaid, to the treasurer, with
his warrant annexed thereto for the collection of the taxes therein. The
assessor, upon the completion of the several city tax rolls, shall certify to
the clerk the amounts of taxes levied therein.
Sec. 10.19. Contents, etc., of warrants annexed to rolls.
The warrant annexed to each and all of such rolls shall state the several
amounts levied therein to be paid into the city, school, and county
treasuries, respectively; and shall command the treasurer to collect from
the several persons named in said rolls the said amounts; and the warrant
shall authorize the treasurer, in case any person shall neglect to pay his
tax, to levy the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such
person.
Sec. 10.20. Lien for taxes, assessments and charges generally.
All taxes, assessments, and charges levied or spread in any such tax rolls
shall be and remain a lien upon the property until paid.
Sec. 10.16 CHARTER Sec. 10.21
C:43
Sec. 10.21. Apportioning of tax on portion of taxed property.
Any person owning an undivided share or other part of any parcel of real
property, assessed in one description, may pay the taxes assessed against
such description or may pay the share or part owed by him by paying an
amount having the same relation to the whole tax as the value of the part
on which payment is made bears to the value of the whole description and
the receipt given and the record of the receiving officer shall show that such
payment was made and the claimed interest upon which it was made.
Sec. 10.22. Return of delinquent tax roll to county treasurer;
collection.
All taxes, special assessments, collection charges, and interest on the city
tax roll which remain unpaid on the first day of March following the date
when said roll was received by the treasurer shall, on that date become
delinquent and shall be returned to the county treasurer in the same
manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township,
school, and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent
tax roll to be prepared by the treasurer and shall include all the additional
charges and interest which shall, in such return, be added to the amount
assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes, assessments,
charges, and interest, thus returned shall be collected in the same manner
as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the
provisions of the general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien
upon the lands against which they are assessed, until paid.
Sec. 10.23. Protection of city liens.
The city shall have power insofar as the exercise thereof shall not conflict
with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the state, to acquire
by purchase any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale,
or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan, or the fee owner, when
the purchase of such property is necessary to protect the lien of the city for
taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises and may hold, lease,
or sell the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city in the protection
of its tax lien shall be deemed to be for public purpose.
Sec. 10.21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 10.23
C:44
CHAPTER 11
Elections
Sec. 11.1. Qualifications of electors.
Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in the
State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next ensuing
regular or special city election, shall be entitled to register as an elector of
the City of Holland in the precinct in which he resides.
Sec. 11.2. Election procedure.
The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control as near
as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections, except
as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedures,
or require more than one publication of notice and except as otherwise
provided by this Charter.
Sec. 11.3. Regular city elections.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, a nonpartisan regular city
election shall be held on the first Monday in April in each odd numbered
year.
Sec. 11.4. Special elections.
Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the council,
adopted at least 40 days in advance of such election, or when required by
this Charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution calling a special
election shall set forth the purpose of each election. No more than two
special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year.
Sec. 11.5. Primary elections; when primary not held; when elected
at primary. [Amend. of 11-19-2004]
A nonpartisan city primary election shall be held on the date prescribed
by state law for the holding of general primary elections. If, upon the
expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any elective city
office, it appears that petitions have been filed for no more than twice the
number of candidates for such office, then no primary election shall be
held with respect to such office, and the clerk shall publish notice of such
fact. Candidates in number equal to twice the number of persons to be
elected to each city office, who receive the highest number of votes at any
such city primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to
the respective offices for which they are candidates. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in all primary elections, any candidate for an office who receives
a majority of all votes cast for candidates for that office shall be elected.
In cases where no primary election was held, persons named in petitions
shall be certified to the election commission to be placed upon the ballot
for the next subsequent regular city election. No person whose name is not
printed on the primary election ballot, but whose name is written thereon,
Sec. 11.1 CHARTER Sec. 11.5
C:45
or appears on the ballot on a sticker pasted thereon at such election, except
such stickers as have been placed thereon by the election commission as
provided by law, shall be nominated for election to any office, unless he shall
receive at least 25 votes nominating him for such office.
Sec. 11.6. Election commission.
An election commission, consisting of the clerk, the mayor, and the city
attorney, is hereby created. The clerk shall be Chairman. The commission
shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law
and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. The
compensation of all election personnel shall be determined in advance by
the council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the election
commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow.
Sec. 11.7. Notice of election.
Notice of the time and place of holding any city election and of the officers
to be elected and the questions to be voted upon, shall, except as herein
otherwise provided, be given by the clerk in the same manner and at the
same times as provided in the state election laws for the giving of notices
by township clerks in state elections.
Sec. 11.8. Voting hours.
The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed
by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections.
Sec. 11.9. Nomination petitions—Generally. [Amend. No. 9,
4-3-1967]
Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for any office, elected at large,
under this Charter shall file an official petition therefor with the clerk
signed by not less than 60 registered electors of the city, of which not less
than 10 shall be from each ward of the city. In the case of councilmen to
be elected from the several wards of the city, such petitions shall be signed
by not less than 20 nor more than 40 registered electors of the ward from
which such person seeks election. Such petitions shall be filed with the clerk
not later than 4:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on the sixth Monday prior
to the date of the regular city primary election. Official blank petitions in
substantially the same form as required by state law for nonpartisan judicial
officers, shall be prepared and furnished by the clerk. Before the clerk shall
furnish nomination petitions to any person, he shall enter thereon in ink the
name of the person desiring to become a candidate for office in the city, or
the person in whose behalf the petition is to be circulated, and the name of
the office for which he is to be candidate and no petition which has been
altered with respect to such entries shall be received by the clerk for filing
under the provisions of this section. Nomination petitions for the purpose
of filling a vacancy shall so state in connection with the name of the office
for which the petition is to be circulated. The clerk shall publish notice
Sec. 11.5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11.9
C:46
of the last day, time, and place for filing nomination petitions at least one
week before, and not more than three weeks before that date. No person
shall sign his name to more than one petition for any one office to be filled
at the next regular city election. Where any name appears on more than
one petition for the same office, such name shall not be counted upon any
petition for that office.
Sec. 11.10. Same—Filing and approval of petitions.
The clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions on official blanks
containing the required number of signatures for candidates having those
qualifications required for elective city officers by this Charter. When
petitions are filed with [by] persons other than the person whose name
appears thereon as a candidate, they may be accepted for filing only when
accompanied by the written consent of the person in whose behalf the
petition or petitions were circulated. The clerk shall, within five days after
the final filing date, determine the sufficiency of the signatures of each
petition filed, and if he finds that any petition does not contain the required
number of signatures of registered electors, he shall immediately notify
the candidate in writing of the insufficiency of his petition. Each petition
which is found by the clerk to contain the required number of signatures
of registered electors for candidates shall be marked "In Order" with the
date thereof, and he shall immediately so notify the candidate whose name
appears thereon, in writing.
Sec. 11.11. Same—Public inspection of petitions.
All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of
the clerk beginning five days after the final filing date for such petitions.
Sec. 11.12. Contents and form of ballots.
The names of all persons nominated for election to each city office,
including the names of candidates for election to membership on the council
who are nominated by the respective wards of the city, shall be placed upon
the city ballot for the election of qualified persons to fill such offices by the
electors of the city at large. The form of the ballot used in any city election
shall conform as nearly as may be to that prescribed by or in accordance
with state law for nonpartisan elections. The names of qualified nominees
for each office shall be rotated on the ballots.
Sec. 11.13. Canvass of votes. [Amend. No. 20, 11-6-1984; amend. of
11-19-2004]
The board of canvassers, as created and established by state law, shall
canvass the votes cast at all city elections. The board of canvassers shall
meet in accordance with the requirements of state law, and publicly canvass
the returns of such election, and shall determine the vote upon all questions
and propositions, and declare whether the same has been adopted or
rejected and what persons have been nominated for election or elected at
Sec. 11.9 CHARTER Sec. 11.13
C:47
such election. The candidates for the office of membership on the council,
nominated by each ward of the city entitled to nominate such candidates at
any city election, receiving the larger number of legal votes at such election
by the electors of their respective ward or elected at a primary pursuant to
Sec. 11.5 of the Charter, shall be deemed to have been elected to the office
for which he was a candidate. The candidates for the office of membership
on the council, nominated by the electors of the city at large or elected at
a primary pursuant to Sec. 11.5 of the Charter, receiving the larger number
of legal votes at such election of the city at large, shall be deemed to have
been elected to the office for which he was a candidate.
Sec. 11.14. Tie vote.
If, at any city election, there shall be no choice between candidates by
reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of votes,
then the council shall name a date for the appearance of such persons for
the purpose of determining the nomination or election of such candidate by
lot as provided by state law. Should any person or persons fail or refuse to
appear, in person or by representative, to determine the result of any tie
election at the time and place named by the council, such determination
shall be made by lot in his or their absence, at the direction and under the
supervision of the council. Such determination shall, in any event, be final.
Sec. 11.15. Recount.
A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or upon any
proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the
state.
Sec. 11.16. Recall.
Any elective official may be removed from office by the electors of the city
in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created
by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner prescribed
by law.
Sec. 11.17. Initiative and referendum—Generally.
Any ordinance may be initiated, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted
by the council may be had, by a petition, as hereinafter provided.
Sec. 11.18. Same—Petitions. [Amend. No. 21, 11-6-1984]
A petition initiating an ordinance, or requesting a referendum on an
ordinance, shall be signed by not less than 15% of the number of electors
of the city who voted for governor of the State of Michigan at the last
fall election held in the state. Before being circulated for signatures, all
such petitions shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. No such
petition need be on one paper but may be the aggregate of two or more
petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name in ink or
indelible pencil, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and place
Sec. 11.13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11.18
C:48
of his residence by street and number, or by other customary designation.
To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit that each
signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such
petition shall be filed with the clerk, who shall, within 10 days, canvass the
signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. No signature, in the
case of a petition initiating an ordinance, shall be counted in the canvass
thereof which was signed thereto more than six months prior to the date
on which such petition was filed with the clerk, or, in the case of a petition
requesting referendum on an ordinance or legislative act, shall be counted
in the canvass thereof which was signed thereto more than 30 days prior to
the date on which such petition was filed with the clerk, and, in any case,
a signature shall be disqualified if the date following such signature has
been altered in any manner. If any petition initiating an ordinance shall be
found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors
of the city, or to be improper as to form or not to be in compliance with
the provisions of this section, the clerk shall notify the person filing such
petition forthwith, and 10 days from such notification shall be allowed for
the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper,
the clerk shall certify such fact on the petition or not less than one paper
thereof, indicating the date and time of such certification, and shall present
the petition to the council at its next regular meeting.
Sec. 11.19. Same—Council procedures.
Upon receiving a petition initiating an ordinance or requesting a
referendum on an ordinance from the clerk, the council shall, within 30
days, either:
Sec. 11.20. Same—Submission of proposal to electors.
Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors in either
case, it shall be submitted at an election to be held not less than 40 days,
nor more than 90 days, after the date of action thereon by the council;
provided, that, if any election, other than a school election, is to be held, in
the city, for any purpose whatsoever, within 120 days after such action by
the council, such proposal shall be submitted to the electors of the city at
such election. If such proposal must be submitted at a special election, and
no such election may be held in the city because of any limitation thereof
imposed by law, then such proposition shall be submitted to the electors of
the city at the next election other than a school election, held in the city for
any purpose whatsoever. The result shall be determined by a majority vote
(a) If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the
petition, or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the city
and provide for the holding of the election thereon; or
(b) If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the
petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the
city and provide for the holding of the election thereon.
Sec. 11.18 CHARTER Sec. 11.20
C:49
of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by
the constitution or laws of the State of Michigan.
Sec. 11.21. Same—Limitation on referendum; suspension of
ordinance; amendment or repeal of initiatory ordinance; conflicting
ordinances. [Amend. No. 21, 11-6-1984]
No petition seeking referendum on an ordinance or legislative act of the
council shall be valid unless filed with the clerk within 30 days after the
effective date of an ordinance or of the adoption date of a resolution.
Certification by the clerk of the sufficiency of a petition for referendum
shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance or legislative
act pending repeal by the council or final determination by the electors as
the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory
proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the council for a period
of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should
two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting
provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those
provisions.
Sec. 11.20 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11.21
C:50
CHAPTER 12
Utility Franchises and Municipal Ownership of Utilities
Sec. 12.1. Conditions applicable to public utility franchises.
All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter,
whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject
to the right of the city:
Sec. 12.2. Procedures and requirements controlling franchise
ordinances, etc.
Every ordinance or resolution granting any franchise or right to occupy
or use the streets, highways, bridges, or public places in the city for any
purpose shall be complete in the form in which it is finally passed, and
remain on file with the clerk for public inspection for at least 30 days
before the final passage or adoption thereof, or approval for referral to the
electorate. No exclusive or irrevocable franchise shall be granted by the
city, unless such proposition shall have first received the affirmative vote of
at least 3/5 of the electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special
election. No such franchise ordinance, or resolution shall be approved by
the council for referral to the electorate until a public hearing has been held
(a) To repeal the same for misuse, or nonuse, or for failure to comply with
the provisions thereof;
(b) To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
(c) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products,
and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
(d) To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
(e) To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the council
to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public;
(f) To require the public utility to which any franchise is granted to permit
joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets,
alleys, and public places of the city, by the city, and other utilities
insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon
payment of reasonable rental therefor; provided, that in the absence of
agreement, upon application by the public utility, the council shall
provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and
the compensation to be paid therefor;
(g) To pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the
streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, as shall arise from
its use thereof and to protect and save the city harmless from all
damages arising from said use.
Sec. 12.1 CHARTER Sec. 12.2
C:51
thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the clerk his
unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election
for such purpose shall be ordered by the council unless the expense of
holding such election, as determined by the council, shall have first been
paid to the treasurer by the grantee.
A franchise ordinance, or ordinance granting or authorizing the granting of
a license to use or occupy the streets of the city for public utility purposes
which is subject to revocation at the will of the city, may be enacted by the
council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted nor become
operative unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally
enacted and remain on file with the clerk for public inspection for at least
four weeks before the final enactment thereof.
Sec. 12.3. General powers relative to municipal utilities and
services. [Amend. No. 16, 11-8-1977]
The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all powers granted to
cities by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan to
acquire, by purchase or condemnation, the franchises, if any exist, and the
property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in the
electric, light, gas, heat, water and power business and for the purchase and
condemnation of private property for any public use or purpose within the
scope of the powers specified herein, to construct, own, operate, improve,
enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate
limits, airports, landing fields and aeronautical facilities, hospitals and
public utilities, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities
for treating and supplying water, and for supplying light, heat, power, gas,
sewage treatment and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the city
and its inhabitants; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas
and other public utility services, without its corporate limits to an amount
not exceeding the limitations set by the state constitution. The power to
supply, as herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to extract
and process water, electricity or gas from natural resources, to manufacture
the same or to purchase the same from others.
Sec. 12.4. Board of public works generally—Management of electric
and water utilities of the city.
The board of public works of the City of Holland, having been created,
is hereby continued, and shall be known and designated as the board of
public service.1 Such board, subject only to the approval of the council,
is hereby charged with the duty, power and responsibility of constructing,
maintaining, improving, and extending the electric and water plants and
distribution systems of the city, together with any public heating which may
be a by-product thereof, and with the management, supervision, and control
thereof. The title of all grounds and rights in real or personal property
held, purchased, or otherwise secured by or on behalf of said board, shall
1. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 12.4
C:52
be taken in the name of the City of Holland; and said water, electric and
heating plants and works, and everything pertaining thereto, shall be the
property of the city, and all contracts and purchases made by said board,
shall be in the name of the city.
Sec. 12.5. Same—Status of board.
The board of public service [works]2 and the works, and utilities, under its
management, supervision, and control, shall constitute a department of the
city government.
Sec. 12.6. Same—Composition; appointment, qualifications and
terms of members; filling vacancies. [Amend. No. 12, 4-7-1969]
The board of public works shall be composed of the five members of that
board, who held office on the date that this Charter became law, and
the city manager. Said members shall hold office for the balance of the
terms for which they were elected or appointed prior to the date that this
Charter became law. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the council, during the month of
June of each year. Each person appointed as a member of the board of
public works shall possess the qualifications required by this Charter for
elective officers of the city and shall be appointed to serve for a term of five
years commencing on and dating from the first day of July, next following
his appointment; provided, that persons appointed to fill a vacancy shall
assume office immediately upon appointment and shall hold office only
for the balance of the term of the person creating such vacancy. The city
manager, as a member of the board of public works, shall have the duty of
attending all meetings of the board, shall be privileged to participate in all
discussions and proceedings of the board, but shall not be entitled to vote
on questions before the board.
Sec. 12.7. Same—Organization; officers; quorum.
Said board shall, annually during the month of July, organize and elect one
of its appointed members president. A majority of the board, other than the
city manager, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
clerk of the city shall be ex officio clerk of the said board, but shall have no
vote therein. He shall have access to all of its records and papers.
Sec. 12.8. Same—Public service planning; annual report.
The board of public service [works]3 shall be charged and entrusted with the
responsibility for the planning of improvements of, additions to, extensions
of, and the operation and maintenance of the public service works of the
city relating to the supplying of electricity and water to the inhabitants of
2. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
3. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.4 CHARTER Sec. 12.8
C:53
the city, and within any limits provided by law, the territory surrounding
the city. The board shall, annually in the month of March, make a report
to the council, by filing the same with the clerk, which report shall present
an analysis of the status and needs of the public service works under the
board's jurisdiction and the recommendations of the board with respect
thereto. Such report shall contain estimates of the costs of all improvements
of, additions to, and extensions of the public services of the city which
are recommended to be made during the ensuing fiscal year of the city,
together with explanations thereof. The council shall have power to modify
or disapprove any improvement of, addition to, or extension of the public
service works of the city which may be recommended to be made in such
report; provided, however, that unless the council shall modify or
disapprove of any such recommended improvement, addition, or extension,
or any number or combination of the same within 30 days after the date
of the first meeting of the council, following the filing of such report with
the clerk, such report shall be deemed to be approved by the council. Such
report, as approved or modified by the council shall constitute the public
service works program of the board of public service [works] for the fiscal
year following that in which it is filed and it shall not again be necessary
for the board to secure the approval of the council for the making of any
improvement of, addition to, or extension of the public service works of the
city which is made in accordance with such report as approved or modified
by the council. Except as provided in section 12.9, the board of public
service [works] shall make no improvement of, addition to, or extension of
any public service work of the city in any year, except in accordance with
such report as approved or modified by the council with respect to both
the nature and the estimated cost thereof, unless the same shall be first
approved by the council.
Sec. 12.9. Same—Budget; additional expenditures.
On or before February 15, of each year, the board of public service [works]4
shall file with the city manager for the consideration of the council, a budget
proposal and a payroll schedule for the next fiscal year of the city. Such
budget shall set forth estimates, in substantially the form required by this
Charter for budget proposals of the city, of the amount of money, other
than moneys estimated to be required for improvements of, additions to, or
extensions of the public service works of the city under its control which,
according to the judgment of the board, will be required for the public
service works of the city during the ensuing fiscal year of the city. The
budget proposal of the board of public service [works] shall be appended
to and made a part of the budget proposal of the city which is submitted to
the council by the city manager. The estimates of the board of public service
[works], contained in its budget proposal, may be modified or adopted by
the council. In the event that the council does not act upon or complete its
action upon such proposed budget by the first day of June, following the
filing thereof with the clerk, such proposed budget shall be presumed to
4. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.8 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 12.9
C:54
have been approved by the council and shall be the budget of the board
for the ensuing fiscal year of the city just as though formally approved
by the council. The board of public service [works] shall administer its
own budget. With the consent of the council, the board may exceed any
budget appropriation or allotment where it can transfer a sufficient amount
therefor from unencumbered balances within its budget. All proposed
expenditures of the board of public service [works] which are not included
in the board's planning report provided in section 12.8, or its budget,
as approved by the council, shall be approved by the council before any
obligation for such expenditures shall be incurred by the board; provided,
however, that when by unanimous action of the board, it is deemed
necessary for the proper functioning of any utility under the board's
jurisdiction to install or construct works, or purchase material for the
extension of, or addition to, any such utility beyond its yearly planning or
budget report, and when the cost of such extension, addition, or purchase
does not exceed the total sum of $1,000, and the money to pay the same
is or will be available in the unencumbered funds of the board, then such
extension, addition, or purchase may proceed without further authorization;
provided, further, that the total cost of all extensions, additions, or
purchases made or done under authority by this proviso shall not exceed
the sum of $5,000 in any fiscal year of the city.
Sec. 12.10. Same—Employment of superintendent of utilities and
other operating personnel.
Subject to budget allowances therefor, and without the necessity of the
approval of the council, the board of public service [works]5 shall have
power to employ a superintendent of utilities and all personnel deemed
by the board to be necessary for carrying on the supervision, operation,
maintenance, and general conduct of the public service works of the city
entrusted to it by the provisions of this Charter and budget allowances
therefor.
Sec. 12.11. Same—Expenses and funds generally.
The expenses of conducting the affairs of the board of public service
[works]6 shall be defrayed from the revenues of the public service works of
the city under its control, or may be paid or supplemented from the general
funds of the city, if the council shall so determine with the concurrence of
the board of public service [works]. All funds earned, raised, or realized
by the board shall be deposited with the treasurer who shall give a receipt
therefor and file a copy thereof with the city auditor. The treasurer shall
deposit all such receipts to the credit of the proper fund or account of the
city.
5. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
6. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.9 CHARTER Sec. 12.12
C:55
Sec. 12.12. Same—City auditor to provide system of accounts; board
accounts generally.
Separate accounts shall be provided for and kept by the city auditor, in the
form required by state law, for each public service work which is owned
by the city and operated by the board. Such accounts shall show the value
of any service rendered to or by such public service work or works of
the city with reference to the city itself. Such accounts shall take into
consideration and preserve, for the use for which the same were set aside
and accumulated, all funds of the city which stand to the credit of the
board of public works of the city at the time that this Charter became law.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all funds raised for, or realized
from the operation of such public service works and utilities of the city
shall remain in the accounts to which they have been allocated and no part
thereof shall be transferred from or revert to any other account or fund at
the close of any fiscal year.
Sec. 12.13. Same—Annual audit; other reports to council.
The cost of making the annual audit of the accounts of the board of public
service [works]7 shall be defrayed from the funds of the board. The annual
audit of the affairs of the board of public service [works] shall show the
financial status of the affairs of the board and, as nearly as possible, the
financial results of the city ownership and operation of the public service
works of the city for which the board is responsible. The board shall also
make such other reports and furnish such other information to the council
as that body shall require by ordinance or resolution.
Sec. 12.14. Same—Purchase of water or electricity by city.
With the consent of the council, the board of public service [works]8 may
purchase water or electricity from any person, firm, or corporation,
municipal or private, if such purchase may be deemed by the board to be in
the best interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof.
Sec. 12.15. Other city utility services.
The council shall be charged with the responsibility for constructing,
maintaining, improving and extending the sewage disposal facilities, the fire
alarm system, and such other utilities of the city as existed on the date
this Charter became law or which may thereafter have been acquired by
the city. Such facilities shall constitute one or more separate departments
of the city government or may be assigned by resolution of the council to
an appropriate department or division of the city government, or shall be
under the administrative charge and responsibility of the city manager as
the council shall determine.
7. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
8. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 12.16
C:56
Sec. 12.16. Limitation on use of utility funds.
The receipts from the operation of the electric and water utilities and
income from investments shall be applied to the purposes thereof, in
accordance with the budget appropriations, including the payment of bonds
outstanding or which may be issued for the purposes of such utilities and
the interest thereon. The net income shall be determined by deducting from
the receipts from operations and income from investments all expenses
incurred and charges made or allowed for and on behalf of such utility
in accordance with budget appropriations, or by appropriate action under
authority of section 9 of this chapter, and after the setting aside of moneys
for the payment of principal and interest on indebtedness in accordance
with any ordinance or resolution authorizing such indebtedness. Up to
50% of the annual net income of the board may be appropriated by the
council to the general purposes of the city. All such net income which is
not so appropriated shall be placed in proper accounts or funds of the city
which shall be established as reserves for future operations, replacement,
extension, or improvement of such utilities. Nothing herein contained shall
be interpreted to limit the power of the council to place, for any year, in
such accounts or funds a larger percentage than 50% of such net income to
the purposes of such utilities, in the event that such appropriation shall be
requested by the board of public service [works]9 and be approved by seven
members of the council.
The foregoing limitation of 50% of such net income which may be
appropriated by the council for general purposes may be increased in any
year by and with the consent of the board of public service [works], and the
consent of seven members of the council.
Such funds so established as reserves for the purposes of the utilities
may be invested and reinvested by the city auditor as the board of public
service [works] shall direct, by and with the approval of the council, in
such investments as are authorized by law for investment by fiduciaries.
Said funds may be used for the purposes of such utilities upon the
recommendation of the board of public service [works], by and with the
consent of the council.
The electors of the city may, by a 3/5 vote of the qualified electors voting
on such proposal at a regular or special election, approve an appropriation
of more than 50% of the net income for any year for general purposes,
or may approve the placing of more than 50% of the net income for any
year in the reserve accounts or funds as above provided for the purposes of
such utilities, or may approve for other municipal purposes the use of such
accumulated and unallocated accounts or funds as have been established.
9. Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of this Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.16 CHARTER Sec. 12.17
C:57
Sec. 12.17. Utility rates and charges generally.
With the approval of the council, the board of public service [works]10 shall
fix the rates to be charged for all public utility services under its control.
The council shall fix the rates to be charged for all public utility services
of the city which are not under the control of the board of public service
[works]. When any person, firm, or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay
to the city any sums due on utility bills, such service upon which such
delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued by the proper board
or department of the city and suit may be instituted by the city for the
collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 12.18. Lien for utility charges; collection of delinquent
charges.
Except as otherwise provided, or limited by state law, the city shall have
as security for the collection of all charges, a lien upon the premises to
which such utility services were supplied. Such lien shall become effective
immediately upon the distribution or supplying of such utility service or
services to such premises.
All unpaid charges for utility services furnished to any such premises,
which, on the 30th day of June of each year, have remained unpaid for a
period of three months, or more, shall be reported by the city auditor to
the council at the first meeting thereof in the month of July. The council
thereupon shall order the publication in a newspaper published in the
city, of notice to all owners of property within the city that all unpaid
utility charges which have remained unpaid for a period of three months
or more prior to the 30th day of June, and which have not been paid
by the thirty-first day of July, shall be assessed upon the city's tax roll
against the premises to which the utility services, for which the unpaid
charges accrued, were supplied or furnished; and that such charges shall
be collected in the same manner as the city taxes on said tax roll.
All such utility charges, which remain unpaid on the 31st day of July, shall be
transferred to the city's tax roll and assessed against the premises to which
the utility service, for which the unpaid charges accrued, was supplied or
furnished, and shall be collected with, and in the same manner as, city
taxes. If the same have remained delinquent and unpaid after the expiration
of the time limited in the treasurer's warrant for the collection of taxes
levied in said tax roll, such charges shall be returned to the county treasurer
to be collected in the same manner as the lien created by city taxes on the
delinquent tax roll of the city.
In the event that any provision of this section shall prove to be incomplete
or inadequate for the carrying out of the purposes thereof, the council shall
provide by ordinance such additional procedures as may be required for
the collection of public utility charges, and, for such purpose, shall have all
10.Editor's Note: See section 12.20 of the Charter which changes the name of the "board of
public service" to the "board of public works."
Sec. 12.17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 12.18
C:58
the powers granted to cities by Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of 1939, as
amended.
Sec. 12.19. Disposal of plants, etc.
Except for purposes permitted by law, the city shall not sell, exchange,
lease, or in any other way alien or dispose of the property, easements,
income, equipment, privileges, or assets belonging to and appertaining to
any utility which it may own or acquire, unless and except such proposition
shall first have been submitted to the qualified electors of the city at a
special city election called for that purpose in the manner provided in this
Charter, and approved by them by a 3/5 majority vote of the electors of the
city voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or
other forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and of no
effect. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or
exchange of any article of equipment of any city-owned utility which is worn
out or useless, or which is being or has been replaced by new and improved
machinery or equipment.
Sec. 12.20. Board name change, etc. [Amend. No. 1, 4-2-1951]
The name of the "board of public service" is hereby changed to the name
of "board of public works," and in each place in the city Charter where the
name of "board of public service" appears, the same shall be deemed to
mean the "board of public works."
The board of public works shall succeed to all the property, money,
contracts, rights, credits, effects, records, files, books and papers belonging
to the board of public service, and shall perform all the duties, obligations
and functions specified in the Charter to be performed by the board of
public service.
Sec. 12.18 CHARTER Sec. 12.20
C:59

CHAPTER 13
Reserved11
11.Editor's Note: Sections 13.1—13.5 pertaining to the historical/cultural commission were
deleted in their entirety by an amendment approved by the electorate on Jan. 28, 1997.
CHARTER Sec. 12.20
C:61

CHAPTER 14
City Library
Sec. 14.1. Library board—Continued; composition; appointment,
qualifications and terms of members; vacancies. [Amend. No. 22,
11-7-1989]
Sec. 14.2. Same—Organization; officers; quorum; appointment of
librarian and other personnel; audit of accounts.
The library board shall, at its first regular meeting in the month of July in
each year, organize and elect one of its members president. The clerk shall
be the clerk of the board. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. The board shall appoint a librarian and all
necessary personnel required to operate and conduct the affairs entrusted
to it, subject to budget allowances therefor. The accounts of the board shall
be subject to audit at the time the general accounts of the city are audited.
(a) The library board of the City of Holland, having been created, is hereby
continued. The library board shall be composed of five members,
appointed in compliance with the provisions of the Charter and such
additional members as may be added pursuant to subsection (b) below.
The appointed members existing on the date of this amendment shall
continue to hold office for the balance of the terms for which they were
appointed, and thereafter, their successors shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the council, during the month of
June in each year for a term of five years. Each person appointed as a
member of the library board by the city shall possess the qualifications
required by this Charter for elective offices of the city and shall be
appointed to serve for a term of five years, commencing on the first day
of July, following their appointment. A person, appointed to fill a
vacancy, shall assume office immediately upon appointment and shall
hold office only for the balance of the term of the person creating such
vacancy.
(b) There may be added to the library board one or more township
members, appointed by their respective township boards. No township
shall have more than one member on the library board. The addition of
a township member shall be only for the term of any intergovernmental
contract for library services, or renewal thereof, entered into between
the city and the township. The removal and term of the appointment of
the township member shall be governed by the terms, conditions and
agreements of the applicable intergovernmental contract. The township
member shall have all rights, privileges and duties, without
qualification, as any city member of the library board.
Sec. 14.1 CHARTER Sec. 14.3
C:63
Sec. 14.3. Same—Meetings; powers and duties generally; bylaws,
rules and regulations.
The library board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar
month, and shall be charged and entrusted with the management,
supervision, and control of all city library facilities which are or shall be
owned or operated by the city and shall have power to make and adopt
all such bylaws, rules, and regulations as they may deem necessary and
expedient for the transaction of their business, not inconsistent with the
general ordinances of the city, or the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 14.4. Same—Annual estimate for library purposes.
On or before the fifteenth day of February of each year, the board shall
submit to the council careful estimates in detail of the amount of money
which, according to the judgment of the board, will be needed for the
library facilities of the city during the ensuing fiscal year of the city, which
estimates may be increased, modified or adopted by the council as in its
judgment may seem justifiable.
Sec. 14.5. Same—Budget and appropriation for library board;
additional expenditures. [Amend. No. 8, 10-3-1964]
The council shall, during the month of May, in each year, adopt a resolution
providing a budget for, and an appropriation of the money needed by, the
library board for the operation of the library facilities of the city during
the ensuing fiscal year of the city. The board shall administer its own
budget. With the consent of the council, the board may exceed any budget
appropriation or allotment where it can transfer a sufficient amount
therefor from unencumbered balances within its budget. All proposed
expenditures of the library board which are not included in the board's
budget, as approved by the council, shall be approved by the council, before
any obligation for such expenditures shall be incurred by the board.
Sec. 14.6. Library receipts to city treasurer; library fund.
The board shall pay daily to the city treasurer all moneys received by it and
shall file with him a detailed statement thereof and shall file a copy of such
statement with the receipt of the treasurer attached thereto, with the clerk.
The treasurer shall credit all such moneys to a fund within the accounts of
the city, to be known as the "library fund."
Sec. 14.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14.6
C:64
CHAPTER 15
Public Improvements
Sec. 15.1. City may perform public work.
The council shall have power to do any public work or make any public
improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase
of the necessary supplies and material with separate accounting as to
each improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after
competitive bidding. The council shall also have power to do any public
work or make any public improvement under any legally constituted plan
under which labor is furnished by any other government unit, department,
or agency of the United States, or the State of Michigan, or which is wholly
or in part financed by them or either of them.
Sec. 15.2. General powers relative to improvements and special
assessments.
The council shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local
or public improvement, and to determine that the whole or any part of
the expense shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property
especially benefited.
Sec. 15.3. Resolution to proceed with public improvement.
No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary
profiles, plans, specifications, and estimates of cost, shall be made for any
public improvement, the cost of which is to be paid by special assessments
upon the property benefited thereby, until the council has passed a
resolution determining to proceed with such public improvement as
hereinafter provided and required.
Sec. 15.4. Cost of acquired property added.
Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation, or otherwise, for the
purpose of any public improvement, the cost thereof, and of the proceedings
required to acquire such property, may be added to the cost of such
improvement.
Sec. 15.5. Report of city manager.
Before the council shall consider the making of any public improvement, the
same shall be referred by resolution to the city manager directing him to
submit a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications,
estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description
of the assessment district or districts, and such other pertinent information
as will permit the council to decide the cost, extent, and necessity of the
improvement proposed, and what part or portion thereof should be paid
by special assessments upon the property benefited and what part, if any,
should be paid by the city at large. The council shall not determine to
proceed with the making of any local special improvement until such report
Sec. 15.1 CHARTER Sec. 15.5
C:65
has been submitted by the city manager, nor until after a public hearing
thereon has been held by the council.
Sec. 15.6. Resolution of determination on project. [Amend. No. 5,
4-6-1953]
After the city manager has presented the report hereinbefore required
for making any public improvement as requested in the resolution of the
council and after it has reviewed said report, a resolution may be passed
determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature
thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such
improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property
benefited, and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large;
designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected;
designating the manner by which the benefits to be derived by such
improvement by property located in such district shall be measured and
assessed; designating a date and time when the council will hold a public
hearing on such improvement, directing the clerk to publish notice of
a public hearing for the purpose of giving an opportunity for interested
persons to be heard, which notice shall be published at least one week prior
to the holding of such hearing, and placing the complete information on file
in the office of the clerk where the same may be found for examination.
Sec. 15.7. Vote required upon objections to improvement.
If at, or prior to, the hearing by the council on the making of any public
improvement, more than 50% of the number of owners of privately owned
real property to be assessed for any improvement shall object in writing
to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by
proceedings authorized by this chapter without a 2/3 vote of the members
of the council.
Sec. 15.8. Determination by the council; resolution of approval, etc.
At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the council may
determine to proceed with the improvement without change, or to modify
the scope of the public improvement or the assessment therefor, or both,
as they [it] shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole, or
to abandon the improvement. If the determination of the council shall be to
proceed with the improvement in any manner, a resolution shall be passed
approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, and estimates of
cost, and directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in
accordance with the council's determination and report the same to them
for confirmation, which special assessment roll may be ordered to be made,
either forthwith, or after the completion of the public improvement so
ordered.
Sec. 15.5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 15.9
C:66
Sec. 15.9. Special assessment roll generally—preparation, etc.
The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of
land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement
and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount which each such lot
or parcel of land, together with the improvements thereon is deemed to be
or capable of being benefited by the improvement to which such special
assessment roll relates, together with the amount to be collected at the
time of the collection of each installment of deferred special assessment, if
the decision of the council shall be to collect the cost of such improvement
in installments. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the
city manager's estimates of cost, as approved by the council; provided, that
in the event that the special assessment roll is ordered to be made after
the completion of the improvement ordered to be made by the council, the
amount so spread shall be based upon the actual cost of the improvement.
Sec. 15.10. Same—Assessor to file assessment roll with clerk, etc.
When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he shall
file the same with the clerk for presentation to the council for review and
confirmation by it.
Sec. 15.11. Same—Resolution of acceptance, etc.; meeting to review
roll; objections, etc.
Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the council, by resolution,
shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the
clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place the council will
meet to review such special assessment roll, and direct the clerk to publish
a notice of a public hearing for the purpose of giving an opportunity for
interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be made by publication at
least one week prior to the holding of the hearing. The hearing required by
this section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the
council. At this meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present their
objections or other comments, if any, to the making of the improvement or
improvements contemplated and to the special assessment roll therefor.
Sec. 15.12. Same—Changes and corrections in assessment roll;
confirmation of roll; liens for special assessments generally.
The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of
such special assessment roll and, at such meeting, or adjourned meeting
thereof, shall consider all objections thereto. The council may adopt the
special assessment roll as submitted by the assessor; may correct said roll
as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or
other errors appearing therein; or it may annul such assessment roll and the
same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as the making of
the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such
changes as the council deems justified, the council is satisfied with said
special assessment roll as submitted by the assessor or as corrected by it,
Sec. 15.9 CHARTER Sec. 15.12
C:67
it shall thereupon pass a resolution confirming such roll, and commanding
the treasurer to collect the various sums appearing thereon or, if so directed
by the council, to spread the same upon the tax rolls of the city for the full
amounts, or in annual installments if the decision of the council shall be to
collect the costs of such improvements in installments.
Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall
from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement
to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost
of the improvement, as provided in section 11.18 [15.18] of this chapter.
All special assessments shall from the date of the confirmation of the
roll therefor, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land
assessed, and shall be charged against the owner or owners of such lots or
parcels of land or the heir or heirs or assign or assigns of such owner or
owners, until paid.
Sec. 15.13. Deviation from plans and specifications.
No deviation from original plans or specifications, as adopted, shall be
permitted by any officer or employee of the city without authority of the
council by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such change or
deviation shall be certified by the clerk and attached to the original plans
and specifications on file in his office.
Sec. 15.14. Collection of special assessments generally.
All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council
shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be
due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. Within 10
days after such special assessment roll has been certified by the council, the
clerk shall deliver such roll to the treasurer for the collection of the several
sums assessed thereon.
Sec. 15.15. Payment of special assessments in installments.
[Amend. No. 6, 4-6-1953; amend. No. 23, 11-7-1989]
The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual
installments. Such annual installments shall neither exceed 15 in number
nor extend beyond the stated useful life of the public improvement. The
first installment shall be due upon confirmation of the roll and the deferred
installments being due annually thereafter, or, in the discretion of the
council, may be spread upon and made part of each annual city tax roll
thereafter, until all annual installments have been spread. Interest shall be
charged on all unpaid installments of special assessments, from and after a
date fixed by the council, which rate shall not exceed the rate established
and permitted by law. The whole or any number of deferred installments,
with interest accrued thereon, to the date of payment, may be paid in
advance of the due dates as established therefor.
Sec. 15.12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 15.16
C:68
Sec. 15.16. Further provisions relative to special assessment liens;
delinquent special assessments.
Special assessments, from the date of the confirmation of the roll for the
public improvement to which they apply, and all interest and collection
and penalty charges thereon shall be and remain a lien upon the property
assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general
law for state and county taxes, and by this Charter for city taxes, until
paid. Special assessments and installations thereof which are collected on
the city tax rolls shall be subject to the same collection fees and interest
charges as are provided under this Charter for city taxes collected on
the same rolls. The lands upon which any delinquent special assessments,
collection fees, and interest charges, are a lien, shall be subject to sale,
the same as are the lands upon which delinquent city taxes are a lien and
subject to sale.
Sec. 15.17. Abatement or removal of hazards and nuisances.
When any lot, building or structure within the city, because of accumulation
of refuse, or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, or of age or
dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in
the opinion of the council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous
to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or by those
residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the council
may, after investigation, give notice by publication or by registered mail
addressed to the last known address of the owner or owners of the land
upon which such nuisance exits, or to the owner of the building or structure
itself, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such owner to
alter, repair, tear down, abate or remove the nuisance promptly and within
a time to be specified by the council, which shall be commensurate with the
nature of the nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice,
the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case
where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself are not
known, the council may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper
department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required,
or may do the work by contract or by hire. The cost of such abatement
may be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property
upon which such hazard or nuisance is located by special assessment. The
council shall determine what amount or part of each such expense shall be
charged, and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises upon
which the same shall be levied as a special assessment; and as often as the
council shall deem it expedient, it shall require all of the several amounts so
reported and determined, and the several lots or premises and the persons,
chargeable therewith, respectively, to be notified by the clerk either by
registered mail sent to their last known address as shown on the assessment
roll of the city or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the
assessment, the cost thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, which shall
not be less than 30 days, in which payment shall be made. In all cases where
payment is not made within the time limit, the same shall be reported by
the clerk to the assessor who shall spread such amounts charged against
Sec. 15.16 CHARTER Sec. 15.17
C:69
the several persons or descriptions of real property chargeable therewith
on the next tax roll for the collection of city taxes.
The council may declare acts or conditions which are or may be dangerous
to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city to constitute
hazards or nuisances, by ordinance, and shall in such ordinance or
ordinances provide for the abatement thereof and may also provide that the
costs of such abatement be charged against the lot, premises, or description
of real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located and the owner
thereof as a special assessment.
Sec. 15.18. Additional assessments; refunds.
The city manager shall, within 60 days after the completion of each public
improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the
treasurer, who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond
therewith, subject to the limitation contained in section 11.9 [15.9]. When
any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the
improvement for which it was made, the council shall make an additional
pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed shall not exceed the
value of benefits received by any lot or parcel of land. Should the
assessment prove larger than necessary by 5% or less, the council may
place the excess in the city treasury. If more than 5%, the excess shall be
refunded pro rata according to assessments. In either case, the council may
provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess may be allowed as
a credit on the last installment where such installment still remains unpaid
at the time the final cost of the improvement is determined.
Sec. 15.19. Provisions particularly applicable to sidewalks. [Amend.
No. 19, 11-8-1983; amend. of 1-28-1997]
The council shall have the power to require the owners of lots and premises
to build, construct, rebuild, reconstruct, and repair sidewalks in the public
streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises, and to keep
them in repair at all times, and to construct and lay the same upon such
lines and grades, and of such width, materials, and manner of construction
or reconstruction. The procedure to implement the construction,
reconstruction, and repair of sidewalks, including the payment thereof,
shall be set forth by ordinance and shall provide for notice and hearing to an
affected property owner prior to the construction, reconstruction, or repair.
The council, may, by ordinance, provide that if any owner or occupant shall
fail or refuse to build, reconstruct, and repair any such sidewalk, the council
may proceed to order the sidewalk to be built, reconstructed, and repaired.
In the event of new construction of sidewalks, the council may provide, by
ordinance, that the cost of the public improvement be paid in equal annual
installments, plus interest accruing thereon, at a rate and for a duration
as determined by the council. In no event shall the annual installments
of principal plus interest exceed the estimated useful life of the public
improvement. The payment of the costs of the public improvement shall be
Sec. 15.17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 15.19
C:70
in the same manner as set forth in chapter 15 hereof relating to special
assessments, the terms thereof being incorporated herein by reference.
In the event of the repair, reconstruction, or rehabilitation of the sidewalks,
the council, may provide, by ordinance, that the cost of the public
improvement may be paid in the manner prescribed in section 15.20. The
council, may, by a 2/2 vote of its full membership, pay such part of the
expense of building or rebuilding any sidewalk as it may deem proper from
the general funds of the city.
Nothing contained herein shall limit or restrict the power and authority of
the council to proceed with a sidewalk public improvement pursuant to the
other provisions of chapter 15 of this Charter or statutes of this state.
Sec. 15.20. Assessments on single lots. [Amend. No. 19, 11-8-1983]
When any expense shall be incurred by the city for a public improvement
or reconstruction in respect to a separate or single lot, parcel of land, or
land or premises, which, by the provisions of this Charter, the council is
authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same,
which is not of that class of special assessment required to be made pro
rata upon several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district,
an account of the labor or services for which such expense was incurred,
verified by the city manager, with respect to the lot, or the name of the
owner or person, if known, chargeable therewith, shall be reported to the
council in such manner as it may prescribe. The council shall determine
what amount or part of the cost of any such expense shall be charged, and
the person, if known against whom, and the premises upon which, the same
shall be levied as a special assessment; and as often as the council shall
deem it expedient, it shall require all of the several amounts so reported
and determined, and the several lots or premises and persons chargeable
therewith respectively to be notified by the clerk either by first class mail,
sent to their last known address as shown on the assessment roll of the city
or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the
cost thereof, and shall give a reasonable time as determined by the council
in which payment shall be made. In all cases where payment is not made
within the time limit, the same shall be reported by the clerk to the assessor
who shall spread such amounts against the several persons or descriptions
of real property chargeable therewith on the next roll for the collection of
taxes.
Sec. 15.21. Additional procedures.
In any case where the provisions of this Charter may prove to be insufficient
to carry into full effect the making of any special assessments, the council
shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required to
effect the improvement by special assessment procedures.
Sec. 15.19 CHARTER Sec. 15.22
C:71
Sec. 15.22. Special assessment funds and accounts.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special
assessment to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a
special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor and
each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement
project for which the assessment was levied.
Sec. 15.23. Contesting, etc., assessments.
Except and unless notice is given to the council in writing of an intention
to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment for the
construction of any public improvement or the removal or abatement of any
public hazard or nuisance, within 15 days after the date of the resolution
of the council confirming the assessment roll for such improvement, as
provided in section 15.12 of this chapter, which notice shall state the
grounds on which the proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of
any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or
enjoining the collection of such special assessment.
Sec. 15.24. Reassessment for benefits.
Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or
defective for any reason whatever, of if any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason
whatsoever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a
new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former
assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has
been completed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been
collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the
collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as provided for the
original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have
been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment
and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more
than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be
refunded to the person or persons making such payment.
Sec. 15.22 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 15.24
C:72
CHAPTER 16
Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 16.1. Liability of city for damages; notice to city of claim for
injuries; proof of claim, etc.
The city shall not be liable in damages for injury sustained by any person,
either to his person or property, by reason of the negligence of the city,
its officers or employees, or by reason of any defective public works or
public service improvement or facility, or by reason of any obstruction,
ice, snow, or other encumbrance thereon unless, within 60 days after such
injury shall have occurred, such person or his representative shall serve
or cause to be served upon the clerk, a notice in writing which shall set
forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which
it occurred, the nature of the act or defect complained of, the extent of
such injury as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses
of the witnesses known at the time to the claimant, and a statement that
the person receiving such injury intends to hold the city liable for such
damages as may have been sustained by him. No person shall bring any
action for injury to person or property arising out of any of the reasons
or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period limited by
law from the time such injury was sustained, nor unless he shall have first
presented to the clerk his claim in writing and under oath, setting forth
particularly the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages
claimed by reason thereof, which claim shall be presented to the council by
the clerk and the council shall be given an opportunity to act thereon, either
by allowing or refusing to allow the claim.
It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or
proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city, under
this section, that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim, as in
this section required, were not presented and filed within the time and in
the manner as herein provided.
Sec. 16.2. Limitation on platting.
Lands or premises hereafter laid out, divided, and platted into lots, streets,
and alleys within the city, shall comply with the provisions of state law
and shall be subject to the approval of the council. The city shall not be
responsible for the improvement of streets and alleys shown on any plot
approved by it, excepting such as the council shall accept and confirm by
resolution.
Sec. 16.3. Publication of notices, etc.
The council shall determine the method of publication of all notices,
ordinances, and proceedings for which a mode of publication is not
prescribed by this Charter or by law. The council may determine that such
publication may be made in a newspaper which is printed or circulated in
the city, or that such publication may be made by posting in the office of
Sec. 16.1 CHARTER Sec. 16.3
C:73
the clerk and in five other places in the city. In case publication is made
by posting, a notice of such posting setting forth, by a description thereof,
the purpose or nature of the notice, ordinance, or proceeding posted, and
the location of the place where posted, shall be published at least once in a
newspaper published or circulated in the city within seven days after such
posting was done.
Sec. 16.4. City records to be public.
All records of the municipality shall be public.
Sec. 16.5. No estoppel by representation.
No official of the city shall have power to make any representation or recital
of fact in, or which may be deemed to constitute a part of, any franchise,
contract, document, or agreement, contrary to any public record of the city.
Any such representation shall be void and of no effect as against the city.
Sec. 16.6. Continuation of rights and liabilities.
The adoption and taking effect of this Charter shall not discharge, impair,
or limit any right vested in or liability incurred by the City of Holland at the
time this Charter became law.
Sec. 16.7. Tense.
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all
words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited
to the time of adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the
time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is
made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition.
Sec. 16.8. Number and gender.
As used in this Charter, every word importing the singular number only,
may extend to and embrace the plural number and every word importing
the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number. Every
word importing the masculine gender only shall be extended and applied to
the feminine as well as the masculine gender.
Sec. 16.9. Public schools of the city.
The adoption of this Charter by the people of Holland and the taking effect
thereof as law shall not affect, nor extend to or include the government
of the school district comprising the City of Holland known as the "Public
Schools of the City of Holland" and all provisions of law relating to and
affecting such school district shall continue to apply to and govern such
school district without any change whatsoever.
Sec. 16.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 16.10
C:74
Sec. 16.10. Chapter headings and catchlines not part of Charter.
The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience
only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Charter.
Sec. 16.11. Effect of illegality of any part of Charter.
Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this Charter be
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or
unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the
validity of this Charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such
provision or section; it being hereby declared to be the intent of the Charter
commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such
unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any part of the
Charter, except that specifically affected by such holding.
Sec. 16.12. Amendments.
This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Act
No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended.12 Should any two or more
amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions,
the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those
provisions.
12.Editor's Note: See M. S. A., § 5.2071 et seq.
Sec. 16.10 CHARTER Sec. 16.12
C:75
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code generally. [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.1]
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters and
sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Holland,
Michigan," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as "Holland
City Code."
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction. [Code 1955, §§ 1-1.7,
1-1.9, 1-1.10; Ord. No. 666]
In the construction of this Code and all amendments thereto, and all other
ordinances of the City, the following definitions and rules shall be observed,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise, or unless such interpretation
and construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City
Council:
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Holland, Michigan.
CITY — The City of Holland, Michigan.
CITY COUNCIL — The word "Council" or the words "City Council" mean the
legislative body of the City of Holland, Michigan.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed as prescribed by state statute.
COUNTY — The word "county" shall mean either the County of Ottawa
or the County of Allegan, or both, or as the case may be, in the State of
Michigan.
GENDER — Every word of the masculine gender may be extended and
applied to the feminine or neuter as well as to the masculine gender, and
every word of the neuter gender, may be extended and applied to the
feminine or masculine as well as the neuter gender.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the section of this Code or the ordinance
granting the authority.
MONTH — The word "month" shall be construed as to mean a calendar
month.
NUMBER — Every word of the singular number may extend to and embrace
the plural number, and every work of the plural number may include and be
applied to the singular number.
Sec. 16.12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 1-2
C:76
OATH; AFFIRMATION; SWORN; AFFIRMED — The word "oath" shall be
construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word
"sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed."
OFFICERS — The several officers' titles mean such officers of the City, or
their deputies or authorized subordinates or agents, as provided in Section
1-8.
OWNER — The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include
any part owner, land contract vendee, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant
in partnership, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety or optionee of the whole
or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — The word "person" shall include any individual, copartnership,
association, unincorporated club, joint venture and any other group or
combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting the same, any
corporation and the fiduciary of any estate or trust.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following" mean
next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — The word "property" shall include real estate and personal
property.
PUBLIC PLACE — The words "public place" mean any street, alley, service
drive, parking lot or area, public building, any place of business or assembly,
or any other premises open to or frequented by the public; provided, that
drives and parking lots or areas serving residential dwellings of three or
less living units are excluded.
SEAL — In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be
required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the
word "seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such
paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means
of a wafer or wax.
SHALL; MAY — The word "shall" means imperative or mandatory; the word
"may" means permissive.
SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION — The words "signature" and "subscription"
include a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE — The word "state" means State of Michigan.
STREET; HIGHWAY; ALLEY — The words "street" and "highway" shall mean
all property which is subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or which
is owned in fee and devoted to such purpose by the City, county or state.
The word "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary
means of ingress and egress from a property.
SUNDAYS; LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Whenever any act required to be done
pursuant to the provisions of this Code or any ordinance falls on a Sunday
or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business
day.
Sec. 1-2 CHARTER Sec. 1-2
C:77
TENSE — All words used in the present tense shall not be limited to the
time adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the
happening of any act, event or requirement for which provision is made
herein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition.
TIME — Whenever time is referred to, it means Eastern Standard Time or
the time officially in force in the City.
WEEK — The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING — The words "written" or "in writing" may include
any form or reproduction or expression of language.
YEAR — The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year and
the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord."
Sec. 1-3. Division of Code; numbering of sections. [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.2]
This Code is divided into chapters, articles, divisions and sections. A section
number is assigned to each section of the Code for identification purposes.
Such section number is in two parts and is arranged so that the left hand
number, followed by the dash, designates the chapter number, and the
number following the dash, together with the chapter numbers, designates
the section itself.
Sec. 1-4. Headings and catchlines. [Code 1955, § 1-1.4]
All words and phrases set in capital letters or underlined at the beginning
of the chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections of this Code
shall constitute chapter, article, and division headings and catchlines of
sections and subsections and are not a part of this Code, but are for
convenience only and, as such, shall not be available or used for any
purpose or construction or interpretation of this Code or of any chapter,
article, division, section, or any portion thereof.
Sec. 1-5. Citation of individual Code provisions. [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.3]
Each provision of this Code may be cited by its assigned section number,
and no other citation of any provision shall be required for any purpose.
Sec. 1-6. Service of notice. [Code 1955, § 1-1.11]
Except where the manner of service of notice is specifically provided for in
Sections 15.17 or 15.20 of the City Charter, or in any section of this Code
requiring notice, notice required to be given by this Code shall be served:
(a) By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same
at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable
age and discretion; or
Sec. 1-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 1-6
C:78
Sec. 1-7. Publication, etc., of rules and regulations. [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.12]
Except as otherwise provided by the City Charter or by this Code, all
rules and regulations made by the administrative officers of the City which
are required to make effective the provisions of this Code shall become
effective after the approval thereof by the Council and the filing of a
certified copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk. Copies of all such
rules and regulations shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection and distribution.
Sec. 1-8. Title of officer to include deputy, etc. [Code 1955, § 1-1.8]
Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the City is assigned
any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, the title of such officer
shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate
or agent.
Sec. 1-9. Effect of repeal.
The repeal of any provision of this Code or other ordinance or part thereof
shall not release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred
under such provision of this Code or other ordinance or any part thereof,
unless the repealing ordinance shall expressly so provide, and such
provision of this Code or other ordinance or part thereof shall be treated
as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture
or liability.
Whenever any provision of this Code or any ordinance, or any part thereof,
is repealed by a subsequent ordinance, such provision of this Code or
ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not be revived by the repeal
of such subsequent repealing ordinance.
Sec. 1-10. General penalty; continuing violations.13 [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.13; Ord. No. 1240, 3-24-1999]
(b) By mailing such notice by registered mail to such owner at his last
known address; or
(c) By posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises; or
(d) By publication of either such notice or the proceedings of the Council at
which the action regarding the same was taken.
(a) Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the City is
specifically designated in the code or ordinance as a municipal civil
infraction, or unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Municipal Civil Infractions.
Sec. 1-6 CHARTER Sec. 1-10
C:79
Sec. 1-10.1. Authority of certain officers and others to issue and
serve appearance tickets, notices to appear, etc. [Ord. No. 891; Ord.
No. 1240, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1256, 8-4-1999; Ord. No. 1344,
8-7-2002; 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1629; 2-21-2018 by Ord. No. 1725]
or any ordinance of the City for any particular provision or section, this
section shall apply.
(b) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no
specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such
provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the City shall be
punished by a fine and costs, the total of which fine and costs shall not
exceed $500, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
Each act of violation, and every day upon which such violation shall
occur or continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided in this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided therein, shall apply to every addition to this Code and to the
amendment of any section thereof without the necessity of providing
such penalty in the ordinance making any such addition or amendment.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in this section, the City may
pursue any equitable remedy for a violation of this Code or any
ordinance of the City provided by a provision of this Code, or a provision
of a technical or other code adopted by reference in this Code, or a rule,
regulation or order promulgated or made under the authority of either,
or provided by state law, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated
or made under the authority of state law, including, but not limited
to, the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, injunctive relief and
revocation of licenses or permits.
(a) Any officer or reserve officer of the City Police Department shall have
the authority to issue appearance tickets, citations or parking violation
notices for violations of the provisions of this Code which occur in his or
her presence.
(b) When authorized by City Council resolution, volunteers trained by the
Holland Department of Public Safety shall have the authority to issue
citations for parking violations as provided for by law, including as
provided for by MCLA § 257.675d.
(c) When authorized by City Council resolution pursuant to MCLA
§ 257.742(6), nonpolice officer City personnel, trained by the Holland
Department of Public Safety and approved by the Chief of Police, shall
have the authority to issue citations for parking violations as provided
Sec. 1-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 1-10.1
C:80
Sec. 1-10.2. Additional remedies in case of nuisances. [Ord. No.
1240, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1307, 7-3-2001]
In the event that the doing of any act or the permitting of a condition to exist
is declared to be a nuisance per se by any section of this Code, the doing
of such act or permitting of such condition to exist may result in injunctive
relief being sought in a court of competent jurisdiction or the abatement of
such nuisance by the procedures provided and permitted in the City Charter
in addition to or as an alternate procedure to any penalty already imposed
by any section of this Code. As authorized in Section 15.17 of the Charter
of the City of Holland, in any judicial or administrative action to abate a
nuisance per se, the City shall be entitled to recover its costs (including
the cost of administrative staff time) and reasonable attorney fees incurred
to investigate and abate a nuisance, whether incurred before or after the
commencement of litigation. As further authorized in Section 15.17 of the
Charter of the City of Holland, the City shall have a lien against the property
subject to the abatement proceedings for all such costs and attorney fees
awarded under this Section 1-10.2 and may enforce the lien in the manner
prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of
special assessments.
Sec. 1-11. Aiding, abetting, etc., violation of Code, etc. [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.6; Ord. No. 1240, 3-24-1999]
Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the City is specifically
designated in this Code or any ordinance as a municipal civil infraction,
whenever any act or omission to act is a violation of any provision of
this Code, or any amendment thereto, or any rule or regulation adopted
thereunder, any person causing, securing, aiding or abetting such violation
may be prosecuted and tried and, on conviction, shall be punished as if he
or she had directly committed such violation.
Sec. 1-12. Construction and severability of Code. [Code 1955,
§ 1-1.15.]
It is the legislative intent of the Council, in adopting this Code, that all
provisions of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the
for by law, but excluding citations for those violations as set forth in
MCLA § 257.675d(1)(a) through (j).
(d) The enforcing officers under the provisions of Chapters 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9,
11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 21A, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34,
35, 37, 38, 39 and 40 of this Code shall have the authority to issue and
serve appearance tickets or notices to appear for violations of the
provisions of those chapters.
(e) The enforcing officers under the provisions of Chapters 4, 6, 8, 11, 12,
14, 18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 27 and 29 of this Code shall have the authority to
issue and serve municipal civil infraction notices or municipal civil
infraction citations for violations of the provisions of those chapters.
Sec. 1-10.1 CHARTER Sec. 1-12
C:81
peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and should
any provision of this Code or part thereof be held unconstitutional or
invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any
of the remaining provisions, it being the intent that the remainder of this
Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision thereof.
The provisions of this section shall apply to every addition to this Code and
to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of
this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance.
Sec. 1-13. Procedure to amend Code. [Code 1955, § 1-1.5.]
This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each such
amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and
purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows:
Sec. 1-14. Replacement of mutilated, lost, etc., bonds issued by
City.14 [Ord. No. 531, §§ 1, 2.]
In case any bond heretofore or hereafter issued by the City shall become
mutilated or be destroyed, stolen or lost, the City shall execute and deliver
a new bond (with appropriate coupons attached in the case of coupon
bonds) of like maturity and principal amount as the bond so mutilated,
destroyed, stolen or lost. Such new bond shall be delivered in exchange and
substitution for a mutilated bond, upon surrender and cancellation of such
(a) To amend any section:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF HOLLAND,
MICHIGAN, BEING ORDINANCE NO. _____, OF THE CITY OF
HOLLAND, BY AMENDING SECTION _____ (OR SECTIONS _____ AND
_____) OF SAID CODE.
(b) To insert a new section, article or chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF HOLLAND,
MICHIGAN, BEING ORDINANCE NO. _____ OF THE CITY OF
HOLLAND, BY ADDING A NEW SECTION (_____ NEW SECTIONS,
A NEW ARTICLE, OR A NEW CHAPTER, AS THE CASE MAY BE)
WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS, ARTICLE, OR CHAPTER) SHALL
BE DESIGNATED AS SECTION _____ (SECTIONS _____ AND _____) (OR
PROPER DESIGNATION IF AN ARTICLE OR CHAPTER IS ADDED) OF
SAID CODE.
(c) To repeal a section, article or chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF HOLLAND,
MICHIGAN, BEING ORDINANCE NO. _____, OF THE CITY OF
HOLLAND, BY REPEALING SECTION _____ (SECTIONS _____ AND
_____) (OR ARTICLE _____ OR CHAPTER _____) OF SAID CODE.
14.Editor's Note: See also Charter Sections 9.12 and 9.13.
Sec. 1-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 1-14
C:82
mutilated bond and attached coupons, if any, or in lieu of and substitution
for a bond and the coupons thereof, if any, destroyed, stolen or lost, upon
filing with the City Clerk evidence satisfactory to him that such bond and
attached coupons, if any, have been destroyed, stolen or lost and proof
of ownership thereof, and upon furnishing the City Clerk with indemnity
satisfactory to him and paying such expenses as the City may incur in
issuing such new bond.
In the instance a trustee is appointed for any bonds issued or to be issued
by the City, such trustee shall act instead of and in place of the City Clerk in
performing the duties and functions set forth in the preceding paragraph of
this section.
Sec. 1-15. Lost, stolen, abandoned and unclaimed personal
property. [Ord. No. 536]
The Police Department of the City shall be charged with the custody of such
lost, stolen, abandoned or unclaimed personal property as may come into
its possession, whether surrendered to the City or to any agent thereof,
or recovered by any agent of the City, and shall dispose of the same as
provided in this section.
(a) Claim and recovery by owner. All such personal property in the custody
of the Police Department of the City may be claimed and recovered by
the rightful owner thereof, upon submitting satisfactory proof of
ownership to the Police Department, and upon paying such costs and
fees as may have been incurred and charged in the recovery and
storage of such property.
(b) Procedure for disposition of unclaimed property. All such personal
property as shall remain in the custody of the Police Department for a
period of 30 days, without being claimed by the rightful owner thereof,
shall be disposed of as follows:
(1) The person who surrendered such property to the City shall be
given written notice to claim the same within 30 days from date of
notice.
(2) If such property shall have been recovered by an agent of the City,
or if the person who surrendered the same to the City shall not
make claim thereto as above provided, such property shall be
disposed of as follows:
a. If the apparent value thereof shall exceed $10, the same shall
be sold at public auction, with notice thereof to be posted in
three conspicuous places in the City, and notice to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, all such
notices to be at least 10 days prior to the date of such sale.
b. If the apparent value thereof shall be less than $10, the same
may be disposed of in any reasonable and feasible manner.
Sec. 1-14 CHARTER Sec. 1-15
C:83
Sec. 1-16. Wards. [Ord. No. 461; Ord. No. 597; Ord. No. 796; Ord.
No. 1047, 4-1-1992; Ord. No. 1332, 3-21-2002; Ord. No. 1539,
1-6-2010]
The City shall consist of six wards, the boundaries and numbers of which
are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "The Ward and Precinct
Map of the City of Holland, Michigan, adopted January 6, 2010" which
accompanies this ordinance and is made a part hereof, said ward
boundaries being shown in solid, unbroken lines, and which follow the
center lines of the streets designated by such boundaries, where applicable.
Sec. 1-17. Precincts. [Ord. No. 461; Ord. No. 511; Ord. No. 566;
Ord. No. 597; Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 1047, 4-1-1992;
Ord. No. 1332, 3-21-2002]
Each ward of the City is hereby divided into two or more voting precincts
as shown and numbered on the map referred to in Section 1-16 of this Code
by dotted lines, which lines follow the center lines of the streets designated.
Ward 1, Precinct 2 follows the center line of said streets as designated.
However, a portion of the north line of Ward 1, Precinct 2 begins 857.31
feet south of NW corner of Section 26, T5N, R15 west and continues due
east to the west 1/8 line; thence north to the center of Black River; thence
easterly and southeasterly to the north/south 1/4 line of Section 26; the
same being the east boundary of City limits. The number of each precinct
is in two parts and is arranged so that the left hand number, followed by
a dash, designates the ward number, and the number following the dash
designates the precinct number of that ward.
Chapter 2
(c) Records to be kept. The Police Department of the City shall keep a
permanent record of all such property, the person surrendering the
same to the City, the apparent value thereof and the disposition thereof.
(d) Disposition of proceeds of sale. All proceeds from the sale of such
personal property, less expenses, shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer and shall be credited to the general fund.
(e) Notices generally; when sales to be held. Notices required by this
section may cover more than one item of personal property, and shall
describe all such personal property as accurately as possible. Public
sales pursuant hereto shall be held annually, or more often, if required.
(f) Exceptions. The public auction provisions contained herein shall not
apply to money, and none of the provisions herein contained shall apply
to animals or motor vehicles.
(g) Effect of section. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to alter the
legal relationship between the finder of personal property and the true
owner thereof.
Sec. 1-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 1-17
C:84
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 1-17 CHARTER Sec. 1-17
C:85

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 2-1. City records—Disposition of certain records. [Code 1955,
§ 1-2.1; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1704]
Records of the City which are deemed by the City Council to be of no further
value to the City may be disposed of in a manner provided in § 11 of Act No.
470 of the Public Acts of 2016, as amended (MCLA § 399.811).
Sec. 2-2. Same—Records inventory. [Code 1955, § 1-2.2]
The City Manager shall cause to be compiled and maintained an inventory
of all City records affected by the provisions of the statute referred to in
Section 2-1. Such inventory shall state the quantity, physical location and
function of such records and shall establish a schedule of disposition, which
schedule and amendments thereto shall become effective upon approval
by the City Council, the Sate Historical Commission and the State
Administrative Board.
Sec. 2-1 CHARTER Sec. 2-2
C:87

ARTICLE II
Personnel Regulations
Sec. 2-3. Short title and purpose. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by Ord.
No. 1642]
This article shall be known as the personnel regulations of the City. Its
purpose shall be to set forth and establish the personnel policies of the City
for all its classified employees who are paid, in whole or in part, from funds
which are budgeted and approved by the City Council, such purpose being
in the spirit of Section 6.16 of the City Charter which inspires each group
and individual in the employ of the City to the highest levels of ability in
an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect which shall result in fair and
equitable treatment of employees and improved administration, increased
efficiency and economy of operation of the City's affairs.
Sec. 2-4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning:
CLASS; JOB CLASS — Positions in classified City employment sufficiently
alike to permit use of such single descriptive job title, the same
qualifications requirements, the same tests of competence and the same pay
scale. Each "class" or "job class" shall be assigned a "class number."
CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEE — An employee of the City in its classified service
as set forth in Section 2-7.
EXEMPT EMPLOYEE — An employee of the City in its exempt service as set
forth in Section 2-6.
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee whose regular workweek is the
workweek normally scheduled for the position, on a continuing basis,
including evening, night or weekend scheduling which may be required by
the position.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee who regularly works less than the
workweek usually scheduled for the position.
POSITION — A collection of job tasks; a job, within a class, to which an
employee is specifically assigned. Each "position" shall be designated by a
"position number."
PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE — As to a full-time employee, one who, at the
effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives15, has not held
his/her position at such date for 12 continuous, consecutive months, or who,
thereafter, has not completed such period of employment. It shall mean,
as to a part-time employee, one who has not completed the probationary
period which shall be extended to equate with that of a full time employee,
but which shall not be longer than 12 months.
15.Editor's Note: The ordinance from which this article derives became effective 12-11-1968.
Sec. 2-3 CHARTER Sec. 2-4
C:89
REGULAR EMPLOYEE — An employee who has completed his/her
probationary period.
STATUS — An employee's situation with respect to being a regular
employee or a probationary employee.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE — An employee whose employment, at the time
he/she is hired, is reasonably anticipated to be for a duration of one year
or less because of project or seasonal requirements or other qualifying
circumstances.
UNIT OF GOVERNMENT — The major City functions including the general
City services and the Holland Board of Public Works.
Sec. 2-5. Classification of employees. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by
Ord. No. 1642]
Each employee of the City shall be considered to be within either the
classified service or the exempt service by virtue of the position he/she
occupies.
Sec. 2-6. Composition of exempt service. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014
by Ord. No. 1642]
The exempt service shall include the following:
Sec. 2-7. Composition of classified service. [Ord. No. 557;
11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
The classified service shall include all employees of the City, including but
not limited to the general City and the Holland Board of Public Works, that
are not specifically placed in the exempt service by the provisions of Section
2-6.
Sec. 2-8. Applicability of Sections 2-9 to 2-15. [Ord. No. 557;
11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
The provisions of Sections 2-9 to 2-15 shall apply only to the classified
service.
(a) All elected officials and members of boards and commissions appointed
by the Mayor and City Council.
(b) The City Manager, City Attorney, contract employees, superintendent of
utilities, assistant superintendent of utilities, and such other positions
as may from time to time be determined by resolution of the Council.
(c) Consultants, counsel and contract employees rendering advisory
services.
(d) Employees performing part-time or temporary work who may be
specifically placed in the exempt service by the personnel rules.
Sec. 2-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-9
C:90
Sec. 2-9. Personnel policies and objectives generally. [Ord. No. 557;
11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
The declared personnel policies and objectives of the City shall include the
following and such others as may hereafter be adopted by City Council
and are based on the dual recognition of the employees' rights and
responsibilities and the City Council's responsibilities for the orderly and
efficient operation of City functions:
(a) To so organize the duties and responsibilities of the employees of the
City so as to allow for assignment of personnel for the effective
accomplishment of the mission of the unit of City government
concerned and so that employees shall be classified according to
related job duties.
(b) To describe, in writing, the job duties of each class, and to provide for
establishment and direction of the positions therein by the appropriate
unit of City government.
(c) To develop a compensation plan which will reflect fairly the differences
in duties and responsibilities of the classes established and which will
assure, to the extent practicable, similar pay treatment for similar
work; which will reflect salary and wage rates which compare favorably
with those in the area for comparable positions; and which provide a
means of rewarding employees for continued good or outstanding
service.
(d) To provide a group of compensation supplements (so-called "fringe
benefits") such as, for illustration only, sick leave, vacation, health
insurance and pension, which shall be those applicable to any position
as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article
derives,16 to review the same and make adjustments therein, if
necessary, to the end that employees performing similar work and
meeting other requirements that are similar shall receive similar total
remuneration under the compensation plan and in the cost of the
compensation supplements provided to the employee; and to make
adjustments in the types of compensation supplements and in the
extent of each, as may tend towards uniformity of the types of salary
supplements and the extent of each, throughout the classified service of
the City.
(e) To provide services, privileges and benefits to employees such as, for
illustration only, bulletin boards, meal facilities, parking facilities and
long-service awards, as may be appropriately provided to the class of
the employee and his/her particular place of performing the work of his/
her position.
(f) To establish for each position a work schedule which is as attractive as
is practicable considering all the circumstances of such position.
16.Editor's Note: The ordinance from which this article derives became effective 12-11-1968.
Sec. 2-9 CHARTER Sec. 2-9
C:91
Sec. 2-10. Administration of personnel policies, rules, procedures,
etc. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
The personnel policies established in this article shall be carried out in
accordance with an employee handbook, rules, regulations and procedures
adopted by resolution of the City Council. The administration of such
employee handbook, rules, regulations and procedures shall be the
responsibility of those charged with the management, supervision and
control of the appropriate unit of government under the applicable
provision of the City Charter. To the extent that the City shall adopt an
employee handbook for City employees, the employee handbook shall apply
and prevail in the event of a conflict or interpretation of this article.
Sec. 2-11. Personnel officer. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by Ord. No.
1642]
There shall continue to be a personnel officer of the City, who shall be
appointed by the City Manager with consent of City Council and who
shall hold his/her office until removed by the City Manager with approval
(g) To establish for each position the rules such as, for illustration only,
disaster, fire, conduct and safety, which reflect the standards of
reasonable conduct sensibly expected of an employee in his/her
position under the circumstances covered by the rule, for the good of
the City and the employee group involved, and to establish procedures
to be followed in connection with administering such rules.
(h) To provide procedures for recruiting, evaluation and hiring of personnel
for the classified service, on the basis of objective considerations such
as, for illustration only, prior experience, aptitude, education and
physical fitness for the position involved, and of general character and
integrity, and to give those hired appropriate orientation to the duties
and responsibilities of the position undertaken.
(i) To determine the compensation, types of compensation supplements,
the extent of each, the services, privileges and benefits, and the extent
of each which shall be applicable to a position other than full-time.
(j) To conduct a program of personnel administration which shall include:
the evaluation of an employee and his/her work performance (during
his/her probationary period and thereafter); work-related training and
advancement; and procedures for demotion, transfer, layoff or
separation of an employee.
(k) To provide a procedure for consideration and appeal to a reasonable
number of successively higher levels of authority of employee
questions, problems, complaints and requests as they relate to wages,
hours and working conditions of the classified employees.
(l) To establish and maintain such personnel forms and records as may be
required or advisable in connection with the foregoing.
Sec. 2-9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-11
C:92
of the Council or until his/her successor is appointed and has qualified.
The personnel officer shall be chosen on the basis of his/her executive
and administrative qualifications with special reference to his/her actual
experience in, or his/her training or aptitude for, personnel administration.
The personnel officer may have responsibilities in City administration apart
from those as personnel officer. It shall be the responsibility of the
personnel officer to prepare and submit for consideration of the City Council
the employee handbook, rules, regulations and procedures referred to in
Section 2-10; to seek concurrence of the boards, City officers and employees
or employee groups prior to action by Council; and to carry out publication
and distribution of such actions following Council's approval; and to assist
and advise the various boards and City officers on methods of the
administration thereof.
Sec. 2-12. Personnel managers/officers. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014
by Ord. No. 1642]
There may be a personnel manager/officer for one or more units of City
government appointed by the manager of the unit of government involved
with the approval of the board of such unit whose duties and responsibilities
would encompass the application of City-wide personnel policies, practices
and procedures to that function, the notification of the personnel officer of
the City under Section 2-11 of personnel policies, practices and procedures
of less than City-wide applicability but which he/she deems advisable for
application to the unit he/she serves, and assisting the personnel officer as
called upon by him/her to do so. Such a personnel manager may have other
duties and responsibilities within the function which he/she serves in that
capacity.
Sec. 2-13. Publication of personnel policies, practices and
procedures. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
The personnel policies, practices and procedures applicable throughout the
classified service of the City shall be public. Information relating thereto
shall be distributed to each affected employee who is in the classified
service.
Sec. 2-14. Discrimination prohibited. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by
Ord. No. 1642]
Adoption, implementation and administration of the policies set forth in this
article shall be carried out without regard to race, color, sex, political or
religious application of the employees involved.
Sec. 2-15. Use of consultants, counsel and other advisory
personnel. [Ord. No. 557; 11-19-2014 by Ord. No. 1642]
Upon approval thereof by the City Council, on its motion or upon
recommendation of the City Manager, personnel officer or heads of the
various units of government, the City Council may engage the services
Sec. 2-11 CHARTER Sec. 2-15
C:93
of consultants, counsel or other advisory assistance in the establishment,
implementation or revision of the policies set forth in this article.
Sec. 2-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-15
C:94
ARTICLE III
Planning Commission
Sec. 2-16. Planning Commission continued. [Code 1955, § 1-7.1;
Ord. No. 1522, 11-5-2008]
The City Planning Commission, having been established under and by virtue
of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of 1931 and Act No. 163 of the Public
Acts of 1943, is hereby continued as provided in Act 33 of the Public Acts of
2008.
Sec. 2-17. Composition. [Code 1955, § 1-7.2; Ord. No. 1032,
12-4-1991; Ord. No. 1522, 11-5-2008]
Sec. 2-18. Terms of members; powers, duties, removal and duties as
to public places. [Code 1955, § 1-7.3; Ord. No. 1522, 11-5-2008]
(a) The City Planning Commission shall consist of the Mayor, one of the
administrative officials of the City selected by the Mayor, one member
of the Council selected by the Council, as members ex officio, and six
persons appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote
of members of the City Council. For purposes of this section, the term
"administrative official" shall be defined as any department head of the
City or Board of Public Works established by charter, ordinance, or
action of the City Council or Board of Public Works. The Council shall
adopt biennially, prior to the expiration of the term of the administrative
official, a list of eligible administrative officials from which an
appointment shall be made by the Mayor.
(b) Members of the City Planning Commission shall be representative of
important segments of the community, representative of the entire
geography of the community to the extent practicable, and shall be
qualified electors in the City, except that one member may be an
individual who is not a qualified elector in the City.
(a) The terms of office, powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall
be as prescribed by Act 33 of the Public Acts of 2008 and any
amendments thereto. The rules and regulations as provided by such Act
and any amendments thereto are hereby adopted and made a part of
this Code.
(b) The City Council may remove a member of the Planning Commission for
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written
charges and after a public hearing.
(c) A street, square, park, playground, public way, or other open space or
public building or other structure shall not be constructed or
authorized for construction in an area covered by a municipal master
plan unless the location, character, and extent of the street, public way,
open space, structure, or utility have been submitted to the Planning
Commission by the City Council and has been approved by the Planning
Sec. 2-16 CHARTER Sec. 2-18
C:95
Commission. The Planning Commission shall submit its reasons for
approval or disapproval to the City Council. If the Planning Commission
disapproves, the City Council may overrule the Planning Commission
by a vote of not less than 2/3 of its entire membership. If the Planning
Commission fails to act within 35 days after submission of the proposal
to the Planning Commission, the project shall be considered to be
approved by the Planning Commission.
(d) If the opening, widening, or extension of a street, or the acquisition or
enlargement of any square, park, playground, or other open space has
been approved by the City Planning Commission and authorized by the
legislative body as provided under Subsection (c) of this section, the
City Council shall not rescind its authorization unless the matter has
been resubmitted to the Planning Commission and the rescission has
been approved by the Planning Commission after holding a public
hearing. The Planning Commission shall submit its reasons for approval
or disapproval of the rescission to the City Council. If the Planning
Commission disapproves the rescission, the City Council may overrule
the Planning Commission by a vote of not less than 2/3 of its entire
membership. If the Planning Commission fails to act within 63 days
after submission of the proposed rescission to the Planning
Commission, the proposed rescission shall be considered to be
approved by the Planning Commission.
(e) The City Planning Commission shall be exempt from preparing a capital
improvements program of public structures and improvements.
Preparation of the capital improvements program of public structures
and improvements is delegated to the City Manager to prepare and
present to City Council for approval as authorized and described in
Section 65(1) of Act 33 of the Public Acts of 2008.
Sec. 2-18 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-18
C:96
ARTICLE IV
Human Relations Commission
Sec. 2-19. Declaration of public policy. [Ord. No. 515; Ord. No. 692]
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City that all persons
subject to its jurisdiction shall enjoy equal freedom and the opportunity
to peaceably pursue their just aspirations and that practices or conditions
based upon or resulting from considerations of race, creed, educational
association, color, sex, handicap, age, marital status, national origin or
association which result in hindrance or restrictions upon the enjoyment or
exercise of that freedom or those aspirations are harmful to the common
good and contrary to the public policy of the City.
Sec. 2-20. Creation; composition; appointment, terms, etc., of
members; filling vacancies. [Ord. No. 515; Ord. No. 692; Ord. No.
726]
There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission for the City, to be
composed of nine members to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and approval of the Council. Three members of such Commission shall be
appointed in June of each year and shall serve for terms of three years,
each commencing on the first day of July following appointment. Initial
appointments hereunder shall be for partial terms appropriate to initiate
the system of staggered terms outlined above; provided, that such initial
appointments hereunder shall be made in such a manner so as to permit
all of the present members of the Commission to complete the terms of
their present appointment. Each vacancy among the appointed members
of the Human Relations Commission shall be filled in the manner provided
for making original appointments and shall be for the balance of the term
vacated. Membership shall be broadly representative of the City. The Mayor
may, with the advice and approval of the Council, appoint additional officers
of the City as nonvoting, ex officio members of such Commission.
Sec. 2-21. Duties and functions. [Ord. No. 515; Ord. No. 692]
The Human Relations Commission shall:
(a) Promote amicable relations and mutual respect between and among the
racial, cultural, religious and other groups within the greater City
community, and discourage discrimination practices toward or within
any such groups.
(b) Make investigations and studies and conduct research to gather
statistics or data which will aid in substantiating need for programs
promoting meaningful social change in accordance with public policy,
as declared in Section 2-19.
(c) Cooperate with and aid in the organization of activities of other public
and private organizations in efforts to improve relationships and
conditions among the citizens of the greater City area.
Sec. 2-19 CHARTER Sec. 2-21
C:97
Sec. 2-22. Rules. [Ord. No. 515]
The Human Relations Commission shall adopt rules of organization and
procedure appropriate to the performance of its duties.
Sec. 2-23. Meeting place and secretarial services. [Ord. No. 515]
The City Manager shall provide a meeting place and secretarial services for
the Human Relations Commission.
Sec. 2-24. Budget. [Ord. No. 515]
The Human Relations Commission shall annually prepare and submit to the
City Manager an estimate of the expenditures of such Commission for the
next fiscal year, as provided in Chapter 9 of the Charter of the City.
(d) Assemble, analyze and disseminate factual data, information and
materials of educational value relating to group relations.
(e) Advise and consult with the City Council and other public or quasipublic
bodies on matters within its scope of activity.
(f) Encourage, receive, investigate, evaluate and conciliate complaints,
from any person or group, of discrimination contrary to the public
policy as defined in Section 2-19 and make known to such person or
group the procedures which may be used to complain of such
discrimination.
(g) Promote equal opportunity, counter results of past discrimination,
initiate action necessary to effectuate the public policy as stated in
Section 2-19 and concern itself with the cultural, educational and other
matters contributing to a harmonious society.
All legislative and policy-making functions in the field of human
relations heretofore vested in the Council or in other public bodies
shall remain the prerogative of each such public body.
Sec. 2-21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-24
C:98
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)
Sec. 2-25. and Sec. 2-26. (Reserved)17
17.Editor's Note: Former Sections 2-25, Created, and 2-26, Composition; appointment,
qualifications and terms of members; filling vacancies, were repealed 1-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 1704.
Sec. 2-25 CHARTER Sec. 2-25
C:99

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)
Sec. 2-27. and Sec. 2-28. (Reserved)18
18.Editor's Note: Former Sections 2-27, Created, and 2-28, Composition; appointment,
qualifications and terms of members; filling vacancies, were repealed 1-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 1704.
Sec. 2-27 CHARTER Sec. 2-27
C:101

ARTICLE VII
Odd-Year Primary and General Elections
Sec. 2-29. Short title; purpose of article. [Ord. No. 590]
This article shall be known as the "Odd-Year Election Ordinance." Its
purpose is to adopt the provisions of Public Act No. 239 of the Michigan
Public Acts of 1970,19 relative to the election and terms of office of elected
City officers.
Sec. 2-30. General election. [Ord. No. 590]
A regular nonpartisan City election, to be known as the "Odd-Year General
Election," shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in
November of each odd-numbered year, beginning in 1973.
Sec. 2-31. Primary election. [Ord. No. 590]
A regular nonpartisan City primary election, to be known as the "Odd-Year
Primary Election," shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday
in August of each odd-numbered year, beginning in 1973.
Sec. 2-32. Nomination of candidates for general election. [Ord. No.
590]
All City officers required to be elected at the odd-year general election
shall be nominated at the odd-year primary election preceding the general
election.
Sec. 2-33. Election and term of office of Mayor and Councilmen.
[Ord. No. 590]
Sec. 2-34. Nominating petitions. [Ord. No. 590; amended 1-17-2018
by Ord. No. 1704]
Notwithstanding § 11.9 of the Charter, nominating petitions for City officers
to be elected the odd-year general elections shall be filed not later than the
(a) The Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years at each odd-year
general election beginning in 1973.
(b) Councilmen shall be elected for a term of four years at each odd-year
general election as follows:
(1) Beginning in 1973, one Councilman-at-large and Councilmen
representing wards 1, 3 and 5 shall be elected.
(2) Beginning in 1975, one Councilman-at-large and Councilmen
representing wards 2, 4 and 6 shall be elected.
19.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 168.644e et seq.
Sec. 2-29 CHARTER Sec. 2-34
C:103
deadline established by resolution adopted by the City Council pursuant to
MCLA § 117.3b and MCLA § 168.1, et seq.
Sec. 2-35. Time for taking office. [Ord. No. 590]
All City officers elected at the odd-year general election shall take office
on the Monday next following the date of the election at which they were
elected.
Sec. 2-35.1. Alteration of ward and precinct
boundaries—annexation. [Ord. No. 1272, 2-2-2000]
(1) Pursuant to the orders of the State Boundary Commission for the State
of Michigan dated November 29, 1999, effective December 30, 1999, in
Docket Numbers 98-AP-9 and 98-AP-12, the following described lands
are hereby included in the 5th Ward of the City:
Parcel A (98-AP-9):
Part of Sections 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, T4N, R15W, Fillmore Township,
Allegan County, Michigan, being described as: Beginning at the east 1/
4 corner of said Section 15; thence south 00° 26' 36" east 479.54 feet
along the east line of said Section 15; thence north 88° 18' 44" west
834.73 feet; thence north 35° 35' 06" west 701.37 feet along the center
line of M-40; thence 631.48 feet along the center line of M-40 and along
the arc of a curve to the right with a radius of 34,377.48 feet through
a central angle of 01° 03' 09" the long chord of which bears north 35°
03' 31" west 631.47 feet; thence north 88° 19' 14" west 1,059.95 feet;
thence south 00° 39' 46" east 585.25 feet along the north and south 1/
4 line of said Section 15; thence north 88° 18' 44" west 2,648.32 feet
along the east and west 1/4 line of said Section 15 to the west 1/4
corner of said Section 15; thence north 89° 31' 11 west 1,328.51 feet
along the east and west 1/4 line of said Section 16; thence north 00°
45' 48" west 1,727.79 feet along the west line of the east 1/2 of the
northeast 1/4 of said Section 16; thence 1,373.89 feet along the south
line of Interstate 196 and along the arc of a curve to the right with
a radius of 3,922.72 feet through a central angle of 20° 04' 02" the
long chord of which bears south 75° 01' 02" west 1,366.88 feet; thence
south 00° 37' 45" east 35.58 feet along the north and south 1/4 line of
said Section 16; thence north 89° 39' 58" west 1,209.33 feet along the
south line of Interstate I-196; thence south 05° 55' 59" east 1,332.62
feet along the west line of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence north
89° 31' 11" west 1,570.17 feet along the east and west 1/4 line of said
Section 16 of the west 1/4 corner of said Section 16; thence south 89°
54' 53" west 578.77 feet along the east and west 1/4 line of said Section
17; thence north 0° 08' 47" west 754.64 feet along the east line of the
west 36 acres of the south 46 acres of the northeast 1/4 of said Section
17; thence south 89° 54' 53" west 300 feet along the north line of the
south 46 acres of the northeast 1/4 of said Section 17; thence south
00° 08' 47" east 754.64 feet along the west line of the east 300 feet
Sec. 2-34 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-35.1
C:104
of the west 36 acres of the south 46 acres of the northeast 1/4 of said
Section 17; thence south 89° 54' 53" west 1778.03 feet along the east
and west 1/4 line of said Section 17 to the center of said Section 17;
thence south 89° 54' 53" west 2657.15 feet along the east and west
1/4 line of said Section 17 to the west 1/4 corner of said Section 17;
thence north 89° 19' 47" west 1,325.75 feet along the east and west 1/
4 line of said Section 18; thence north 00° 05' 36" west 1,261.43 feet
along the west line of the southeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of said
Section 18; thence 982.91 feet along the south line of Interstate 196
and along the arc of a curve to the right with a radius of 11,356.16 feet
through a central angle of 04° 57' 33" the long chord of which bears
north 87° 25' 35" east 982.60 feet; thence north 89° 54' 21" east 343.56
feet along the south line of Interstate 196; thence north 00° 06' 36"
west 300 feet along the west line of Section 17; thence north 89° 54'
21" east 5,306.29 feet along the north line of Interstate 196; thence
north 00° 22' 51" west 1,019.04 feet along the east line of said Section
17 to the northeast corner of said Section 17; thence south 89° 48' 47"
east 1,819.67 feet along the north line of said Section 16; thence north
00° 43' 28" west 99.00 feet; thence south 89° 48' 47" east 165.00 feet;
thence north 00° 43' 28" west 759.00 feet; thence south 89° 48' 47" east
660 feet; thence south 00° 43' 28" east 858 feet along the north and
south 1/4 line of said Section 9 to the south 1/4 corner of said Section 9;
thence south 89° 52' 03" east 1,983.36 feet along the south line of said
Section 9; thence along the northerly right-of-way line of Interstate 196
the following nine courses: thence north 00° 07' 57" east 33.00 feet;
thence north 72° 51' 34" east 218.90 feet; thence north 49° 36' 07" east
479.12 feet; thence north 37° 26' 15" east 415.64 feet; thence north
22° 52' 11" east 415.64 feet; thence north 10° 42' 19" east 903.25 feet;
thence north 54° 44' 52" east 119.54 feet; thence 289.05 feet along the
arc of a curve to the right with a radius of 68,834.90 feet through a
central angle of 00° 14' 26" the long chord of which bears north 35°
23' 28" west 289.05 feet; thence north 35° 16' 14" west 66.64 feet;
thence north 54° 43' 46" east 160.00 feet; thence south 35° 16' 14" east
66.64 feet; thence 782.14 feet along the arc of a curve to the left with a
radius of 68,674.90 feet through a central angle of 00° 39' 09" the long
chord of which bears south 35° 35' 49" east 782.13 feet; thence south
35° 55' 24" east 1,470.33 feet; thence along the southerly right-of-way
line of Interstate 196 the following seven courses: thence north 09° 04'
29" east 169.71 feet; thence north 54° 04' 22" east 185.81 feet; thence
north 14° 25' 06" east 890.45 feet; thence north 29° 46' 28" east 426.72
feet; thence north 49° 36' 07" east 376.13 feet; thence north 40° 10'
23" east 103.77 feet; thence north 49° 36' 07" east 204.88 feet; thence
south 88° 08' 31" east 969.14 feet along the east and west 1/4 line of
Section 10; thence south 00° 34' 51" east 1,312.40 feet along the east
line of the northwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said Section 10; thence
south 88° 13' 43" east 895.29 feet along north line of the southeast 1/
4 of the southeast 1/4 of said Section 10; thence south 00° 38' 01" east
200.18 feet; thence south 88° 13' 43" east 435.60 feet; thence south
00° 38' 01" east 1,110.27 feet along the east line of said Section 10
Sec. 2-35.1 CHARTER Sec. 2-35.1
C:105
to the southeast corner of said Section 10; thence south 00° 28' 41"
east 2,677.94 feet along the east line of said Section 15 to the east 1/4
corner of said Section 15 and the point of ending.
Parcel B (98-AP-12):
Part of the west 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 and part of the northwest 1/4 of
Section 10, T4N, R15W, Fillmore Township, Allegan County, Michigan,
described as follows: Beginning at the north 1/4 corner of said section;
thence south 88° 05' 14" east 725.01 feet along the north section line;
thence south 00° 31' 41" east 1,270.64 feet parallel with the northsouth
1/4 line; thence north 88° 05' 14" west 480.01 feet; thence south
00° 31' 41" east 1,109.24 feet along the east line of the west 15.00
acres of the northeast 1/4 of said section; thence south 49° 36' 09" west
373.37 feet along the northerly right-of-way line of Highway 1-196 (a
limited access highway); thence north 34° 20' 02" west 3,239.15 feet
along the westerly right-of-way line of CSX Railroad (a 100.00 foot wide
right-of-way); thence south 88° 36' 26" east 1,545.02 feet along the
north section line; thence south 00° 31' 41" east 250 feet; thence south
88° 36' 26" east 300 feet; thence north 00° 31' 41" west 250 feet along
the north-south 1/4 line to the place of beginning.
(2) The above-described property, located contiguous to Precincts 5.1 and
5.3, shall be included in the respective precincts to determine polling
places in such wards. A map of the City of Holland depicting wards,
precincts, and polling places for the above-described property is
attached hereto, and is incorporated by reference, and a copy is on file
with the Office of the City Clerk, City Hall, Holland, Michigan.
Sec. 2-35.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-35.1
C:106
ARTICLE VIII
Compensation Commission
Sec. 2-36. Purpose and intent of article. [Ord. No. 608, § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 5 of Act No. 279 of Public Acts of
1909, as amended by Act No. 41 of Public Acts of 1969, being Section 117.5
of the Compiled Laws of 1948, as further amended by Act No. 8 of Public
Acts of 1972 (M.S.A. 5.2084(3)), adding Section 5c, the City hereby creates
a Compensation Commission.20 It is the purpose and intent of this article
to provide for the creation and workings of a Compensation Commission as
stated in Subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Section 5c (M.S.A. 5.2084(3))
enacted by Act No. 8 of Public Acts of 1972, and all questions of intent and
interpretation of this article or its validity shall be resolved to the extent
possible by reference to such section.
Sec. 2-37. Creation. [Ord. No. 608, § 2]
A Compensation Commission is hereby created which, subject to the
provisions of Sections 2-38 through 2-40, shall determine and fix the
salaries of all elected officials of the City.
Sec. 2-38. Composition; appointment and terms of members; filling
vacancies; persons not eligible for membership. [Ord. No. 608, § 3]
(a) The Compensation Commission shall consist of seven members, all of
whom shall be registered electors of the City. Within 30 days after
November 22, 1972, the Mayor shall appoint the initial seven members
of the Compensation Commission, one member to serve for a term of
one year, one member to serve for a term of two years, one member to
serve for a term of three years, one member to serve for a term of four
years, one member to serve for a term of five years, one member to
serve for a term of six years, and one member to serve for a term of
seven years. As each member's term expires, another member shall be
appointed by the Mayor to serve for a term of seven years. All members
appointed after the initial appointment shall be appointed prior to
October 1 of the year of the appointment. Vacancies shall be filled by an
appointment by the Mayor for a term equal to the unexpired term of the
member leaving the Compensation Commission.
(b) All appointments made by the Mayor, whether initial appointments,
appointments to fill expired terms or appointments to fill unexpired
terms, shall be subject to the confirmation by a majority of the members
elected and serving on the City Council.
(c) No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch
of any level of any government or members of the immediate family of
such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the
compensation committee.
20.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 117.5c.
Sec. 2-36 CHARTER Sec. 2-39
C:107
Sec. 2-39. Determination of salaries. [Ord. No. 608, § 4]
Sec. 2-40. Meetings; times of determinations; quorum; session
days; compensation and expenses. [Ord. No. 608, § 5]
(a) The Compensation Commission shall determine the salaries of the
elected officials of the City, and such determination shall be effective to
establish such salaries unless the City Council, by a resolution adopted
by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the City
Council, shall reject the determination. The determinations of the
Compensation Commission shall be filed with the City Clerk's office and
shall become effective on the thirtieth day following such filing unless
rejected by the City Council, in which case the then existing salary shall
remain the salary of the elected official.
(b) Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to any elected official in
addition to salary shall be for expenses actually incurred in the course
of City business and accounted for to the City.
(a) The Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session
days in 1972 and every odd-numbered year thereafter, and all
determinations shall be made within 45 days following the first session
day of any calendar year. A majority of the members of the
Compensation Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting
the business of the Compensation Commission, and the Compensation
Commission shall take no action or make any determination of salaries
without the concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and
serving on the Compensation Commission.
(b) The term "session days" as used herein shall mean any calendar day on
which the Compensation Commission meets and a quorum is present.
(c) The members of the Compensation Commission shall receive no
compensation but shall be reimbursed by the City for their actual
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
Sec. 2-39 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-40
C:108
ARTICLE IX
Purchasing Department
Sec. 2-41. Created. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214,
7-1-1998]
Pursuant to powers granted by Section 4.16 of the Charter of the City,
there is hereby created a department of purchases of the general City
administration, for the control of purchasing activities and making
contracts. Purchases by the Board of Public Works shall be made as
prescribed by its governing board within Charter limitations. The Board
shall establish and periodically review guidelines and policies to govern
such purchases.
Sec. 2-42. Organization; Purchasing Coordinator generally. [Ord.
No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998; 4-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 1766]
Sec. 2-43. Authority of Purchasing Coordinator; definitions. [Ord.
No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998; 4-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 1766]
(a) The Finance Director shall be the Purchasing Coordinator. The
Purchasing Coordinator shall receive such salary for his duties as shall
be determined by the annual City budget. The activities of the
Purchasing Coordinator shall be under the supervision of the City
Manager, subject to the provisions of this article.
(b) Nothing herein shall preclude the City Manager from assigning the
purchasing function to an existing department of the general City
administration or designating someone other than the Finance Director
as the Purchasing Coordinator. When such assignment is made, the
reference herein to a department shall be deemed to refer to the
assignment of that function to an existing department. The Purchasing
Coordinator shall have such experience and capabilities as shall be
required by the City Manager. The Purchasing Coordinator may appoint
a Deputy Purchasing Coordinator subject to approval by the City
Manager. The Deputy Purchasing Coordinator shall possess all the
powers and authorities of the Purchasing Coordinator, except as such
may be from time to time limited by his superior or by the City Manager.
(a) For purposes of this Article IX of Chapter 2, the following terms shall be
construed to have the following meanings:
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — Construed to mean, but not limited to,
standard software licenses (other than software that is custom
designed for the City), utility services, and the rental, repair or
maintenance of equipment, machinery, automotive equipment and
other City-owned personal or real property.
FUNDING AGREEMENT — Contracts with local nonprofit
organizations that provide services to or for the City.
Sec. 2-41 CHARTER Sec. 2-43
C:109
Sec. 2-44. Duties of the Purchasing Coordinator. [Ord. No. 628;
Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Purchasing Coordinator
shall have the following general duties and responsibilities, in addition to
those specifically promulgated in the rules and regulations by the City
Manager:
SUPPLIES, MATERIALS and EQUIPMENT — Any and all goods which
shall be furnished to or used by any department.
(b) Subject to Subsections (d), (e) and (f) of this Section 2-43, the
Purchasing Coordinator shall have the power to purchase all supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services needed by the general
departments of the City, exclusive of the Board of Public Works.
Purchases under this Section 2-43 do not require specific City Council
approval.
(c) Purchases under this Section 2-43 shall be by purchase order or
contract (See Section 2-49.), made in consultation with the appropriate
department head and shall be subject to the quotation or competitive
bidding requirements set forth in Sections 2-46 through 2-48.1, if
applicable. All contracts authorized by this Section 2-43 shall be signed
by the City Manager, subject to approval as to form by the City Attorney.
(d) The Purchasing Coordinator may purchase expendable supplies,
materials and equipment, and contractual services that are not
commonly defined as capital outlay items or fixed assets, if such
purchases do not exceed $20,000 and are a part of the operating budget
approved by the City Council.
(e) The Purchasing Coordinator may purchase supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services that are commonly defined as capital
outlay items or fixed assets if such purchases do not exceed $20,000
and were approved as part of the budget approved by the City Council.
(f) The Purchasing Coordinator may purchase professional services or
minor construction services without prior City Council approval if such
services do not exceed $50,000 and were approved as part of the
budget approved by City Council.
(g) The City Manager may execute funding agreements for recipients who
provide services to or for the City if such agreements do not exceed
$20,000 and are a part of the operating budget approved by the City
Council.
(a) Procure or supervise procurement of all supplies, materials, equipment
and contractual services needed by the general City departments.
(b) Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories of supplies
belonging to the general City departments, including but not limited to
the authority to establish and supervise storerooms and warehouses for
Sec. 2-43 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-44
C:110
Sec. 2-45. Purchases by department heads. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No.
779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998; 4-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1766]
A department head, consistent with the terms of this article, may purchase
materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services for his or her
department without prior approval of the Purchasing Coordinator or the
City Council through a confirming purchase order if the purchases do not
exceed $5,000 and were approved as part of the budget approved by the
City Council. Subject to the provisions of this article, the City Manager
may prescribe rules and regulations authorizing a department head to make
purchases of supplies, materials, equipment or services upon prior verbal
authorization by the City Manager or the Purchasing Coordinator with the
confirming purchase order to be issued subsequent thereto.
Sec. 2-46. Quotations and bids—when required. [Ord. No. 628; Ord.
No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998; 4-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1766]
Sec. 2-47. Procedures for quotations and bids. [Ord. No. 628; Ord.
No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 1488, 1-9-2008]
materials which can be purchased and stored for future use by one or
more units of the City government.
(c) Supervise the trade, sale at public auction or otherwise disposition of
surplus materials, supplies and equipment belonging to the general
City departments in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
Charter and statutes applicable to the disposal of surplus or abandoned
materials, supplies and equipment.
(a) The Purchasing Coordinator shall obtain a minimum of two quotations
prior to purchasing supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services if the estimated cost exceeds $1,500 but is under $5,000.
Purchases up to $1,500 may be made without quotations.
(b) The Purchasing Coordinator shall solicit written competitive bids for
purchases of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services
where the estimated cost exceeds $5,000 but is under $20,000.
(c) The Purchasing Coordinator shall solicit sealed bids for purchases of
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services where the
estimated cost exceeds $20,000.
(d) The Purchasing Coordinator shall solicit written competitive bids for
minor construction services where the estimated cost exceeds $5,000
but is under $50,000.
(a) When the Purchasing Coordinator deems it advisable or this article
requires quotations or sealed bids, he shall confer with the department
head as to the specifications required for the purchase, and again after
the quotations have been received, before issuing a purchase order or
Sec. 2-44 CHARTER Sec. 2-47
C:111
submitting them to the City Manager for approval by the City Council,
if required.
(b) When required, the Purchasing Coordinator shall solicit bids or
quotations from responsible prospective suppliers by sending them a
copy of the request to bid. In addition, requests for bids or quotations
shall be sent to such prospective bidders as shall represent a sufficient
number of qualified bidders. The Purchasing Coordinator or the City
Manager shall determine the extent of advertising or solicitation of
sealed bids which may include advertisements in an appropriate
newspaper or trade publication prior to the deadline for receiving bids.
(c) Competitive bidding shall not be required with respect to contracts for
professional services, insurance, banking, and financial services. For
purposes of this section, professional services shall mean that the
contract for services requires a high degree of individual skill, training,
and expertise where the specialized ability or fitness of the individual or
company performing such service is required by the City.
(1) Professional services, including those services specified in
Subsection (c), shall be obtained by competitive negotiation to
determine that a reasonable price for such services has been
obtained. No contract for the services of legal counsel may be
awarded without prior approval of the City Attorney and City
Council.
(2) In any other case where competitive bidding or competitive
negotiation is not required by law and either clearly is not practical
or no advantage would result to the City by competitive bidding or
competitive negotiation, the City Council, upon written
recommendation of the City Manager, may authorize the execution
of a contract without competitive bidding or competitive
negotiation. When a contract is let without competitive bidding or
competitive negotiation, the proposed contract shall be approved
by the City Attorney as to form and content, unless prepared by him
by direction of the City Council, and submitted to the City Council
for approval.
(d) All sealed bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Coordinator and,
when deemed necessary by the Purchasing Coordinator or upon
direction of the City Manager, shall be accompanied by surety in the
form of check, cash or bond in such amount as shall have been
prescribed in the notice and/or invitation to bid. The bids shall be
opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice and/or
invitation to bid by the Purchasing Coordinator and, if applicable, in the
presence of the City Manager or the department head of the
department for which the purchase is to be made. Sealed bids received
by the purchase coordinator after the established deadline shall be
returned unopened to the bidder submitting the same.
Sec. 2-47 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-47
C:112
Sec. 2-48. Same—Award of contracts and purchases. [Ord. No. 628;
Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
Contracts and purchases shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.
In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to the price,
the department head, Purchasing Coordinator or the City Council shall
consider:
(e) Purchases of items that are unique, noncompetitive, or available only
from a sole source may be exempt only from the requirements of
Section 2-46 with regard to quotations and bids; however, every effort
should be made to obtain alternate sources of supply for such items.
Items that are unique, noncompetitive or available only from a sole
source shall be designated as such only by the City Manager. Such
purchases shall still require the appropriate purchase order and/or
contract, and necessary approvals.
(f) Pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.16 of the City Charter, the City
shall have the right to accept or reject any or all bids. The City shall also
have the right to waive any informalities/irregularities in the bids, as
well as the right to split the award or a bid between two or more
bidders. Purchases shall be made from the source from which the
lowest responsible bid is received, as defined in Section 2-48.
(a) The bidder's ability, capacity and skill to perform the contract or
provide the supplies, material, equipment or services required
promptly, or within the specified time, without delay or interference.
(b) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
(c) The bidder's previous and existing compliance with contracts, purchase
orders or services.
(d) The bidder's previous and existing compliance with laws and
ordinances relating to contracts, purchase orders or services.
(e) The sufficiency of the financial resources of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the supplies, materials, equipment or services.
(f) The availability and adaptability of the supplies, materials, equipment
or contractual services to the particular use required.
(g) The bidder's ability to provide future maintenance and service subject
to the contract or purchase order.
(h) The number of scope of the conditions attached to the bid by the bidder.
(i) The brand, make or type of product being proposed by the bidder, and
its compatibility with other similar materials or equipment currently
owned and operated by the City.
Sec. 2-47 CHARTER Sec. 2-48
C:113
Sec. 2-48.1. Preference for local bidders/Holland-based businesses.
[Ord. No. 1565, 6-1-2011]
If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality
and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local
bidder, in any. In all other cases of tied bids, the contract shall be
awarded to one of the tied bidders by drawing lots in public.
(a) Purpose. The City finds that its purchasing practices should encourage
local vendors to provide goods and/or services to the City, resulting in
increased economic activity through more local jobs, tax revenues, and
expenditures, and to entice businesses to relocate to the City.
(b) Definition. "Holland-based business" means a physical and economic
relationship to Holland determined by a verifiable business address (not
a P.O. box) within the corporate boundaries of the City, activities carried
out in Holland substantial enough to consider it a Holland-based
business, and the payment of City property taxes for not less than one
year immediately prior to the date of the bid submittal. A Holland-based
business shall also include a local vendor which is located outside the
geographic boundaries of the City of Holland but within the geographic
boundaries of the Macatawa Area Coordinating Council and the
governmental unit in which such local vendor is located has an
ordinance or a purchasing policy which grants a similar local vendor
preference to Holland-based businesses as defined in the first sentence
of this paragraph.
(c) Exceptions.
(1) Purchases resulting from exigent emergency conditions where any
delay in completion or preference would jeopardize public health,
safety or welfare of the citizens of the City, or where, in the
judgment of the manager or his designee, the operational
effectiveness of a City department or division or a significant City
function would be seriously threatened if a purchase was not made
expeditiously.
(2) Purchases from any sole source supplier for supplies, materials, or
other equipment.
(3) Purchases made through the state's extended purchasing program,
or other cooperative purchasing contractual agreements utilized or
initiated by the purchasing division.
(4) The procurement of goods and services utilizing the request for
proposal (RFP) or best value quote processes where the award is
based on criteria other than lowest cost, unless the original
solicitation contains the criteria used to affect Holland-based
preference.
Sec. 2-48 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-48.1
C:114
(5) Bid solicitations that utilize federal funding that prohibit awards
based on local preference criteria.
(6) Bid solicitations that utilize "life cycle cost" as the basis of award in
place of submitted bid price.
(d) Preference. When sealed bids are received under Section 2-46, the
following shall apply:
(1) The person or business submitting the lowest responsive,
responsible bid, according to the requirements of the bidding
documents, shall be deemed the lowest bidder. If the lowest bidder
is not a Holland-based business, any Holland-based business with a
bid within 2% of the lowest bid shall be deemed the lowest bidder if
it agrees to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest bidder. A
lowered bid by a Holland-based business which is premised upon,
in whole or in part, changes to or variances to the bid
specifications, contract requirements, or scope of work shall be
considered nonresponsible and will not be considered.
(2) If such a Holland-based business refuses to reduce its bid to match
the lowest bid, then the next lowest responsive and responsible
Holland-based business with a bid within 2% of the lowest bid shall
be deemed the lowest bidder, if it agrees to reduce its bid to match
the bid of the lowest bidder.
(3) If no responsive and responsible Holland-based business within 2%
of the lowest bid agrees to reduce its bid, then the contract shall be
awarded to the person or business with the lowest, most responsive
and responsible bid.
(4) No contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be sublet in any
matter that permits 50% or more of the dollar value of the contract
to be performed by a subcontractor or subcontractors who do not
meet the definition of "Holland-based."
(e) Additional requirements. In no event shall a Holland-based business be
awarded a contract if the business is not current on real and personal
property taxes owed to the City.
(f) Rights of City. This section shall not waive or constrain, in any manner,
the right and prerogative of the City to reject any and all bids or
proposals, to reject a bid not accompanied by required bid security or
other documentation or data required by the bidding documents, or to
reject a bid which is in any way incomplete, irregular, not responsive or
not a lowest responsible bidder as defined by Section 2-48 of the
ordinance code.
(g) Rules and regulations. The City Manager, in conjunction with the
Purchasing Coordinator, may prescribe rules and regulations to
implement and carry out the intent and purpose of this section. Such
Sec. 2-48.1 CHARTER Sec. 2-48.1
C:115
Sec. 2-49. Contracts generally. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord.
No. 1214, 7-1-1998; 4-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1766]
Sec. 2-50. Involvement of the City Finance Director. [Ord. No. 628;
Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
The City Finance Director shall be notified of all contracts and the amounts
thereof, so that the proper accounts may be encumbered.
The City Finance Director shall be notified of each purchase order, giving
either the definite amount thereof or an amount estimated as closely as
possible by the Purchasing Coordinator, specifying the account to be
charged, so that the proper account may be encumbered.
Except in cases of emergency or in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-45, the Purchasing Coordinator
shall not release any order for delivery on a contract or purchase order
until the City Finance Director shall have certified that there are sufficient
unencumbered funds to the credit of the account indicated on the order to
defray the amount of such purchase.
Sec. 2-51. Emergency purchases. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord.
No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Purchasing
Coordinator or the City Manager may make or authorize a department head
to make emergency purchases when there exists a threat to public health,
safety or welfare under emergency conditions as defined in regulations
promulgated by the City Manager, provided, that such purchases shall be
made as competitively as is practical under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency purchase and for the selection
of the particular vendor or contractor shall be filed with the Purchasing
Coordinator and the City Manager within three days after the purchase is
made.
rules and regulations shall be consistent with the City charter and all
applicable City ordinances.
(a) The City Manager and/or City Attorney shall determine which
purchases of materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services
shall be by contract. All other purchases of materials, supplies,
equipment and contractual services shall be by purchase order.
Contracts or purchase orders shall not be required for purchases of less
than $1,000.
(b) Except as provided in Section 2-43(d), (e) and (f), all contracts shall be
submitted to the City Council and, upon approval by the City Council,
shall be signed by the Mayor and City Clerk, subject to approval as to
form by the City Attorney.
Sec. 2-48.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-52
C:116
Sec. 2-52. Inspection of delivered goods. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No.
779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
The department head shall be responsible for the inspection of all deliveries
of supplies, materials, equipment and services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the contract or purchase
order. The Purchasing Coordinator shall have the authority to require
testing of deliveries when necessary to determine their quality and
conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the
Purchasing Coordinator may make use of laboratory facilities of any agency
of the City government or any outside laboratory with the approval and
consent of the City Manager.
Sec. 2-53. Split orders or other deviations. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No.
779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
The Purchasing Coordinator or any department head shall not split any
order for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services to
avoid the limitations placed upon such purchases by this article, and no
department head shall declare a purchase to be an emergency one unless
an unforeseeable circumstance or combination of circumstances makes
immediate action necessary. Infractions of these regulations shall be
deemed to be a violation of this article of the Code of the City.
Sec. 2-54. Combined purchases. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord.
No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
Nothing herein shall preclude the purchasing department from combining
purchases with the Boards of the City or with other units of government,
including the state, in order to obtain advantages which might accrue by
doing so.
Sec. 2-55. Reports. [Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214,
7-1-1998]
The City Council, through the City Manager, or the City Manager may
request reports on purchases from the Purchasing Coordinator and such
reports shall be submitted forthwith.
Sec. 2-56. City Manager to prescribe rules and regulations. [Ord.
No. 628; Ord. No. 779; Ord. No. 1214, 7-1-1998]
The City Manager, in conjunction with the Purchasing Coordinator, may
prescribe rules and regulations to implement and carry out the intent and
purpose of this article. All rules and regulations shall be consistent with the
City Charter, all City ordinances and any purchasing resolutions adopted by
the City Council.
Sec. 2-57. through Sec. 2-59. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-52 CHARTER Sec. 2-57
C:117

ARTICLE X
CATV Advisory Commission
Sec. 2-60. Purpose. [Ord. No. 634]
Public access to CATV and related communication systems and the
possibility for the use of CATV facilities for two-way and additional
communications make it advisable to have a public commission to advise
the City on the impact, utilization, programming and public service aspects
of any CATV licensee operating in the City.
Sec. 2-61. Created; composition; appointment and terms of
members. [Ord. No. 634; Ord. No. 1147, 7-5-1995; Ord. No. 1433,
12-7-2005]
Sec. 2-62. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 634]
(a) There is hereby created a CATV Advisory Commission composed of
seven members, selected in the following manner:
(1) One member shall be the City Manager or his designated
representative.
(2) One member shall be the superintendent of utilities or his
designated representative.
(3) One member shall be affiliated with a local educational institution.
(4) Four members shall be from the public at large.
(5) A minimum of five members of the Commission shall be residents of
the City of Holland.
(b) With the exception of the City Manager and superintendent of utilities
or their designates, the members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and approval of the Council, for terms of three years;
provided that, of the members initially appointed, two public members
shall be appointed to a one-year term, one public member and one
educational member shall be appointed to a two-year term, and one
public member shall be appointed to a three-year term.
(c) Terms shall commence on the first day of July following appointment.
Each vacancy among appointed members shall be filled in the manner
of making original appointments and shall be for the balance of the
term vacated.
(a) Promote local programming for and by various religious, educational,
governmental, ethnic, professional, cultural and other special interest
groups.
(b) Advise the City Council on matters which might constitute grounds to
terminate a CATV license or attachment agreement.
Sec. 2-60 CHARTER Sec. 2-62
C:119
Sec. 2-63. Meetings; rules; Chairperson. [Ord. No. 634]
The Commission shall meet quarterly and at such other times as required
or as advisable. The Commission shall adopt such rules and procedures as
are appropriate to the performance of its duties. The members shall elect a
Chairperson to serve a one-year term.
(c) Advise the City Council on the regulation of rates and charges to
subscribers.
(d) Advise the City Council on the service and operational performance of
any CATV licensee.
(e) Advise the City Council of new developments and achievements in the
CATV and related fields.
(f) In accordance with normal budgeting procedures for the City, and with
approval of City Council, direct the expenditures of funds available to
the CATV Advisory Commission.
Sec. 2-62 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-63
C:120
ARTICLE XI
Airport Expenditures
Sec. 2-64. Referendum required. [Ord. No. 817]
No funds may be expended to acquire, establish, operate or help maintain
an airport or similar facility without the approval of a majority of electors
voting on such a question at any general or special election.
Sec. 2-65. through Sec. 2-83. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-64 CHARTER Sec. 2-65
C:121

ARTICLE XII
(Reserved)
Sec. 2-84. through Sec. 2-90. (Reserved)21
21.[Editor's Note: Former Sections 2-84, Definitions, 2-85, Residency Requirement, 2-86,
Exceptions–Appointive officers/department heads, and 2-87, Failure to comply, were
repealed 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1704
Sec. 2-84 CHARTER Sec. 2-84
C:123

ARTICLE XIII
Economic Development Corporation
Sec. 2-91. Creation. [Ord. No. 699]
There is hereby created and authorized the incorporation of the Economic
Development Corporation of the City pursuant to and in accordance with
Act 338, Public Acts of 1974, as amended.22
Sec. 2-92. Approval of application. [Ord. No. 699]
The application dated July 6, 1977, and filed by Robert De Young, Paul
vander Leek and David L. Meier, is hereby approved.
Sec. 2-93. Approval and adoption of Articles of Incorporation. [Ord.
No. 699]
The Articles of Incorporation for the Economic Development Corporation of
the City of Holland are hereby approved and adopted in the following form:
Article I
Name
The name of the economic development corporation is THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION OF THE CITY OF HOLLAND.
Articles of Incorporation
of The Economic Development Corporation of the City of Holland
A Public Corporation
These Articles of Incorporation are for the purpose of forming a public
economic development corporation pursuant to the provisions of Act No.
338 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, (the "economic development
corporations act of 1974").
Article II
Incorporating Municipality
The incorporation of The Economic Development Corporation of the City
of Holland is to be accomplished by the approval of the Articles of
Incorporation by Ordinance of the City of Holland, Ottawa and Allegan
Counties, Michigan.
Article III
Purpose
22.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1601 et seq.
Sec. 2-91 CHARTER Sec. 2-93
C:125
The Corporation is organized and incorporated as authorized by and
pursuant to the Economic Development Corporations Act of 1974 (Act 338,
Public Acts of 1974), as amended. The purpose for which the Corporation
is created is to alleviate and prevent conditions of unemployment; to assist
and retain local industries and commercial enterprises; to strengthen and
revitalize the economy of the City of Holland and of the State of Michigan;
to provide means and methods for the encouragement and assistance
of industrial and commercial enterprises in locating, purchasing,
constructing, reconstructing, modernizing, improving, maintaining,
repairing, furnishing, equipping and expanding in the City of Holland;
to encourage the location and expansion of commercial enterprises to
more conveniently provide needed services and facilities of the commercial
enterprises to the City and the residents thereof. To accomplish the
foregoing essential public purposes, the corporation, pursuant to Act 338,
Public Acts 1974, as amended, may do the following:
a) Construct, acquire by gift or purchase, reconstruct, improve,
maintain or repair Projects (as the word "project" is defined in Act
338, Public Acts of 1974, as amended), and acquire the necessary
lands for the site therefor;
b) Acquire by gift or purchase the necessary machinery, furnishings, and
equipment for a Project;
c) Borrow money and issue its revenue bonds or revenue notes to
finance part or all of the cost of the acquisition, purchase,
construction, reconstruction or improvement of a project or any part
thereof, the cost of the acquisition and improvement of the necessary
sites therefor, the acquisition of machinery, furnishings and
equipment therefor and the costs necessary or incidental to the
borrowing of money and issuing of bonds or notes for such purpose;
d) Enter into leases, lease purchase agreements, or installment sales
contracts with any person, firm, corporation or public authority for
the use or sale of a Project, or any part thereof;
e) Mortgage the Project, or any part thereof, in favor of any lender of
money to the corporation;
f) Sell and convey the Project or any part thereof for a price and at a
time as the corporation determines;
g) Lend, grant, transfer or convey funds, as described in Act 338, Public
Acts of 1974, as amended, as permitted by law, but subject to
applicable restrictions affecting the use of such funds;
h) Assist and participate in the designation of the land area which will
be acquired in the implementation of a Project;
i) Prepare, assist and aid in the preparation of plans, services, studies
and recommendations relative to the public purposes of the
corporation;
j) Aid, assist and participate in clearing, rebuilding and rehabilitating
blighted, deteriorated areas or structures;
Sec. 2-93 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-93
C:126
k) Encourage citizen participation and assistance in industrial and
commercial enterprises, housing and community improvements and
to disseminate information to the general public concerning the
purposes and objectives of the corporation;
l) Aid, assist and participate in the acquisition, rehabilitation or
construction of industrial and commercial improvements, dwelling
units or other structures or matters incidental thereto;
m) Hold, demolish, repair, alter and improve or otherwise develop, clear
and dispose of real property;
n) Enter into agreements and contracts with any state agency or
department, its political subdivisions and agency or department
thereof, or any other official public body and any individual,
corporation or other organization in connection with the purpose of
the corporation;
o) Accept, hold, own, and acquire by bequest, devise, gift, purchase,
or lease any property, real or mixed, whether tangible or intangible,
without limitation as to kind, amount or value;
p) Sell, convey, lease, rent, mortgage, or make loans, grants or pledges
of any such property, or any interest therein or proceeds therefrom,
and to invest and reinvest the principal thereof and receipts
therefrom, if any;
q) Carry on any activity for the purposes above stated, either directly
or as agent, for or with public authorities, individuals, corporations
or other organizations, or in whole or in part through or by means of
public authorities, individuals, corporations or other organizations;
r) In general, and subject to such limitations and conditions as are
or may be prescribed by law, to exercise such other powers which
now are or hereafter may be conferred by law upon a corporation
organized pursuant to Act 338, Public Acts 1974, as amended, and for
the foregoing purposes.
Article IV
Board of Directors
1. Directors:
The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall consist of nine
persons, not more than three of whom shall be an officer or employee
of the City. The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Holland with the advice and
consent of the City Council, as amended. The Directors shall be
appointed for terms of six years, except of the Directors first
appointed, four shall be appointed for six years, one for five years, one
for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one
year.
2. Additional Directors:
Sec. 2-93 CHARTER Sec. 2-93
C:127
In accordance with Act 338, Public Acts of Michigan, 1974, as
amended, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
shall appoint two additional directors to the Board of Directors of
the Corporation for each project proposed by the Corporation. Each
of said additional Directors appointed pursuant to this paragraph 2,
Article IV, shall serve as Directors of the Corporation until the project
for which they are appointed is either abandoned or, if undertaken,
is completed in accordance with the project plan, at which time each
such director shall cease to serve.
Article V
Officers
The Board of Directors of the Corporation, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of its members (not counting additional directors appointed
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article IV, hereof), shall elect as the officers of
the Corporation, a President, a Secretary and a Treasurer, and from time to
time may elect one or more Vice-Presidents and such Assistant Secretaries,
Assistant Treasurers and such other officers, agents and employees as the
Board of Directors may deem proper. Any two offices other than the office
of President, Secretary, and Treasurer may be held by the same person.
The officers of the Corporation shall serve for a term of one year and
thereafter until his/her successor is elected and qualified, or until death,
resignation or removal.
Article VI
Powers and Duties
Sec. 2-93 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-93
C:128
The powers and duties of the Corporation and its officers are to assist
in alleviating and preventing conditions of unemployment; to assist and
retain local industries and commercial enterprises; to assist industrial
and commercial enterprises in locating, purchasing, constructing,
reconstructing, modernizing, improving, maintaining, repairing,
furnishing, equipping and expanding in, the City; and to construct, acquire
by gift or purchase, reconstruct, improve, maintain, modernize, repair,
furnish, equip and expand Projects (as the word "Project" is defined in Act
338, Public Acts 1974, as amended), and acquire the necessary lands for
the site therefor; to acquire by gift or purchase the necessary machinery,
furnishings, and equipment for a Project; to borrow money and issue
revenue bonds or revenue notes to finance all or part of the cost of a
Project, including machinery, furnishings and equipment and the necessary
site or sites therefor; to enter into, execute and carry out leases, lease
purchase agreements, installment sales contracts with any person, firm
or corporation for the use or sale of the Project; to lease, mortgage, sell
and convey the Project or any part thereof for a price and at a time as
the Corporation determines; to lend, grant, transfer, or convey funds as
permitted by law, and in general to do and have such powers not prohibited
by law and to this extent all powers provided and conferred by law upon
corporations created and incorporated pursuant to Act 338, Public Acts of
Michigan, 1974, as amended, are hereby incorporated herein as powers of
the Corporation and its officers, in addition to all other powers conferred
thereupon by law. It shall be the power and the duty of the officers of
the Corporation to implement, carry out, and execute the above described
powers and duties of the Corporation.
Article VII
Body Corporate
The Corporation shall be a body corporate with power to sue and be sued
in any court of this state. It shall possess all the powers necessary to
carry out the purpose of its incorporation and those incidental thereto. The
enumeration of any powers in these Articles of Incorporation shall not be
construed as a limitation upon such general powers of the Corporation.
Article VIII
Location
Location of the first offices of the Economic Development Corporation
of the City of Holland is Holland City Hall, 270 River Avenue, Holland,
Michigan, 49423.
Article IX
Registered Agent
The name of the resident agent at the registered office is the Holland City
Clerk.
Article X
Non-stock: Assets
Sec. 2-93 CHARTER Sec. 2-93
C:129
The Corporation is organized upon a non-stock basis. The amount of assets
which said Corporation possesses is:
1) Real property: None
2) Personal property; None
The Corporation will be financed from donations, gifts, grants and devices,
either solicited or unsolicited, obtained from public authorities, individuals,
corporations and other organizations, by earnings from its activities,
borrowings, and issuance of bonds and notes.
Article XI
Incorporators
The names and addresses of each of the incorporators are as follows:
Robert De Young 140 Sunset Drive
Holland, Michigan
Paul vander Leek 56 West 39th Street
Holland, Michigan
David L. Meier 125 West 11th Street
Holland, Michigan
Article XII
Term
The term of existence of the Corporation is perpetual or until dissolved in
accordance with Act 338, Public Acts of Michigan, 1974, as amended.
Article XIII
Bylaws and Regulation of Affairs
The Board of Directors, by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members
(not counting additional directors appointed pursuant to paragraph 2 of
Article IV, hereof), shall adopt bylaws for the operation of affairs of the
Corporation.
The regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation, including the
distribution of assets on dissolution or final liquidation is placed entirely
with the Board of Directors or their successors, provided in the by-laws
this corporation is subject, however, to the provisions of Act No. 338 of the
Public Acts of 1974, as amended.
Article XIV
Publication of Articles of Incorporation
Sec. 2-93 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-93
C:130
The name of the newspaper in which the Articles of Incorporation shall be
published is The Holland Sentinel, a newspaper of general circulation in
the City of Holland. The director elected as Secretary of the Corporation
shall also act as Recording Officer of the Corporation. The Clerk of the
City of Holland shall cause a copy of the Articles of Incorporation to be
published once in said newspaper.
Article XV
Net Earnings
No part of the net earnings of the Corporation, beyond that necessary
for the retirement of indebtedness or to implement the public purposes
or program of the City shall inure to the benefit of any person, firm or
corporation, other than the City (except that reasonable compensation
may be paid for services rendered to or for the Corporation affecting
one or more of its purposes), and no member, trustee, officer or director
of the Corporation or any private individual shall be entitled to share
in the distribution of any of the corporate assets on dissolution of the
Corporation. No substantial part of the activities of the Corporation shall
be the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence
legislation and the Corporation shall not participate in, or intervene in
(including the publication or distribution of statements) any political
campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. Upon the termination
or dissolution of the Corporation, after adequate provision has been made
for all obligations of the Corporation, surplus earnings, all property and
assets of the Corporation shall belong to and be paid only to the City of
Holland, Michigan, or its successor.
We, the incorporators, sign our names this _______ day of __________,
197____.
Robert De Young
Paul vander Leek
David L. Meier
STATE OF MICHIGAN
ss.
County of Ottawa
On this _____ day of ______________, 197 ____, before me personally appeared
Robert De Young, Paul vander Leek, and David L. Meier to me known to be
the persons described in and who executed the foregoing instrument and
acknowledged that they executed the same as their free act and deed.
Sec. 2-93 CHARTER Sec. 2-93
C:131
Notary Public, Ottawa County,
Michigan
My commission expires
Sec. 2-94. Filing with Department of Treasury. [Ord. No. 699]
That a certified copy of this article shall be filed with the corporation
division of the department of treasury in accordance with Section 5,
Subparagraph (1) of Act 338, Public Acts of 1974.
Sec. 2-95. Direction to incorporate. [Ord. No. 699]
That the applicants in the application dated July 6, 1977, are hereby
authorized and directed to incorporate the economic development
corporation of the City as a nonprofit corporation pursuant to Act 327 of
the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, (Sections 450.62 to 450.192, Michigan
Compiled Laws).
Sec. 2-96. Incorporation within 90 days. [Ord. No. 699]
That, pursuant to Act 338, Public Acts of 1974, if incorporation by the
applicants is not accomplished within 90 days after the effective date of this
article, then this article shall be void.
Sec. 2-93 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-96
C:132
ARTICLE XIV
Mainstreet Downtown Development Authority23
Sec. 2-97. Establishment. [Ord. No. 717; Ord. No. 1017, 7-10-1991]
In recognition of the fact that it is necessary for the best interests of
the public to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax
valuation in the City downtown business district and to promote the
economic growth of the City downtown business district, a Downtown
Development Authority is hereby established pursuant to Act No. 197 of
the Public Acts of 1975, to be known as the City of Holland Mainstreet/
Downtown Development Authority.
Sec. 2-98. Powers; duties; boundaries. [Ord. No. 717; Ord. No. 909,
8-20-1986; Ord. No. 958, 8-3-1988; Ord. No. 971, 2-15-1989; Ord.
No. 1228, 12-2-1998; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1704; 5-1-2019 by Ord.
No. 1767]
The Downtown Development Authority shall have all of the powers and
duties prescribed by Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended
(MCLA § 125.1651 et seq.), including but not limited to implementing
development plans, acquiring and disposing of interests in real and personal
property, levying an ad valorem tax, not to exceed two mills, on the real and
tangible personal property in the downtown development district, issuing
bonds and other evidence of indebtedness and authorizing the use of tax
increment financing, all as more fully delineated in Act 197 of the Public
Acts of 1975, as amended, to promote the economic growth of the
downtown development district. The City shall exercise its powers within
the following described area which shall be the "downtown development
district":
All property bounded by the existing corporate limits of the City of Holland
between Fairbanks and Maple Avenues, if extended, to the waters of Lake
Macatawa on the north, Fairbanks Avenue on the east, 11th Street on the
south, and an area described as west of Maple Avenue, if extended, to the
water's edge of Lake Macatawa and north of 9th Street, if extended, to
the water's edge of Lake Macatawa on the west, including such additional
property which is legally described as follows: Part of Sections 20, 21, 28,
and 29 of T5N, R15W, City of Holland, Ottawa County, Michigan, described
as:
Beginning at the intersection of the north line of the CSX Railroad spur
track with the east line of Section 29, said point being distance north
426.35 feet from the east 1/4 corner of Section 29 and proceeding thence
easterly and northeasterly along the northerly and northwesterly right-ofway
line of the CSX Railroad to the center line of the Macatawa River;
thence northwesterly, southwesterly and westerly along the center line of
23.Editor's Note: See Ord. No. 1002, adopted 3-7-1990, for information on the approval and
adoption of the development plan and tax increment financing plan for the Downtown
Development Authority.
Sec. 2-97 CHARTER Sec. 2-98
C:133
the Macatawa River to the intersection with the center line of the northerly
extension of College Avenue; thence south along the center line of the
extension of College Avenue to the south edge of the Macatawa River
marsh; thence southeasterly along the southerly and southwesterly edge of
Macatawa River marsh to the east line of Section 29; thence south along the
east line of Section 29 to the point of beginning; which is zoned commercial
(C-4, C-3, C-2, or C-1, or such future commercial classifications as shall be
established), Windmill Island Neighborhood Business District, Planned Unit
Development or Industrial (I-1 or I-2) but not including that property zoned
R-TRN-Traditional Residential Neighborhood or PRD-Planned Residential
Development.
Sec. 2-98.1. Board; membership; terms. [Ord. No. 972, 2-15-1989;
Ord. No. 1375, 11-19-2003; Ord. No. 1421, 8-17-2005]
The Downtown Development Authority shall be under the supervision and
control of a board consisting of the City Manager and 12 members. The
Board shall be appointed by the City Manager and approved by City
Council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an
interest in property located in the downtown development district. Not less
than one of the members shall be persons having an interest in property
zoned Industrial and located in the downtown development district. Not less
than one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown development
district, if the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within
it. Of the members first appointed, an equal number of the members, as
near as is practicable shall be appointed for one year, two years, three
years, and four years. Notwithstanding, no member shall serve more than
two consecutive four year terms or a total of eight consecutive years. If
a member desires to serve on the Board after two consecutive four year
terms or eight consecutive years, he or she will not be eligible to serve
until one year has elapsed since the expiration of the two consecutive four
year terms or eight consecutive years. An appointment to fill a vacancy
shall be made by the City Manager for the unexpired term only. Members
of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed
for actual and necessary expenses. The Board shall elect a member as a
chairperson and vice-chairperson of the Board. A member shall not serve as
either a chairperson or a vice-chairperson for more than [a] two-year term.
After the chairperson's two-year term has expired, the vice-chairperson
shall become chairperson of the Board for a two-year term. In the event
a vice-chairperson declines to become chairperson at the end of the twoyear
term, the Board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from
the remaining members of the Board. A former chairperson may not serve
as a vice-chairperson until two years have elapsed since the expiration of
the chairperson's two-year term. The operation and activities of the Board
shall comply with Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended; MCLA
§ 125.1651 et seq.
Sec. 2-98 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-99
C:134
Sec. 2-99. Director; bond. [Ord. No. 717]
Any director of the Downtown Development Authority shall, before entering
upon the duties of his office, post a bond in the penal sum of $10,000,
payable to the authority for the use and benefit of the authority, approved by
the Board and filed with the City Clerk. The premium on the bond shall be
deemed an operating expense of the authority, payable from funds available
to the authority for expenses of operation.
Sec. 2-99 CHARTER Sec. 2-99
C:135

ARTICLE XIV.1
Downtown Principal Shopping District
Sec. 2-99.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 1223, 9-16-1998; Ord. No.
1518, 9-3-2008]
In recognition of the fact that it is necessary for the best interests of the City
of Holland to promote the economic health and development of a principal
shopping district in order to promote, encourage, stimulate, preserve, and
maintain the economic growth of the City downtown business district, the
City Council of the City of Holland establishes a principal shopping district
pursuant to Act 120 of the Public Acts of 1961 (MCLA § 125.981 et seq.).
Sec. 2-99.2. Powers; duties; boundaries. [Ord. No. 1223, 9-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1349, 10-2-2002; Ord. No. 1355, 11-20-2002; Ord. No.
1518, 9-3-2008]
The City shall have the power and authority permitted and described by
Act 120 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, including but not limited
to, conducting market research and public relations campaigns, developing,
coordinating, and conducting retail and institutional promotions, and
sponsoring special events and related activities. The City shall further have
the right and authority to acquire by purchase, gift, or condemnation, own,
maintain, or operate real or personal property necessary to effectuate the
intent and purposes of this ordinance. The City shall exercise its power and
authority within the following-described area which shall be designated the
"downtown principal shopping district."
All property within the corporate limits of the City of Holland located
within the boundaries of the Downtown Development Authority, as defined
in ordinance Section 2-98, as those boundaries may from time to time be
amended.
For assessment purposes, the area described as the downtown principal
shopping district may be divided into subareas with differing rates as
designated with the annually adopted principal shopping district
assessment policy.
Sec. 2-99.3. Board; membership; terms. [Ord. No. 1223, 9-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1227, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 1518, 9-3-2008]
The downtown principal shopping district shall be under the supervision
and control of a board consisting of nine members. The Board shall be
appointed by the City Manager with the concurrence of City Council. One
member of the Board shall be from an adjacent residential area; one
member shall be a representative of City government; and a majority of
the members shall be nominees of individual business located within the
principal shopping district. Of the members first appointed, an equal
number of the members, as near as practicable, shall be appointed for one
year, two years, three years, and four years. A member shall hold office until
the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, each member shall serve
Sec. 2-99.1 CHARTER Sec. 2-99.3
C:137
a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by
the City Manager upon concurrence of the City Council for the unexpired
term only. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation. The
chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the Board. The operation and
activities of the Board shall comply with the provisions of Act 120 of the
Public Acts of 1961, as amended.
Sec. 2-99.4. Financing of a project or redevelopment project. [Ord.
No. 1223, 9-16-1998; Ord. No. 1518, 9-3-2008]
A principal shopping district project, as authorized and defined by Act 120
of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, may be financed in whole or in part
by grants and gifts to the City; City funds; the issuance of general obligation
bonds of the City; the issuance of revenue bonds of the City; the levying
of special assessments against land or interests in land, or both; and such
other financing powers and authorities as shall exist pursuant to Act 120 of
the Public Acts of 1961, as existing or amended. The use of the term "public
improvement" shall not prevent the levying of a special assessment for the
cost of a downtown principal shopping district project representing special
benefits.
Sec. 2-99.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-99.4
C:138
ARTICLE XIV.2
Corridor Improvement Authority/Columbia Art District
Sec. 2-99.5. Establishment. [Ord. No. 1489, 1-9-2008]
Pursuant to the provisions of Act 280 of the Public Acts of 2005, MCLA
§ 125.2871 et seq. ("Act"), and for the purpose of creating a commercial
corridor to promote economic growth and for those purposes delineated
in the Act, the City of Holland establishes the Columbia ART District (the
"CAD") as a corridor improvement authority.
Sec. 2-99.6. Powers. [Ord. No. 1489, 1-9-2008]
The Corridor Improvement Authority/CAD shall have such powers and
authority as are delineated in the Act, and specifically those powers
designated pursuant to MCLA § 125.2881, as now existing or hereafter
amended.
Sec. 2-99.7. Boundaries of the development area. [Ord. No. 1489,
1-9-2008]
The boundaries of the Corridor Improvement Authority/CAD which shall
constitute the development area within which the Authority may exercise
its powers are described as follows:
Sec. 2-99.5 CHARTER Sec. 2-99.7
C:139
Beginning at the intersection of 15th Street and Columbia Avenue; thence
west 118; thence south 165.65 to the southwest corner of Lot 1, Block 458,
Assessor's Plat No. 2; thence west 19.45 to the northwest corner of Lot 40,
Block 458, Assessor's Plat No. 2; thence south 495 to the center line of 17th
Street, said point being 33 south of the southwest corner of Lot 19, Block
202, Bosman's Addition; thence east to the intersection of 17th Street
and Columbia Avenue; thence southerly along the center line of Columbia
Avenue to the intersection of 22nd Street and Columbia Avenue; thence
east 170 more or less to the intersection of 22nd Street and Columbia
Avenue; thence southerly along the center line of Columbia Avenue to the
intersection of 24th Street and Columbia Avenue; thence east 650 more or
less to the center line of CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence northwesterly
along said center line to a point being 50 east of the northeast corner
of Lot 1, Block 320, Bosman's Addition; thence west 96 to the northwest
corner of Lot 1, Block 320, Bosman's Addition; thence south 138 to the
northwest corner of Lot 14, Block 320, Bosman's Addition; thence west
to the northeast corner of Lot 10, Block 320, Bosman's Addition; thence
north along the easterly lot line of Lot 5, Block 320, Bosman's Addition,
to the center line of 18th Street; thence westerly along said center line
92 to a point being 33 south of the southwest corner of Lot 9, Block 228,
Bosman's Addition; thence north to the northwest corner of Lot 9, Block
228, Bosman's Addition; thence east 55 to a point directly south of the
southeast corner of Lot 6, Block 228, Bosman's Addition; thence north
along the east lot line of Lot 6, Block 228, Bosman's Addition, to the center
line of 17th Street; thence west 1; thence north to the center line of the
vacated alley of Block 226, Bosman's Addition; thence west to the center
line of Columbia Avenue; thence north 312 along said center line; thence
east 88 to a point 50 north of the southwest corner of Lot 7, Block 479,
Assessor's Plat No. 2; thence west 88 along the north lot line of Lot 6, to
the center line of Columbia Avenue; thence north to POB.
The development area, as described above, is depicted on a map on the
attached Exhibit A, the terms of which are incorporated by reference.
Sec. 2-99.8. Board/membership. [Ord. No. 1489, 1-9-2008]
(a) The Corridor Improvement Authority/CAD shall be under the
supervision and control of a board consisting of the City Manager or
his/her assignee and eight members. Members shall be appointed by
the City Manager subject to the approval of the City Council. Not less
than a majority of the members of the Board shall be persons having an
ownership or business interest in property located in the development
area as described in Section 2-99.7. At least one of the members shall
be a resident of the development area as described in Section 2-99.7 or
of an area within 1/2 mile of any part of the development area. Of the
members first appointed, an equal number of the members, as near as
practicable, shall be appointed for one year, two years, three years, and
four years. A member of the Board shall hold office until the member's
successor is appointed. After initial appointment, each member shall
Sec. 2-99.7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-99.8
C:140
Sec. 2-99.9. Dissolution. [Ord. No. 1489, 1-9-2008]
The City of Holland retains the right to dissolve the Authority, by ordinance,
in the event it has completed the purposes for which it was organized. In
the event of dissolution, the property and assets of the authority remaining
after the satisfaction of the obligations of the authority shall belong to the
City of Holland.
serve a term for four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be
made by the City Manager for the unexpired term only. All members of
the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed
for actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the Board shall
be elected by the members of the Board.
(b) Before assuming the duties of office, a member of the Board shall be
qualified by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.
(c) The proceedings and rules of the Board shall be subject to the Open
Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of the Acts of 1976 (MCLA §§ 15.261 to
15.275). The Board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and
holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the City Council.
Special meetings of the Board may be called in the manner provided in
the rules of the Board.
(d) After having been given notice and an opportunity to be heard, a
member of the Board may be removed for cause by the City Council.
(e) All expense items of the authority shall be published monthly and the
financial records shall be open to the public. For purposes of this
section, "published" shall mean that the expenses of the authority are
duly recorded in the minutes of the authority.
(f) A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
the Board in the performance of an official function is subject to the
Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976 (MCLA §§ 15.231 to
15.246).
Sec. 2-99.8 CHARTER Sec. 2-99.9
C:141

ARTICLE XV
Historic Districts and Historic District Commission
Sec. 2-100. Intent and purpose. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-199824]
The purpose of this article is to safeguard the heritage of the City by
preserving districts or individual sites which relate elements of the cultural,
social, economic, political or architectural history; stabilize and improve
property values; foster civic beauty and pride; strengthen the economy.
Sec. 2-100.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
ALTERATION — Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.
CENTER — The Michigan Historical Center of the Michigan Department of
State, formerly known as the Bureau of History.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA) — The written approval of a
permit application to apply for a building permit if required, for work that is
determined to be appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource.
COMMISSION — The Historic District Commission which is responsible for
implementing Public Act 169 of 1970 as amended25 and the City's historic
district ordinance for the City of Holland.
COMMITTEE — A historic district study committee appointed by the City
Council.
DEMOLITION — The razing of a resource, whether entirely or in part, which
may include, but is not limited to demolition by neglect.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or
culture.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Any structure, site, object, feature, or open space
that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture of this City, state, or of the United States. A landmark is a historic
district as defined in this section which contains only one resource.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — A structure, site, object, feature, or open space
that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture of this City, state, or of the United States.
NOTICE TO PROCEED — Authorization to perform work that does not
qualify for a COA but may legally be accomplished following conferral of
this document.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance amended former Art. XV, which pertained to historic
districts and the Historic District Commission, in its entirety. Said Art. XV was adopted
7-2-1986 by Ord. No. 904, and amended 11-17-1993 by Ord. No. 1099 and 6-15-1994 by
Ord. No. 1114.
25.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 399.201 et seq.
Sec. 2-100 CHARTER Sec. 2-100.1
C:143
OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal
or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer
between other resources.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention to the exterior of a resource.
Ordinary maintenance does not change the exterior appearance of the
resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects
of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for purposes
of this act.
REPAIR — To restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound
condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of
a resource constitutes an alteration for purposes of this act.
RESOURCE — A building, structure, site, object, feature or open space
located within a historic district, or described as a historic landmark.
WORK — Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or
demolition.
Sec. 2-100.2. Historic district established. [Ord. No. 1207,
2-18-1998; Ord. No. 1235, 2-3-1999; Ord. No. 1281, 6-21-2000; Ord.
No. 1320, 10-17-2001; Ord. No. 1446, 3-1-2006; Ord. No. 1548,
7-7-2010]
The historic districts of the City of Holland are hereby established pursuant
to Act 169 of the Public Acts of 1970 as amended, and shall be legally
described as follows:
(1) Properties of the Holland Historic District: Those portions of the
Original Plat of the City of Holland, Ottawa County, Michigan, described
as Lot 5, Lot 6, the east 62.5 feet of Lot 7, and Lots 10 through 16, also
the south 20 feet of Lot 9 of Block 47; also, all of Block 48; also, all of
Block 56; also, all of Block 57, except the east 98 feet of Lot 1 and the
east 163.4 feet of Lot 6 thereof. Also included are those portions of the
West Addition to the City of Holland as described as the south one-half
of Block E, except the north 14 feet of Lot 16 thereof; also, the south
one-half of Block F; also, all of Block G and all of Block H. Also included
are those portions of the Southwest Addition to the City of Holland
described as the south one-half of Block 4, except the north 55 feet of
the west 42 feet thereof; also, all of Block 5; also, Lots 1 through 8 and
Lots 16 through 18 of Block 8; also, all of Block 9; also, Block 5 of
Assessor's Plat No. 2 except Lots 1, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31 thereof; also,
Lots 1 through 28 of Vander Veen's Subdivision and Lots 1 through 5 of
Block 6 of Assessor's Plat No. 2 (being that entire block bounded by
15th and 16th Streets and River and Pine Avenues). Part of the SW 1/4
Sec. 29-5-15 of the Original Town Plat, designated as Market Square,
now known as Centennial Park; also, the north 1/2 of Block 55, Original
Town; also, that part of Block 49, Original Town, described as the west
45.5 feet of Lot 7 and Lot 8 except the east 121 feet, all of Lots 8 and 9
and all of Lot 10, except the east 40 feet; also, that portion of Block 54,
Sec. 2-100.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-100.2
C:144
Original Town, described as the west 3.38 feet of Lot 2 and all of Lots
3 through 7 thereof. For purposes of district continuity, the foregoing
descriptions shall be deemed to extend to the center lines of any streets
or highways adjacent thereto.
(2) Properties of the Washington Boulevard Historic District: Those
portions of the original plat of the City of Holland, Ottawa County,
Michigan, described as the west 21 feet of Lot 2 and Lots 3, 4, 5 of
Steketee Brothers Addition; Lots 1 through 5 and Lots 11 and 12 of
Block 18 of the Southwest Addition; Lot 12 and the east 20 feet of Lot
11 and Lots 1 and 2 and the east five feet of Lot 3, Block 13, Southwest
Addition; Lots 1, 11 and 12 of Block 12, Southwest Addition; Lots 1
through 6 and Lots 11 and 12, Block 7, Southwest Addition; Lots 1
through 3 and lots 7, 8 and the north 25.7 feet of Lot 9, Block 5 Hope
College Addition; all of Block 6, Southwest Addition; all of Block 4,
Hope College Addition; all of Block 3, Southwest Addition; all of Block
3, Hope College Addition; all of Block 2, Southwest Addition; all of
Block 2, Hope College Addition; Lots 7 and 8, Tannery Addition; Lots 8
through 11 and the west 41.25 feet of lot 12, Block B, West Addition;
Lots 3 through 12 of Block C, West Addition and all of Block 1,
Southwest Addition; Lots 1 through 7, Block F, West Addition; Lots 1, 2
and the north 55 feet of the west 42.3 feet of Lot 3, Block 4, Southwest
Addition; Lots 9 through 15, Block 8, Southwest Addition; the north 106
feet of Lot 1, Lot 2 except the east 12 feet of the south 26 feet thereof,
and Lots 3 through 10, Block 11, Southwest Addition; Lot 9 and the
west 50 feet of Lot 10, Block 14, Southwest Addition; the west 45 feet of
Lot 9 and the west 44 feet of Lot 10, Block 17, Southwest Addition.
For purposes of continuity, the foregoing descriptions shall be deemed
to extend to the center line of any streets, alleys or highways adjacent
thereto.
(3) Van Raalte Farm Historic District: The north 3/4 of the northeast 1/4 of
the northeast 1/4 of Section 34, T5N, R15W, City of Holland, Ottawa
County, Michigan (consisting of approximately 30 acres) and also
commonly described as 1076 East 16th Street, Holland, Michigan.
(4) Landmark Properties: City Greenhouses, 22nd at Central. That part of
the SE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Sec. 32, Town 5 North, Range 15 West,
bounded on the east by Central Avenue and on the south and west by
State Street, and on the north by 20th Street, Ottawa County, Michigan.
(5) Keppel's Village Historic District. The district is located within Section
29, Town 5 North, Range 15 West, Block 58 of the Plat of the Village,
now City of Holland. The District consists of platted Lots 1, 2 and 10 of
Block 58, the original plat of the Village, now City of Holland, plus Lot 9
except the west 10 feet thereof, designated as Permanent Parcel
Numbers: 70-16-29-379-006, 70-16-29-379-009, 70-16-29-379-010,
70-16-29-379-011, 70-16-29-379-012, and 70-16-29-379-013, The
proposed district is also described as the lots fronting the west side of
Central Avenue between 13th Street and 14th Street as well as the first
Sec. 2-100.2 CHARTER Sec. 2-100.2
C:145
Sec. 2-101. Historic District Commission established. [Ord. No.
1207, 2-18-1998; Ord. No. 1385, 5-12-2004]
lots to the west of these lots on the same block on both 13th and 14th
streets. The district also includes the lot on the northeast corner of 13th
Street and Central Avenue that is occupied by a duplex constructed in
1966.
(1) Pursuant to P.A. 169 of 1970, as amended, a Historic District
Commission consisting of seven members who shall be residents of the
City shall be appointed by the Mayor, with approval of City Council.
Members shall be appointed for three-year terms with initial
appointments of lesser duration staggered for the first three years.
Members shall be eligible for reappointment, not to exceed two
consecutive full terms. To the extent available, one member shall be a
graduate of an accredited school of architecture, who has two years of
architectural experience or who is an architect registered in this state.
After expiration of an architect member's initial term and renewal term,
the architect may be reappointed to the Commission to serve an
additional renewal term(s) in the event that no suitable architect
residing in the City of Holland is able or willing to serve as a member of
the HDC. Three members of the Commission shall be representative of
the district or districts by either residing or owning property therein.
(2) The Commission shall establish organizational and operating
procedures including the adoption of a meeting schedule. The
Commission may adopt its own rules of procedure and may adopt
design guidelines.
(3) The Commission may also undertake the following:
(a) Assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed to identify
and evaluate the structure, site and areas worthy of preservation.
(b) Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic
groups, public agencies and citizens interested in historic
preservation.
(c) Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas in which the
Commission has reason to believe worthy of preservation.
(d) Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures,
sites and areas worthy of preservation and encourage and advise
property owners regarding the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of resources in the district and other officially
recognized properties of historic interest.
(e) Consider methods other than those provided in this chapter for
encouraging and achieving historic preservation and make
recommendations to City Council and other public and private
bodies and agencies related thereto.
Sec. 2-100.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-101
C:146
Sec. 2-102. Commission duties. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
(f) Use its own funds, gifts, state and federal grants or other resources
received for historic preservation purposes in accordance with the
purposes of this chapter.
(1) Before proceeding with any work affecting the exterior appearance of a
resource or interior work which will cause visible changes to the
exterior of the resource, a certificate of appropriateness (COA) is
required. An application for a COA shall be submitted by the property
owner to the department of community services and development and
shall be reviewed and decided by the Commission.
(2) In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating
historic buildings, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67, and consider the
following:
(a) The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource
and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
(b) The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the
rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.
(c) The general compatibility of design, arrangement, texture, and
materials proposed to be used.
(d) Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission
considers relevant.
(3) When an application is submitted for work affecting the exterior of a
resource considered by the Commission to be so valuable to the local
unit, state, or nation that its alteration or loss adversely affects the
public purpose of the local unit, state, or nation, the Commission shall
attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically
feasible plan for preservation of the resource.
(4) The Commission shall issue a notice to proceed for work affecting the
exterior appearance of a resource to the extent necessary to mitigate
any of the following conditions:
(a) The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to
the structure's occupants.
(b) The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that
will be of substantial benefit to the community.
(c) Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the
owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events
beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible
alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include
offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the
Sec. 2-101 CHARTER Sec. 2-102
C:147
Sec. 2-102.1. Criteria and standards for the VanRaalte Farm
Historic District. [Ord. No. 1446, 3-1-2006]
For the original 30 acres described in Section 2-100.2(3), as the VanRaalte
Farm Historic District, the Historic District Commission shall apply the
standards and criteria set forth in Section 2-102 and shall review any
proposed physical changes to the VanRaalte Farm Historic District or its
master plan, in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as
set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 67, and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been
attempted and exhausted by the owner.
(d) Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community as determined by majority approval of a vote of the
Commission.
(5) The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the Michigan
Open Meetings Act.
(6) The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and
actions available for public inspection.
(7) The COA and notice to proceed shall be effective for one year from the
date of issuance. The applicant may request an extension of this time
period by submitting a written request for extension to the Commission.
The written request shall be filed with the department prior to the oneyear
expiration period. If this time period expires without exercising the
applicant's right to secure a building permit or without substantial work
begun on the resource, then the COA or notice to proceed shall be
considered expired and reapplication would be required. An applicant
shall proceed with diligence to complete a project.
(8) The Commission may delegate the issuance of a COA for minor work to
community services and development staff. The Commission shall
provide written standards for issuance of such COA. Quarterly the
Commission shall review the COA issued by staff.
(9) The Commission shall file with the Building Inspector or other duly
delegated authority the COA or denials of applications submitted for
review. Work shall not proceed, nor shall a building permit be issued
until the Commission has acted as prescribed herein. If an application is
denied, the decision shall be binding on the Building Inspector or other
delegated authority. A denial shall be accompanied with a written
explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if
appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for
Commission review when suggested changes have been made. The
denial shall also include notification of the applicant's right to appeal to
the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court.
Sec. 2-102 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-102.1
C:148
for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for the Treatment
of Cultural Landscape and Preservation Brief #36 Protecting Cultural
Landscapes Planning, Treatment and Management of Historic Landscape, a
publication of the National Park Service.
The Historic District Commission may refer an application for a certificate
of appropriateness to the Leisure and Cultural Services Commission for the
purpose of providing information regarding the impact of proposed changes
to the farm's historical and architectural integrity prior to the granting or
denial of the certificate of appropriateness.
Sec. 2-102.2. VanRaalte Farm property located outside of the
VanRaalte Farm Historic District—advisory recommendation. [Ord.
No. 1446, 3-1-2006]
(1) For the area consisting of approximately 130 acres of the VanRaalte
Farm located outside of the boundaries of the VanRaalte Farm Historic
District, which is legally described as follows: the Northeast 1/4
EXCEPT the North 3/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of
Section 34 Town 5N Range 15 W City of Holland, Ottawa County,
Michigan, the Historic District Commission shall provide advisory
recommendations to the Holland City Council for proposed physical
changes, structures, and improvements to the VanRaalte Farm. In no
event shall the Council of the City of Holland be bound by the advisory
review and recommendation of the Holland Historic District
Commission, and the Council may accept, deny, or modify any
recommendation based upon its sole legislative discretion.
(2) The Holland Historic District Commission, in advising the Holland City
Council, shall follow the U.S. Secretary of Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, as
set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67, and the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for
the Treatment of Cultural Landscape and consider the following:
(a) The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource
buildings and landscapes and their relationship to the historic
value of the surrounding area.
(b) The relationship of any architectural features and landscape of the
resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.
(c) The general compatibility of design, arrangement, texture, size,
scale and materials proposed to be used.
(d) Preservation Brief #36 Protecting Cultural Landscapes Planning,
Treatment and Management of Historic Landscape a publication of
the National Park Service, and consider the following:
1. Viewsheds seen from the 30 acres designated as the VanRaalte
Farm Historic District and viewsheds from the public rights-of-
Sec. 2-102.1 CHARTER Sec. 2-102.2
C:149
Sec. 2-103. Work completed without a certificate of
appropriateness. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
When work has been done upon a resource without a COA, an application
must be immediately submitted. If the Commission finds that the work does
not qualify for a COA, the Commission may require an owner to restore
the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate
work, or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a COA. If the owner
does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a
reasonable time as determined by the Commission, the Commission may
seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the
resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies
for a COA. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of
the court, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct
work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the
work so that it qualifies for a COA in accordance with the court's order. The
cost of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City
as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an
order of the circuit court, a Commission or its agents may enter a property
for purposes of this section.
Sec. 2-104. Areas not regulated. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998; Ord.
No. 1446, 3-1-2006]
With the exception of those standards and criteria applicable to the
VanRaalte Farm Historic District, pursuant to Section 2-102.1, or to the
remainder of the VanRaalte Farm property pursuant to Section 2-102.2,
nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of any resource within the historic district; nor
to prevent construction, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of any
resource under a permit issued by the City prior to the adoption of this
article. Unless subsequently made applicable by amendment, the provisions
of this article shall not apply to the following installations, features, or
activities affecting the historic district:
way adjacent to the VanRaalte Farm property and other
locations of aesthetic importance at the farm;
2. Character defining features of the VanRaalte Farm such as
fence rows, significant vegetation, historic circulation features,
historic noninhabitable constructed features (walls, gates, and
bridges), trails, and location of other historical elements of the
landscape.
(e) Other factors of historic and aesthetic value as the Historic District
Commission considers relevant.
The Historic District Commission shall submit its written
recommendations and findings to the Holland City Council within
30 days of referral.
Sec. 2-102.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-104
C:150
Sec. 2-105. Acquisition of a resource. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
Where City Council determines public ownership of a resource is most
suitable, Council may acquire the resource using public funds, public or
private gifts, grants or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. In
considering acquisition Council shall request a written recommendation
from the Commission. Upon recommendation of the Commission, the City
may sell resources acquired while retaining protective easements assuring
historic preservation of the resource.
Sec. 2-106. Failure to act. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
The failure of the Commission to act within 60 calendar days after the date a
complete application is filed, unless an extension is mutually agreed upon in
writing by the applicant and the Commission, shall be deemed to constitute
approval.
Sec. 2-107. Appeal. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission
may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation Review Board of the
center. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision by the
Commission. An applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic
preservation review board may appeal the decision to the circuit court.
Sec. 2-108. Enforcement; violations. [Ord. No. 1207, 2-18-1998]
(a) Reroofing with like materials, painting, and routine repairs.
(b) Flat concrete work, playgrounds, public streets, and sidewalks.
(c) Yards, gardens, planters, landscaping and trees.
(d) Regulatory and advisory street signs, hydrants, poles, pedestals,
transformers, or similar installations essential to the delivery of public
and private utilities and public services.
(e) Such other construction or repair activities or installations which the
Historic District Commission, by adoption of specific resolution, may
authorize the Building Official to approve without subsequent review
and approval.
(1) After issuance of a COA or notice to proceed or if a violation of this
article is suspected, the City's designated representative may from time
to time inspect the exterior of properties covered by this article.
(2) The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of this
Historic District Commission, in conjunction with the Building Official
and Zoning Administrator of the City. A person, individual, partnership,
firm, corporation, organization, institution or agency of government
that violates this act is responsible for a civil infraction and may be
fined not more than $5,000.
Sec. 2-104 CHARTER Sec. 2-108
C:151
(3) A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government that violates this act may be
ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource
unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated,
or demolished.
Sec. 2-108 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-108
C:152
ARTICLE XVA
Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission
Sec. 2-108.1. Intent and purpose. [Ord. No. 1088, 5-19-1993;
10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1594]
The purpose of this article is to establish the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Commission to provide review and recommendations regarding the diverse
leisure and cultural services of the City of Holland to the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Transportation and the City Council of the City of Holland.
This article is intended to improve leisure and cultural services for the
citizens and neighborhoods of the City of Holland in order to enhance the
quality of life through its parks, recreational programs, and other leisure
activities for the benefit of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City
of Holland and its citizens.
Sec. 2-108.2. Establishment; membership. [Ord. No. 1088,
5-19-1993; 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1594]
There is hereby created and established the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Commission which shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor
upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall be selected as
follows:
Sec. 2-108.3. Compensation; term of appointment. [Ord. No. 1088,
5-19-1993; 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1594]
All members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall serve
without compensation, and each member shall hold office until his/her
successor is appointed. Each member shall be appointed to a three-year
term, unless specifically appointed to fill the balance of an unexpired term.
Sec. 2-108.4. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 1088, 5-19-1993;
10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1594]
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall:
(1) One member representing an educational institution serving the
Holland area;
(2) One member representing the Friend of the Nature Center Citizen
Support Group;
(3) Five members selected at large.
(1) Annually elect a Chairperson, such officers, and such committees from
its membership as it may deem necessary; adopt bylaws, rules, and
regulations for the proper conduct of its meetings and the discharge of
its powers and duties; and keep minutes of all formal actions taken by
the Commission in accordance with statute and ordinance.
Sec. 2-108.1 CHARTER Sec. 2-108.4
C:153
Sec. 2-108.5. Decisions of Commission. [Ord. No. 1088, 5-19-1993;
10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1594]
The decisions of the Commission shall be advisory to the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Transportation and the City Council of the City of Holland
relating to the stated purposes of the Commission. All legislative and policy
(2) Recommend the appointment of subcommittees of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Commission for approval by City Council which
shall meet to review and administer specialized projects and programs
of the Commission.
(3) Meet at least monthly at regular stated times and places. All meetings
shall be open to the public and shall be subject to the Open Meetings
Act of the State of Michigan.
(4) Act in an advisory capacity to the Director of Parks, Recreation and
Transportation and the City Council in all matters pertaining to public
recreation, parks, leisure services and properties owned or managed by
the City of Holland for such purposes, including but not limited to the
following:
a. Assisting the Director and City Council to define the goals and
objectives of the divisions related to parks, recreation and leisure
activities;
b. Assist the Director in the review and recommendations regarding
management and policy directions of the divisions related to parks,
recreation and leisure activities;
c. Assist the Director and City Council in reviewing the budget and
financial plans for the organization, programs, services and
operations of divisions related to parks, recreation and leisure
activities;
d. Assist the Director in the development of programs and services for
the planning of leisure and cultural services;
e. Assist the Director in informing and educating the public regarding
the importance, need, and priority of recreation and park
programs, facilities, and services;
f. Assist the Director and City Council with the establishment and
maintenance of an effective public relations program;
g. Assist the Director in establishing and maintaining liaison and
coordination with related community organizations, such as
schools, community centers, senior centers, and like institutions to
ensure the most effective and economical public services possible;
h. Render such additional services to the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Transportation and the City Council as the Council
may from time to time require or request;
Sec. 2-108.4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-108.5
C:154
making functions in the area of parks, recreation and leisure activities shall
remain vested in the Council of the City of Holland or other public bodies as
shall be designated by statute, ordinance, or regulation.
Sec. 2-108.5 CHARTER Sec. 2-108.5
C:155

ARTICLE XVB
(Reserved)26
Sec. 2-108.6. through Sec. 2-108.12 (Reserved)
26.[Editor's Note: Former Article XVB, Windmill Island Advisory Commission, was repealed
1-17-2018 by Ord. No 1704.]
Sec. 2-108.6 CHARTER Sec. 2-108.6
C:157

ARTICLE XVI
Budget Stabilization
Sec. 2-109. Fund—Established. [Ord. No. 757; amended 1-17-2018
by Ord. No. 1704]
Pursuant to Act No. 30 of the Public Acts of 1978 [MCLA §§ 141.441 to
141.445; M.S.A. 5.3230(1) to M.S.A. 5.3230(5)], a budget stabilization fund
is created.
Sec. 2-110. Same—Purposes. [Ord. No. 757; amended 1-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 1704]
The purpose of the budget stabilization fund shall include those purposes
specified pursuant to § 4 of Act No. 30 of the Public Acts of 1978 [MCLA
§ 141.444; M.S.A. 5.3230(4)], including, but not limited to:
Sec. 2-111. Same—Appropriation to. [Ord. No. 757]
Each fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the fund is created, the
City Council may appropriate, by ordinance or resolution adopted by a twothirds
vote of the members elected or serving, all or part of a surplus in
the general fund resulting from an excess of revenue in comparison to
expenses, to the fund. The money in the fund may be invested as provided
by law with the earnings of the fund to be returned to the general fund of
the City.
Sec. 2-112. Same—Prohibitions on use of. [Ord. No. 757]
In the establishment and maintenance of the budget stabilization fund, the
City may not:
(a) To cover a general fund deficit, when the annual audit of the City
reveals such a deficit;
(b) To prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the number of
employees at any time in a fiscal year when the City's budgeted revenue
is not being collected in an amount sufficient to cover budgeted
expenses;
(c) To prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the number of
employees when, in preparing the budget for the next fiscal year, the
City's estimated revenue does not appear sufficient to cover estimated
expenses; and
(d) To cover expenses arising because of a natural disaster, including a
flood, fire or tornado. However, if federal or state funds are received to
offset the appropriations from the fund, the money shall be returned to
the fund.
Sec. 2-109 CHARTER Sec. 2-112
C:159
(a) Impose additional taxes producing revenue in excess of that needed for
its estimated budget in order to provide money to be appropriated to
the fund;
(b) Accumulate money in the fund which shall exceed either 15% of the
City's most recent general fund budget, as originally adopted, or 15% of
the average of the City's five most recent general fund budgets, as
amended, whichever is less. If the money in the fund exceeds that
permitted in this subsection, the excess money shall be appropriated in
the municipality's next general fund budget, but shall not be
appropriated to the fund; or
(c) Appropriate monies in the budget stabilization fund for the acquisition,
construction or alteration of a facility as part of a general capital
improvement project.
Sec. 2-112 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-112
C:160
ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Civil Infractions
Sec. 2-113. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1249,
5-5-1999]
As used in this article:
ACT — Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended.27
AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL — A police officer or other personnel of
the City authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil
infraction citations or municipal civil infraction notices.
BUREAU — The City of Holland Municipal Civil Infractions Bureau as
established by this chapter and as authorized under Sections 8396 and
8707(6) of the Act.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION — An act or omission that is prohibited by
this Code or any ordinance of the City, but which is not a crime under this
Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, but not
limited to, fines, damages, expenses and costs may be ordered as authorized
by Chapter 87 of the Act, as amended.28 A municipal civil infraction is not a
lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized City official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of one or more municipal civil
infraction violation(s) by the person cited.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION NOTICE — A written notice, other than a
municipal civil infraction citation, prepared by an authorized City official,
directing a person to appear at the City of Holland Municipal Civil
Infractions Bureau and to pay the fine(s) and costs, if any, prescribed for
the municipal civil infraction(s) by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the
City, as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act.
REPEAT OFFENSE — A second (or any subsequent) municipal civil
infraction violation of the same requirement or provision which is
committed by a person within a twenty-four-month period of a prior
violation (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code
or any ordinance) and for which the person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible.
Sec. 2-114. Municipal civil infraction action; commencement;
enforcement. [Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1257,
8-4-1999;1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1704]
27.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.101 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8701 et seq.
Sec. 2-113 CHARTER Sec. 2-114
C:161
Sec. 2-115. City of Holland Municipal Civil Infractions Bureau.
[Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999]
(a) A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the
issuance by an authorized City official of:
(1) A municipal civil infraction notice directing the alleged violator to
appear at the City of Holland Municipal Civil Infractions Bureau; or
(2) A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to
appear in court.
(b) Pursuant to this article, the Department of Public Safety, Police
Operations and its officers and any of the other enforcing officers of
Chapters 4, 6, 8, 11, 12, 14, 18, 19, 22, 24, 27 and 29 of this Code shall
be authorized to enforce municipal civil infractions, and they shall all
automatically be deemed "authorized City officials" pursuant to this
article.
(a) Bureau established. The City hereby establishes the City of Holland
Municipal Civil Infractions Bureau ("the Bureau") as authorized under
Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act to accept admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal
civil infraction notices issued and served by authorized City officials,
and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code
or any ordinance.
(b) Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The Bureau
shall be located at City hall and shall be under the supervision and
control of the City treasurer. The City treasurer, subject to the approval
of the City Council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation
of the Bureau and shall appoint any necessary qualified City employees
to administer the Bureau.
(c) Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of municipal civil
infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which
a municipal civil infraction notice (rather than a municipal civil
infraction citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been
scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to
dispose of the violation at the Bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent or restrict the City from issuing a municipal civil infraction
citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of
competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a
municipal civil infraction violation at the Bureau, and any person may
have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the
Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the
person's rights, privileges, and protection accorded by law.
(d) Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of
the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
Sec. 2-114 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-115
C:162
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and
retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The
Bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies
having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only "with
explanation," and in no event shall the Bureau determine, or attempt
to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an
alleged violation.
(e) Municipal civil infraction notices; issuance and service. Municipal civil
infraction notices shall be issued and served by authorized City officials
under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
in Section 2-116 of this chapter for municipal civil infraction citations.
(f) Municipal civil infraction notices; contents and form. In addition to any
other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the
municipal civil infraction notice shall indicate the following:
(1) The time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau;
(2) The methods by which an appearance at the Bureau may be made;
(3) The address and telephone number of the Bureau;
(4) The hours during which the Bureau is open;
(5) The amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation; and
(6) The consequences for failure to appear at the Bureau and pay the
required fine within the required time.
(g) Municipal civil infraction notices; appearance; payment of fines and
costs. An alleged violator who receives a municipal civil infraction
notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at
or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction
notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by
representation.
(h) Municipal civil infraction notices; procedure where admission of
responsibility not made or where fine not paid. If an authorized City
official issues and serves a municipal civil infraction notice and if an
admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if
any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at
the Bureau, then a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with
the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class
mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known
address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all
particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Sections
8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint
containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil infraction notice
and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the
citation.
Sec. 2-115 CHARTER Sec. 2-116
C:163
Sec. 2-116. Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and
service. [Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999]
Sec. 2-117. Municipal civil infraction citations; contents and form.
[Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999]
(a) An authorized City official who witnesses a person commit a municipal
civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and required copies of a municipal
civil infraction citation.
(b) An authorized City official may issue a municipal civil infraction citation
to a person if:
(1) Based upon an investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon an investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction,
the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or City
Attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation.
(c) Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized City
official as follows:
(1) Except as provided by Section 2-116(c)(2), an authorized City
official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building, or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged
violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land,
building, or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching
the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the
citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land,
building, or structure at the owner's last known address. For the
purposes of this article, the owner shall be presumed to be the
person or entity designated or listed on the tax rolls maintained by
the City for the land, building, or structure.
(a) A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address
of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place
where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
(b) The time for appearance specified in a municipal civil infraction citation
shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.
Sec. 2-116 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-117
C:164
(c) The place for appearance specified in a municipal civil infraction
citation shall be the district court.
(d) The municipal civil infraction citation shall inform the alleged violator
that he or she may do one of the following:
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or in
person or by representation.
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following:
a. Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
district court magistrate, without the opportunity for being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
judge is requested by the City;
b. Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(e) The municipal civil infraction citation shall also inform the alleged
violator of all of the following:
(1) That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with
explanation" in person or by representation, then the alleged
violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or
by representation within the time specified for appearance and
obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance.
(2) That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, then the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a
hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
(3) That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the City.
(4) That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(5) That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
(f) The municipal civil infraction citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced
type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time
Sec. 2-117 CHARTER Sec. 2-117
C:165
Sec. 2-118. Schedule of civil fines established. [Ord. No. 1241,
3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1249, 5-5-1999]
specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or
appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default
judgment against the alleged violator in the municipal civil infraction
action.
(g) A municipal civil infraction citation for a municipal civil infraction
signed by an authorized City official shall be treated as made under
oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of
the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the
following statement immediately above the date and signature of the
official: "I DECLARE UNDER THE PENALTIES OF PERJURY THAT THE
STATEMENTS ABOVE ARE TRUE TO THE BEST OF MY
INFORMATION, KNOWLEDGE, AND BELIEF."
(h) Each municipal civil infraction citation shall be numbered consecutively
and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator.
(i) The original municipal civil infraction citation shall be filed with the
district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the City and
issued to the alleged violator as provided by Section 8705 of the Act.
(a) A schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions of
responsibility by persons served with municipal civil infraction notices
is hereby established. The civil fines for the classes of municipal civil
infractions are as follows:
Schedule of Civil Fines
Class First Offense
Second Repeat
Offense Within
24 Months
Third and
Subsequent
Repeat Offenses
Within 24 Months
I $25 $50 $75
II $50 $100 $150
III $100 $250 $500
(b) A copy of this schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted
at the Bureau.
(c) This schedule shall apply to all municipal civil infractions unless
another fine is specifically set forth in this Code as applicable to a
particular municipal civil infraction.
(d) A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless
otherwise provided.
Sec. 2-117 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-119
C:166
Sec. 2-119. Failure to appear; misdemeanor; default of civil
infraction action. [Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999]
The failure of an alleged violator to answer a citation or notice to appear
in court for a municipal civil infraction is a misdemeanor, and the failure of
an alleged violator to appear as directed by a citation or other notice at a
scheduled appearance, at a scheduled informal hearing, or at a scheduled
formal hearing, shall result in the court entering a default judgment against
the alleged violator in the municipal civil infraction action.
Sec. 2-120. Administrative liability. [Ord. No. 1241, 3-24-1999]
No officer, agent, employee, or member of the City of Holland shall render
himself or herself personally liable for any damage which may occur to
any person or entity as the result of any act or decision performed in the
discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant to this article.
Sec. 2-119 CHARTER Sec. 2-120
C:167

ARTICLE XVIII
Expense Recovery
Sec. 2-121. Purpose. [Added 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1596]
The Holland City Council has determined that it is in the best interests
of the City of Holland to provide for the recovery of municipal expense
incurred with the arrest and prosecution of certain criminal offenses
leading to a conviction as permitted by Act 372 of the Public Acts of 2000,
as amended, MCLA § 769.1f et seq. and the general powers of the City
pursuant to Section 2.1 of the City Charter.
Sec. 2-122. Definitions. [Added 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1596]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENSE OF PROSECUTION — The salaries, wages, or other
compensation, including, but not limited to, overtime pay of prosecution
personnel for time spent investigating and prosecuting the crime or crimes
resulting in conviction.
LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL EXPENSE — Shall mean:
Sec. 2-123. Liability for expenses of arrest and prosecution for
certain offenses. [Added 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1596; amended
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1704]
The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement
personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which the
conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the person
after the arrest, preparing reports on the incident, investigating the
incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including, but not
limited to, determining bodily alcohol content and determining the
presence of and identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath,
or urine.
(a)
The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including overtime pay, of
Fire Department and emergency medical service personnel, including
volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service
personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing firefighting,
rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the incident from
which the conviction arose.
(b)
The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by Fire Department and
emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer firefighters
or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, in providing
services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose.
(c)
(a) Upon conviction of any of the following offenses, the person convicted
shall reimburse the City of Holland for law enforcement personnel
expense as well as the expense of prosecution:
Sec. 2-121 CHARTER Sec. 2-123
C:169
Sec. 2-124. Imposition of penalties by court. [Added 11-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 1596]
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the applicable court of
jurisdiction from imposing law enforcement personnel expenses and the
expenses of prosecution as part of a sentence following conviction of any
of the offenses listed in Section 2-123, as authorized by MCLA § 769.1f;
provided, however, that the City of Holland shall not be reimbursed more
(1) A violation or attempted violation of § 601d, 625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6),
or (7), § 625m, or § 626(3) or (4) of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
1949 PA 300, MCLA §§ 257.601d, 257.625, 257.625m, and 257.626,
or of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to §§ 601d(1),
625(1), (3), or (6) or §§ 625m or 626 of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
1949 PA 300, MCLA §§ 257.601d, 257.625, 257.625m, and 257.626.
(2) Felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder, or
attempted felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter, or
murder, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle,
snowmobile, ORV, aircraft, vessel, or locomotive engine while the
person was impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a controlled substance, as defined in § 7104 of the Public
Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.7104, or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or had an unlawful
blood alcohol content.
(3) A violation or attempted violation of § 82127 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA
§ 324.82127.
(4) A violation or attempted violation of § 81134 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA
§ 324.81134.
(5) A violation or attempted violation of § 185 of the Aeronautics Code
of the State of Michigan, 1945 PA 327, MCLA § 259.185.
(6) A violation or attempted violation of § 80176(1), (3), (4), or (5) of
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA
451, MCLA § 324.80176, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to § 80176(1) or (3) of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA § 324.80176.
(7) A violation or attempted violation of § 353 of the Railroad Code of
1993, 1993 PA 354, MCLA § 462.353.
(8) A violation or attempted violation of § 411a(2) of the Michigan
Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCLA § 750.411a (false report of a
crime).
(9) A violation or attempted violation of Section 4(1) of the Public
Threat Alert Act, MCLA § 28.674.
Sec. 2-123 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-124
C:170
than once for the expenses incurred in the arrest, processing and
prosecution of any individual.
Sec. 2-125. Procedures to determine and recover expenses.
The law enforcement personnel expenses and expenses of prosecution for
the offenses listed in Section 2-123 shall be determined and recovered as
follows:
Sec. 2-126. Conflict with criminal laws; coordination of collection
efforts. [Added 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1596]
Nothing within this ordinance shall be construed to conflict, contravene,
enlarge or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines
(1) Charge against person. Any expenses incurred by the City, including
law enforcement personnel expenses and the expenses of prosecution,
resulting from an offense listed in Section 2-123, shall be charged
against the individual convicted of that offense. The charge constitutes
a debt of that person and is collectible by the City in the same manner
as a contractual obligation.
(2) Expense recovery schedule. The Holland City Council may, by
resolution, adopt a schedule of expenses specifying the law
enforcement personnel expenses and the expense of prosecution for the
offenses listed in Section 2-123. Any adopted schedule of expenses shall
be available to the public from the Holland City Clerk's Office. The
schedule adopted by the City Council may be a flat fee based upon a
study of average expense sustained in arresting, investigating, and
prosecuting to conviction any of the listed offenses in Section 2-123. In
the absence of an adopted schedule for an offense specified under
Section 2-123(a), the City may seek its actual expense incurred as a
result of the conviction.
(3) Billing. The City of Holland Finance Department shall, within 10 days of
receiving itemized expenses, or any part thereof, incurred for the
arrest, investigation, and prosecution to conviction of an individual for
an offense listed under Section 2-123, submit a bill to that individual for
such expenses by first class mail or personal service. The bill shall
require full payment in 30 days from the date of mailing or personal
service. An administrative late charge as established by resolution
adopted by City Council shall be charged for any payment made after
the due date.
(4) Failure to pay; procedure to recover expenses. Any individual
responsible for expenses under this article who fails to pay those
expenses within the time required by this article shall be in default. In
case of default, the City of Holland may file a civil suit to recover the
total amount of expenses or may contract with a collection agency to
recover such expenses on behalf of the City. Fees and costs incurred to
collect such charges shall be included in the amount to be paid.
Sec. 2-124 CHARTER Sec. 2-126
C:171
imposed by a judge for any criminal offense under Michigan law. If recovery
of law enforcement personnel expenses and the expense of prosecution
are required as part of a criminal sentence, the City of Holland Finance
Department shall work with the applicable court of jurisdiction to
coordinate recovery of such expenses.
Sec. 2-127. Severability. [Added 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1596]
The phrases, sentences, sections, and provisions of this article are
severable; if any portion of this article is found to be unconstitutional or
otherwise unenforceable, the remaining sections of the article shall remain
in full force and effect.
Sec. 2-128. Repeal of conflicting ordinances. [Added 11-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 1596]
All other ordinances, parts of ordinances or amendments to such ordinances
which conflict with this article are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Sec. 2-126 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-128
C:172
ARTICLE XIX
Civic Center Place
Sec. 2-129. Civic Center Place defined. [Added 11-1-2017 by Ord.
No. 1699]
The Civic Center Place shall consist of:
Sec. 2-130. Creation of Board; composition; appointment, terms,
etc., of members; filling vacancies, removal. [Added 11-1-2017 by
Ord. No. 1699]
Sec. 2-131. Duties and functions. [Added 11-1-2017 by Ord. No.
1699]
(a) The interior and exterior of the Civic Center building; and
(b) The City-owned parking areas and exterior grounds between 7th Street
and 9th Street and Maple and Pine Avenues, including the area used for
the Holland Farmers' Market.
(a) There is hereby created a Civic Center Place Board, to be composed of
seven members plus one ex-officio (nonvoting) member from the City
Council. One member shall be a member of the Downtown Development
Authority Board and one other member shall be a member of the
Principal Shopping District Board. At all times, the Board shall include
at least four City residents.
(b) The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, shall appoint the ex-officio member each year during
June to serve for one year starting that following July 1.
(c) The initial appointments shall establish a system of staggered terms
with two members appointed for terms ending June 30, 2018; two
members appointed for terms ending June 30, 2019; and three
members appointed for terms ending June 30, 2020. After the initial
terms, members of the Board shall be appointed for three-year terms,
starting on July 1 and ending on June 30.
(d) A vacancy on the Civic Center Place Board shall be filled for the balance
of the vacated term by appointment by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
(e) The City Council may remove a member of the Civic Center Place Board
for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, as determined
in the sole discretion of the City Council, after a public hearing.
(f) The City Manager shall appoint a Civic Center Place staff liaison who
shall report to the City Manager concerning the activities of the Civic
Center Place Board.
Sec. 2-129 CHARTER Sec. 2-131
C:173
(a) The Civic Center Place Board shall:
(1) Oversee all management and operations of the Civic Center Place
in accordance with the Holland City Code so as to provide a place
for meetings, events and activities for the community in a
financially sustainable manner.
(2) Establish short- and long-term goals for the use, operation and
maintenance of the Civic Center Place.
(3) Either (i) solicit proposals from, interview and recommend to the
City Council the engagement of a professional event and facilities
management organization to manage the Civic Center Place
facilities, or (ii) recommend to Council an alternate facilities
management structure. The professional event and facilities
management organization shall be engaged by written contract as
an independent contractor.
(4) Establish a fee schedule and policies for the use, booking,
promotion, operation, repair and maintenance of the Civic Center
Place, subject to approval by Council. The policies and fee schedule
shall balance the City's desire to make the facility available for use
by residents of the City and other local persons, organization and
groups with the need or demand to use the Civic Center Place for
special events, conventions or other activities.
(5) Work with the management organization to carry out the policies
and goals of the Civic Center Place.
(6) Provide space available for the Holland Farmers' Market and
coordinate activities and efforts with the Farmers' Market marketmaster.
(7) Coordinate activities and efforts with the Downtown Development
Board and Principal Shopping District.
(8) Consult with the City's insurance agent of record and recommend
to the City Council any special insurance needs to protect Civic
Center Place and to protect the City from liabilities.
(9) Make investigations and studies and conduct research to gather
statistics or data which will aid in operation and management of
the Civic Center Place.
(10) Advise and consult with the City Council on matters within the
scope of its activity.
(11) Advise and recommend to the Mayor persons to appoint to the
Board.
(12) Apply for grants or other funding for the Civic Center Place, subject
to approval by the City Council.
Sec. 2-131 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-131
C:174
Sec. 2-132. Budget, purchasing. [Added 11-1-2017 by Ord. No.
1699]
(b) Notwithstanding the above, all legislative, budgetary and contracting
authority and functions shall remain vested in the Council, except as
provided in a contract with a professional event and facilities
management organization.
(a) The Civic Center Place Board shall annually prepare and submit a
budget for the Civic Center Place to the City Manager showing
anticipated revenues and expenditures for the Civic Center Place for
the next fiscal year. The budget shall be submitted to the City Manager
not later than February 15 of each year. The City Council shall adopt or
revise the proposed budget and incorporate it into the City's annual
budget.
(b) The Civic Center Place Board shall consult with the City's Finance
Director and finance staff so that the budget is consistent in format with
the rest of the City's budget and shall comply with the legal
requirements of the City under the City's Charter and state and federal
law.
(c) All Civic Center Place revenue and expenditures shall be subject to the
requirements imposed by the City's Charter, except that the internal
budget, revenue and expenditures of a professional event and facilities
management organization shall be under the control of that
organization. The professional event and facilities management
organization shall not have the power to bind the City by contract or
otherwise incur liabilities or debts of the City.
(d) Notwithstanding Sections 2-41 through 2-45 of the Holland City Code,
the Civic Center Place Board may authorize and make purchases of
supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services, but only if the
purchases are within its budget appropriations. The terms "supplies,"
"materials" and "equipment" shall be construed to mean any and all
articles or items which are reasonably necessary for the Civic Center
Place. The term "contractual services" shall mean, but not limited to,
utility services and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment,
machinery and other City-owned personal or real property. All
purchases shall comply with the quotation and bidding requirements of
Section 2-47 et seq.
(e) All purchases under Subsection (d) shall be by purchase orders on
forms approved by the City's Finance Director. Copies of the purchase
orders shall be immediately provided to the City's finance office.
(f) All purchases or contracts, other than those allowed under Subsection
(d), shall be by contracts approved by the City Council, signed by the
Mayor and Clerk, and approved as to form by the City Attorney.
Sec. 2-131 CHARTER Sec. 2-133
C:175
Sec. 2-133. Meetings, place and recordkeeping. [Added 11-1-2017
by Ord. No. 1699]
(a) The Civic Center Place Board shall determine its meeting schedule. All
meetings shall be held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act,
MCLA 15.261 et seq., as amended from time to time.
(b) The Civic Center Place Board shall meet at the Civic Center when it is
available or, when not available, at City Hall or such other public place
designated by the Board.
(c) All documents, meeting minutes and other records of the Civic Center
Place Board shall be and remain records of the City and shall be kept by
the City Clerk in accordance with the City's Charter and shall be subject
to the document retention and destruction policies and requirements of
the City.
(d) All documents, meeting minutes and other records of the Civic Center
Place Board shall be subject to the Michigan Freedom of Information
Act, MCLA § 15.231 et seq., as amended from time to time.
(e) The Civic Center Place Board may adopt (and periodically review,
update and amend) bylaws to establish its rules of organization and
procedure appropriate to the performance of its duties, subject to
approval by Council.
Sec. 2-133 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 2-133
C:176
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENTS
Sec. 2-133 CHARTER Sec. 2-133
C:177

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 3-1. Applicability of chapter. [Code 1955, § 7-3.1; Ord. No.
1154, 10-18-1995; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1705]
The licensing provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any private
dance, or to any dance, show, concert or other amusement or entertainment
conducted under the supervision of Hope College, any public or parochial
school, any church, or the City, or organizations under the control or
direction of any of them, the Young Men's Christian Association, the Young
Women's Christian Association, any fraternal beneficiary society when such
amusement is open to members only, and not open to the public or any
charitable organization as defined by IRC, § 501(c)(3); nor shall the
provisions of this chapter apply to religious services of any kind. This
section shall not relieve any person or organization from obtaining a parade
permit as provided in Section 18-20.
Sec. 3-2. Tulip Time entertainment. [Code 1955, § 7-3.7]
No person or organization shall present any theatrical exhibition, show,
entertainment or amusement for which money or other compensation is in
any manner demanded or received during Tulip Time week of any year,
without first securing a license from the City Council for such presentation;
provided, however, that persons licensed under Section 3-23 shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section. If Council determines that the
proposed activity: (a) detracts from, interferes with or is detrimental to
planned Tulip Time activities; (b) is not in keeping with the theme of Tulip
Time; or (c) would be in violation of any provisions of this Code or of state
or federal law, such application for a license shall be denied, otherwise it
shall be granted.
Sec. 3-3. (Reserved)
Repealed by Ordinance No. 770.
Sec. 3-1 CHARTER Sec. 3-3
C:179

ARTICLE II
Bowling, Pool and Billiards
Sec. 3-4. License—required. [Code 1955, § 7-3.2]
No person shall engage in operating, running, keeping or maintaining any
billiard or pool table, or any bowling center, for the use of the public, with
or without charge for the use thereof, within the City, without first obtaining
a license therefor in the manner provided in the article and in Chapter 17.
Sec. 3-5. Same—Eligibility. [Code 1955, § 7-3.2]
No license shall be granted under the provisions of this article to any
natural person who is, or to any corporation whose resident manager or
operator is, under 21 years of age; or who has not resided in the state for a
period of one year immediately prior to the application for such license, or
who has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, nor whose
general reputation in any community in which he has resided during the
five years next preceding such application is that of a gambler, cheat or
promoter of vice and immorality. No license shall be granted hereunder to
any corporation which is not authorized to do business in this state.
Sec. 3-6. Same—Application; special provisions applicable upon
change in management of corporation. [Code 1955, § 7-3.2]
The application for a license under this article shall state the applicant's
age, correct name, post office address, and residence, the address of the
premises to be licensed, the number of tables or alleys the applicant intends
to maintain, the length of time he has resided within the City, and his
place of residence for the past five years immediately before the time of
such application, and whether or not he has ever been convicted of any
crime involving moral turpitude. The applicant shall give reference in such
application to at least five reputable citizens of the community wherein he
has last resided within this state, or if he had not previously resided in
this state, of the community wherein he has last resided, and the written
recommendation of at least two such reputable citizens of such community
respecting his moral character. Application on behalf of a corporation shall
be made by the agent of such corporation who will have principal charge
of the establishment to be licensed. Such agent shall furnish all facts
concerning himself which are required of an individual applicant. In case
the agent managing any licensed establishment for a corporation shall be
replaced, the license for such establishment shall be revoked, unless the
Council shall, by resolution, continue such license. In case such license is
not continued as hereinbefore provided, a new application shall be filed
and a new license shall be issued before the business or other activity, the
conduct of which is authorized by such license, is thereafter operated. In
case of a partnership, each active partner in such business shall join in the
application for such license and each shall furnish all of the information and
recommendations required of an individual applicant.
Sec. 3-4 CHARTER Sec. 3-7
C:181
Sec. 3-7. (Reserved)29
Sec. 3-8. Same—Issuance by resolution only. [Code 1955, § 7-3.2]
No license shall be issued under this article except by resolution of the
Council.
Sec. 3-9. Hours of operation. [Code 1955, § 7-3.2; Ord. No. 771;
Ord. No. 1155, 10-18-1995]
No person licensed under the provisions of this article, or his or her
employee, agent, or servant, shall keep open for business between the
hours of 2:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Sunday and from 2:30 a.m. to
7:00 a.m. on any other day. The licensee may request an extension of the
hours of operation to allow the licensee to sponsor a tournament or other
special event on the premises. Said request shall be presented in writing
to the Chief of Police for approval at least one month in advance of the
scheduled event. If approval is denied, then the licensee may present his or
her request to City Council for approval by a majority vote.
Sec. 3-10. Gambling. [Code 1955, § 7-3.2; Ord. No. 1155,
10-18-1995]
No person licensed under the provisions of this article, or his or her
employee, agent or servant, shall permit or allow any one or more persons
on the licensed premises, including bowling centers, to engage in any game
of cards, dice, gambling or other game of chance, or permit any person to
play any game on which bets or wagers are laid, or permit any person to lay
any wager or bet on the outcome or result of any game.
Sec. 3-11. Minors in pool or billiard halls or bowling centers. [Code
1955, § 7-3.2; Ord. No. 1155, 10-18-1995; Ord. No. 1190, 4-2-1997]
No person licensed under the provisions of this article, or his or her
employee, agent or servant, shall permit any minor under the age of 12
years or under to be or remain in any pool or billiard hall, or any bowling
center, after the hour of 9:30 p.m., unless such minor is accompanied by a
parent or guardian, or permit any minor the age of, or between the ages of
13 and 16 years to be or remain in any pool or billiard hall, or any bowling
center, after the hour of 11:30 p.m., unless such minor is accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
29.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 3-7, which pertained to bond prerequisite to issuance of
license, adopted as § 7-3.2 of the 1955 Code, was repealed 1-3-1990 by Ord. No. 993.
Sec. 3-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 3-11
C:182
ARTICLE III
Carnivals, Circuses, Circus Parades, Etc.
Sec. 3-12. License—required; permitting use of property for
unlicensed exhibition, etc. [Code 1955, § 7-3.3]
No person shall exhibit or conduct any carnival or circus, or any menagerie,
or side show connected therewith, for which money or other reward is
in any manner demanded or received, or any circus parade, without first
having obtained a license therefor, as provided in this article and in Chapter
17; and no person shall knowingly allow or permit any building, yard or
other place in the City, owned or possessed by him, to be used for the
accommodation of any such exhibition or performance, unless a license
therefor, obtained as herein provided, shall have first been shown to such
owner or possessor.
Sec. 3-13. Same—Application. [Code 1955, § 7-3.3; Ord. No. 994,
1-3-1990]
The application for the license required under Section 3-12 shall set forth
the object and length of time for which, and the place where such license is
desired to be used, a diagram of the seating plan to be used, showing exits
and aisles, and in case the applicant is a corporation such application shall
set forth the names of all of the officers of such corporation.
Sec. 3-14. Same—Insurance prerequisite to issuance. [Code 1955,
§ 7-3.3]
Before any license required by this article is issued, the applicant therefor
shall also file with the City Clerk evidence, which is satisfactory to the City
Clerk, that he has obtained and carries public liability and property damage
insurance which will be in force through the life of the license, under which
the applicant and the City are coinsurees with respect to any one or more
personal injuries or any property damage arising out of the doing of any act
or arising out of any actionable negligence in the exercise of any license or
permit granted to him under this article, whether such act or negligence
be by the licensee or by any other person who may be performing any act
under or in accordance with the authority granted by such license or permit.
Sec. 3-12 CHARTER Sec. 3-14
C:183

ARTICLE IV
Dance Halls and Dancing Academies
Sec. 3-15. License—required. [Code 1955, § 7-3.4]
No person shall, for hire, charge or reward, keep or maintain a public dance
hall or dancing academy in the City without first having obtained a license
therefor in the manner provided in this article and in Chapter 17.
Sec. 3-16. Same—Application; requirements as to location of
premises and persons in charge. [Code 1955, § 7-3.4]
The application for the license required by this article shall specify the
location and describe completely the interior arrangement and entrances
of the place in which he intends to keep the same, which location, unless
approved by the Council, shall not be in any place where intoxicating liquors
are furnished or consumed. Such application shall further specify the name
of the person who is to be in charge of any such dancing hall, dancing
academy or place where dancing shall be permitted and shall contain an
agreement on the part of the applicant that no other persons than those
so named shall, at any time, be in charge of such dancing hall, dancing
academy or place where public dancing shall be permitted.
Sec. 3-17. (Reserved)30
Sec. 3-18. Permitting improper, indecent, etc., conduct or presence
of intoxicating persons. [Code 1955, § 7-3.4]
No licensee under this article or his assistant or agent shall permit any
improper, immoral or indecent conduct in any such licensed place, or permit
any intoxicated person to enter or remain in any such licensed place.
Sec. 3-19. Booths, etc. [Code 1955, § 7-3.4; Ord. No. 426, § 1]
No booths or space or part of any dance hall, public dancing academy or
place where public dancing is permitted shall be curtained, screened or
partitioned from the general assembly room, except as may be expressly
permitted by the terms of the particular license.
30.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 3-17, which pertained to bond requirements, adopted as § 7-3.4
of the 1955 Code, was repealed 1-3-1990 by Ord. No. 993.
Sec. 3-15 CHARTER Sec. 3-19
C:185

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)31
Sec. 3-20. through Sec. 3-22. (Reserved)
31.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, which pertained to shooting galleries, adopted as § 7-3.5 of
the 1955 Code, as amended 10-7-1992 by Ord. No. 1069, was repealed 10-18-1995 by Ord.
No. 1156.
Sec. 3-20 CHARTER Sec. 3-20
C:187

ARTICLE VI
Theatres, Shows, etc.
Sec. 3-23. License—required. [Code 1955, § 7-3.6]
No person shall operate any theatre, motion picture house, opera house or
concert hall in the City without having first obtained a license therefor in
accordance with the provisions of this article and Chapter 17.
Sec. 3-24. Same—Inspection and certification of premises by Fire
Chief prerequisite to issuance and renewal. [Code 1955, § 7-3.6]
No license required by this article shall be issued or renewed until the
premises for which such license is sought has been inspected by the Fire
Chief, and has been certified by him as being in compliance with this Code
and with state law.
Sec. 3-25. Same—Special requirements for person not licensed
under article. [Code 1955, § 7-3.6; Ord. No. 1069, 10-7-1992]
No person or organization, other than those licensed under this article,
shall present any theatrical exhibition, show, entertainment or amusement
for compensation without having obtained a license therefor as provided in
Chapter 17 and having paid the fee as established by a resolution adopted
by City Council.
Sec. 3-23 CHARTER Sec. 3-25
C:189

ARTICLE VII
Arcades and Mechanical Amusement Devices
Sec. 3-26. Definitions. [Ord. No. 840]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ARCADE — Any place, business, premises or establishment wherein the
total number of amusement devices shall occupy in excess of 20% of the
usable floor space of the licensed premises. For the purposes of this
definition, "usable floor space" shall not include areas not otherwise
available to the general public. For the purposes of this definition, the area
occupied by amusement devices shall include the walkways and areas of
separation between amusement devices required for the walking and safety
of patrons.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Each machine, device or game, operated upon
the insertion of a coin, token or slug, for the use or intended use of the
public, which operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill
or amusement of any kind, nature or description and which returns no
automatic payoff device for the return of money, tokens or slugs.
LICENSEE — Any person requesting a license pursuant to this article.
OPERATOR — Any person, proprietor, lessee, manager or employee who is
in charge of or has control over the operation of any amusement device or
arcade.
OWNER — Any person who owns, has title to or has control over the
operation of any amusement device or arcade.
Sec. 3-27. Article not to permit licensing of slot machines, coinoperated
gambling devices or obscene exhibits. [Ord. No. 840;
amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1705]
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to permit the issuance
of a license for the operation of any slot machine or to permit the use of any
coin-operated machine or device for gambling purposes, wherein money,
trade tokens or slugs are returned as consideration for the operation of a
game of chance, or to permit any amusement device which shall exhibit any
film, picture or material which is obscene pursuant to MCLA § 752.361, et
seq.
Sec. 3-28. Arcade license generally. [Ord. No. 840; Ord. No. 994,
1-3-1990; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1705]
No person shall engage in the operating, running, keeping or maintaining
of an arcade without first obtaining license therefor. No arcade shall be
established, maintained or conducted in the City without a public hearing
by the City Council according to the terms of this section.
Sec. 3-26 CHARTER Sec. 3-28
C:191
(a) A proposed licensee shall submit an application to the City Clerk
pursuant to Chapter 17 of this Code and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) The proposed licensee, owner or operator, if the licensee is a
corporation, shall be 18 years of age or older.
(2) The proposed licensee, owner or operator, if the licensee is a
corporation, shall not have been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude for a period
of eight years prior to the application for a license.
(3) The proposed licensee shall pay to the City Treasurer the fee
established for the issuance of a gaming device license as
established by resolution of the City Council.
(b) In addition to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this section, the
application of the proposed licensee shall specify the following:
(1) The proposed hours of operation anticipated for the arcade.
(2) The number of amusement devices intended for use or intended
use of the public.
(3) The trade name, manufacturer, general description of the
amusement and the serial number of each amusement device.
(4) The number and identity of employees, operators and supervisory
personnel available to monitor the arcade operation.
(5) A list of any anticipated restrictions to be implemented by the
proposed licensee for the operation of the arcade, which will be
prominently displayed upon the granting of the license.
(6) A diagram with dimensions of the proposed licensed premises,
showing the location of each amusement device and the anticipated
exits from the premises.
(7) The location of any racks or other devices for the parking and
storing of bicycles.
(c) Upon receipt of the application for an arcade license, the City Clerk
shall mail notice to all property owners located within 300 feet of the
proposed licensed premises, indicating the name of the proposed
licensee, the location of the business premises and the date and time of
public hearing before Council. Notice shall be mailed no later than 10
days prior to the public hearing.
(d) Prior to the public hearing, the business premises shall be inspected by
the Department of Public Safety and Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services. A written report shall be submitted to the City
Council by each department, based upon the following criteria:
Sec. 3-28 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 3-28
C:192
(1) The Department of Public Safety shall make an investigation as to
the criminal record and character of the proposed licensee and, if
the applicant is a corporation, to the principal shareholders and
operators, including all supervisory personnel, of the proposed
licensee. The Department of Public Safety shall further investigate
the type and nature of the amusement devices proposed to be used
in the arcade. The Department of Public Safety shall further report
on the availability of private property, adjacent to and adjoining the
premises, for the storage of bicycles and shall review the
anticipated congestion of travel for pedestrians within the public
right-of-way.
(2) The Department of Public Safety, in connection with the Electrical
Inspector of the City, shall make an investigation to determine
whether the amusement devices and licensed premises comply
with the provisions of the codes of the City relating to electrical
installation and operation and whether the proposed operation will
constitute a nuisance. The Department of Public Safety shall
further report on the levels of occupancy of the premises for safe
fire exiting to the appropriate exits.
(3) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall
make an investigation to determine whether the proposed licensed
premises complies with all building, zoning, plumbing and
mechanical codes of the City.
(e) The City Council shall conduct the public hearing in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Council. Upon conclusion of the public
hearing, the Council shall grant or deny the license for the operation of
an arcade.
(1) The Council may deny a license if any of the following are found to
exist:
a. If the proposed premises are not suitable and proper for such
operation to be conducted, as such relates to the public health,
safety and general welfare of the City.
b. If a preponderance of evidence has been presented by adjacent
and adjoining properties, by appraisal or other expert opinion
submitted in writing within five days before the public hearing,
indicating that the proposed operation will: constitute or be
likely to constitute a nuisance in fact; constitute substantial
damage to the value or proprietary interest of businesses
located adjacent to or adjoining a proposed licensed premises;
and/or cause substantial interference in the movement of
pedestrian traffic in the public right-of-way, a copy of such
written evidence shall be submitted to the proposed licensee
not less than three days prior to the public hearing for
response and rebuttal.
Sec. 3-28 CHARTER Sec. 3-28
C:193
Sec. 3-29. Operation of business generally. [Ord. No. 840; Ord. No.
1157, 10-18-1995; Ord. No. 1190, 4-2-1997]
For the purposes of this section, any licensee who operates, runs, keeps or
maintains an arcade shall comply with the additional requirements of this
section.
c. If a violation is determined to exist regarding any City codes,
ordinances or statutes, and the Council determines that
corrective action cannot be made within a date of compliance
established by Council.
(2) In the event an arcade license is denied, the Council shall direct the
City Attorney to prepare findings of fact and conclusion of law
relating to the denial of the license, which shall be reviewed and
approved by the Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(f) A license which is approved by the Council shall be subject to the
following terms, conditions and limitations:
(1) Compliance with the representations of the licensee as set forth in
the license application and at the public hearing before the
Council.
(2) Enforcement of the house rules and rules of conduct set forth in the
license application.
(3) Compliance with the level of occupancy determined by the Council
pursuant to the report submitted by the Department of Public
Safety. In the event the arcade operator shall modify or amend any
of the information set forth in the license application, the licensee
shall notify the Chief of Police within 10 days of such amendment or
modification, in writing.
(a) No licensee, or his or her employer, agent or servant, shall permit or
allow the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, unless
licensed by the Liquor Control Commission of the state, or the sale,
possession or use of controlled substances on the licensed premises.
(b) No licensee, or his or her employee, agent, or servant, shall permit,
allow or continue to permit or allow any person on any licensed
premises who is violating any provision of Chapter 20 of this Code.
(c) No licensee, or his or her employee, agent or servant, shall permit or
allow any one or more persons on the licensed premises to engage in
any game of cards, dice gambling or other game of chance, or permit
any person to play any game on which bets or wagers are laid, or permit
any person to lay any wager or bet on the outcome or result of any
game.
(d) No agent, servant, employee, manager or operator of a licensee shall
have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral
Sec. 3-28 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 3-29
C:194
Sec. 3-30. Inspections by Police and Fire Departments. [Ord. No.
840]
The Police and Fire Departments of the City and the officers thereof, as a
condition of the issuance of the licenses contemplated by this article, shall
have access at all times to all arcade premises operated within the City,
and it shall be the duty of those Departments to periodically investigate and
inspect all premises in which arcades are operated, in order to assure that
the devices are being operated in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
Sec. 3-31. Devices to be kept in plain view of inspectors. [Ord. No.
840]
Any amusement device, as defined in Section 3-26, shall at all times be kept
in plain view of any person authorized pursuant to this article to cause or
make inspections of the business premises.
Sec. 3-32. Suspension, revocation and denial of renewal of arcade
licenses. [Ord. No. 840]
A license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked, or
its renewal may be denied, for the causes and in the manner set forth in
Chapter 17 of this Code. The Chief of Police is the designated enforcement
officer for the purposes of this article or any license suspension, revocation
or refusal procedure under Chapter 17.
turpitude for a period of eight years prior to the application for a
license.
(e) A licensee shall post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises the
hours of operation and rules of conduct for the business.
(f) No person licensed under the provisions of this article, or his or her
employee, agent or servant, shall permit any minor under the age of 12
years or under to be or remain in any arcade after the hour of 9:30 p.m.,
unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or permit
any minor the age of, or between the ages of 13 and 16 years to be or
remain in any arcade after the hour of 11:30 p.m., unless such minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(g) A licensee, and his or her employee, agent or servant, shall require that
bicycles and nonmotorized vehicles of patrons and customers be stored
and parked in an orderly manner to permit the safe and unobstructed
flow of pedestrian traffic, and if bicycle racks are installed in the
immediate or adjacent right-of-way of the licensed business, an arcade
operator shall require all patrons and customers to park bicycles and
nonmotorized vehicles in the bicycle racks.
Sec. 3-29 CHARTER Sec. 3-33
C:195
Sec. 3-33. Existing businesses—Generally; license renewal
generally. [Ord. No. 840]
Businesses which have been lawfully operating and existing prior to April
25, 1984, or businesses which have been issued an arcade license shall be
required to annually comply with the provisions of this article, except for
the provisions of this article requiring a preoccupancy license hearing as
set forth in Section 3-28 et seq. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an arcade
licensee shall submit the information and application required pursuant to
Section 3-28.
The application for a license or its renewal shall be submitted for
departmental review pursuant to the criteria set forth in Subsection (d)
of Section 3-28. If the application complies with the criteria of Section
3-28, the license shall be referred to Council for approval without the
preoccupancy hearing.
Sec. 3-34. Same—Dates of license application and payment of fees.
[Ord. No. 840; Ord. No. 1069, 10-7-1992]
Businesses which have been operating and existing lawfully prior to April
25, 1984, shall apply for the license mandated by this article and shall pay
the license fees as set forth and prorated pursuant to resolution adopted by
City Council within 30 days of April 25, 1984.
Sec. 3-35. Severability. [Ord. No. 840]
Should any section, clause or phrase of this article be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of
this article as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared
to be invalid.
Sec. 3-33 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 3-35
C:196
Chapter 3.1
(RESERVED)
[Former Chapter 3.1, Alcoholic Beverages, specifically Sections 3.1-1
through 3.1-7, which pertained to sale of alcoholic liquor on
Sundays, adopted 2-21-2007 by Ord. No. 1467, was repealed
11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1523.]
Chapter 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Sec. 3-35 CHARTER Sec. 3-35
C:197

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 4-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 804]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set out unless it shall be
apparent for the context that a different meaning is intended. Words in
singular form can be construed as plural.
ANIMAL — Any animal, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any other creature.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person employed by the City whose
duty it is to enforce the terms of this chapter, or any police officer, reserve
police officer or any other person employed by the City and empowered by
state statute to enforce municipal ordinances.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any animal shelter maintained by the City, the Ottawa
County Humane Society or the county.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or a member of his immediate family by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
DOG — Any dog of either sex, of any age.
IMPOUNDED — Having been received into the custody of an animal shelter
or into custody of any authorized agent or representative thereof.
KENNEL — Any lot, building, structure or premises whereon or wherein
more than two dogs are kept or maintained for any purpose.
OWNER — Any person having a right or property in a dog or who harbors a
dog or has a dog in his care or who permits a dog to remain on or about the
property or premises occupied by such person.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the City, the state or any
municipality, county or township, and whose duty it is to preserve the peace,
to make arrests or to enforce the law.
Sec. 4-2. Appointment and duties of Animal Control Officer. [Ord.
No. 804; Ord. No. 1242, 3-24-1999]
(a) The City Manager or the designated department head shall appoint a
suitable person as the Animal Control Officer of the City. The City shall
provide minimum employment standards relative to the recruitment,
selection and appointment of Animal Control Officers, which standards
shall at least equal the minimum standards set forth by the laws of the
state.
(b) In the performance of his duties, the Animal Control Officer shall have
the power, authority and the immunity of a public officer and employee
to issue citations and to make arrests without a warrant whenever he or
she has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has
committed in the Animal Control Officer's presence any act which is a
Sec. 4-1 CHARTER Sec. 4-2
C:199
Sec. 4-3. Keeping or housing—Generally. [Ord. No. 804; Ord. No.
823; 8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1614; 4-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1624;
6-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1653; 10-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1747]
No person shall keep or house any animal or honey bees within the City
except dogs, cats, minipigs (120 pounds or less), canaries or other animals
or birds which are commonly kept and housed inside dwellings as domestic,
household pets, except that:
misdemeanor violation of this chapter, or a felony or misdemeanor
violation of state law relating to the care, treatment and impounding of
animals.
(c) The Animal Control Officer shall have charge and be responsible for any
animal shelter maintained in the City and shall have charge and be
responsible for the safe keeping, sheltering, caring for, feeding and
watering of all animals impounded in such animal shelter. The Animal
Control Officer may seize and impound any domestic animal running at
large and such animal may be released to the owner upon payment of
the same fees specified for dogs as set forth in this chapter.
(1) No person shall keep or house more than:
a. Two dogs which have attained four months of age per residential
dwelling unit.
b. Five cats which have attained four months of age per residential
dwelling unit.
c. Two minipigs per residence.
d. A combined total number of more than five dogs, cats and minipigs
which have attained four months of age per residential dwelling
unit.
(2) Agricultural animals. A person shall be permitted to keep or house
cows, horses, mules or fowl if such animals shall be kept or housed not
less than 125 feet from any dwelling of any person other than the one
upon whose premises they are kept or housed and such animals or fowl
are kept or housed on premises used or occupied as one parcel of land
regularly devoted to, or zoned for, agricultural purposes and consisting
of not less than four acres.
(3) Honeybees. Other than in the AG Agriculture District, no person shall
keep honeybees unless he or she obtains a honeybee permit and
complies with the following conditions:
a. The maximum number of hives permitted per property shall be as
follows:
1. Two hives for properties with a lot that is not greater than
11,000 square feet in area.
Sec. 4-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4-3
C:200
2. Four hives for properties with a lot area of greater than 11,000
square feet and not greater than 22,000 square feet in area.
3. Five hives for properties with a lot area of greater than 22,000
square feet and not greater than 43,450 square feet in area.
4. Eight hives for properties with a lot area of greater than
43,450 square feet (one acre) in area.
5. One additional hive is allowed for each additional acre of land.
b. Each hive shall have a maximum size of 20 cubic feet.
c. A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall shield any part of a
property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway barrier
shall consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination
thereof, and it shall be positioned to transect both legs of a triangle
extending from an apex at the hive to each end point of the
property line to be shielded.
d. A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives.
e. All hives shall be located at least 25 feet from any dwelling on a
neighboring property, at least five feet from any property line, and
where a public sidewalk is present, at least 10 feet distant from it.
f. The applicant shall pay the fee required by the fee resolution
periodically adopted by the City Council.
g. Applications for original and renewal honeybee permits shall be
submitted to, and permits shall be issued by, the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services. Permits shall be issued
within one week if the applicant demonstrates that it meets all
conditions of this section.
h. An initial honeybee permit shall be valid for three years from the
date of issuance. A renewal honeybee permit shall be valid for two
years from the date of issuance.
i. Applications for a honeybee permit, renewals, suspensions and
revocations shall be handled in the manner provided in Chapter 17
for licenses.
(4) Pet fowl. A person shall be permitted to keep and house one
domesticated pet chicken (hens only), duck, goose, or similar fowl in a
pen or confinement coop which is at least 25 feet from any neighboring
dwelling unit. Further, a maximum of 10 chicks under the age of five
weeks are permitted.
(5) Chickens. Other than in the AG Agriculture District, no person shall
keep chickens unless he or she obtains a permit and complies with the
following conditions:
Sec. 4-3 CHARTER Sec. 4-3
C:201
a. The keeping of chickens shall be done on a noncommercial basis
while limiting and mitigating any potential adverse impacts on
surrounding properties. The keeping of chickens shall be
exclusively used by the people occupying the property as a locally
grown food source for the consumption of eggs or meat.
b. A maximum of four chickens may be kept per parcel if the parcel is
1/2 acre in size or less, five chickens if the parcel is 1/2 to one acre
in size; and six chickens if the parcel is over one acre in size.
Roosters are prohibited.
c. The outdoor slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
d. Chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and must be
kept in the covered enclosure or an adjoining fenced enclosure at
all times. Chickens may be allowed to roam outside of the covered
or fenced enclosure if within a fully fenced side and/or rear yard
and if supervised by a person in the immediate vicinity of the
chickens.
e. All covered enclosures or fenced enclosures shall be located in the
rear yard, shall be no closer than five feet to any property line of an
adjacent property, and shall be located no closer than 25 feet to any
residential structure on an adjacent property.
f. The total square footage of any covered enclosure and fenced
enclosure shall not exceed 80 square feet and shall be a maximum
of eight feet in height.
g. All covered enclosures shall be constructed in such a way as to
prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored
underneath or within the walls of the enclosure. The enclosure
shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner. The coop and pen
must be completely enclosed with a top and/or cover.
h. All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens
likely to attract rats, mice, or other rodents or vermin shall be
secured and protected in sealed containers.
i. Egg-laying chickens shall be kept in compliance with the Michigan
Department of Agriculture Generally Accepted Agricultural and
Management Practices for the Care of Farm Animals, as amended,
except as otherwise provided in this section.
j. Applications for original and renewal permits shall be submitted to,
and permits shall be issued by, the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services. Permits shall be issued within one week if
the applicant demonstrates that it meets all conditions of this
section.
k. The applicant shall pay the fee required by the fee resolution
periodically adopted by the City Council.
Sec. 4-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4-3
C:202
Sec. 4-4. Same—Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 804; amended 1-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 1706]
l. An initial permit shall be valid for three years from the date of
issuance. A renewal permit shall be valid for two years from the
date of issuance.
m. Applications for a permit, renewals, suspensions and revocations
shall be handled in the manner provided in Chapter 17 for licenses.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep, harbor or have charge of any
animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, when any one or more of the
following facts exist:
(1) The animal has an ugly or vicious disposition, shows vicious habits
and has molested any person or animal lawfully in or upon any
public street or place. For purposes of this section an animal who
has bitten or attacked another person shall be rebuttably presumed
to be vicious;
(2) Such animal has attacked or bitten any person or animal, or has
destroyed any property or domestic animal;
(3) The animal, by destruction of property or trespassing upon the
property of others, has become a nuisance in the vicinity where
kept;
(4) Any dog, by loud barking, howling or yelping, has become a
nuisance in the vicinity where kept;
(5) The animal appears to be suffering from rabies or affected by
hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease; or
(6) The animal has been deprived of proper food, drink, shelter,
veterinary care or protection from the weather by a structure
consisting of at least three sides and a roof, or has been cruelly
beaten, overworked, tortured, tormented or mutilated.
(b) If any one or more of the above facts shall exist, it shall be the duty of
the owner to forthwith deliver such animal to the Animal Control Officer
or police officer on demand. The Animal Control Officer may issue an
ordinance violation for a violation of this chapter or a complaint may be
filed in the district court of the county and such district court shall
thereupon issue a summons to the owner of such animal to show cause
why the animal should not be killed or otherwise disposed of as ordered
by the court. Upon hearing, the district court judge, upon finding that
one or more of the facts set forth in this section exists, shall order such
animal to be killed or otherwise disposed of as ordered by the court.
Any owner refusing to obey such order shall be punished as provided in
Section 4-22. All costs incurred for the disposition of the animal shall be
paid by the owner.
Sec. 4-3 CHARTER Sec. 4-5
C:203
Sec. 4-5. Abandonment. [Ord. No. 804]
No person shall abandon any animal in any public place or on any public
highway, or upon the property of another.
Sec. 4-5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4-5
C:204
ARTICLE II
Dogs
Sec. 4-6. Licensing and registration generally. [Ord. No. 804]
No person shall own, keep, harbor, possess or house any dog within the City
unless such person shall comply with the laws of this state providing for the
licensing and registration of such dog.
Sec. 4-7. Ownership. [Ord. No. 804]
Every person in possession of any dog, who shall allow such dog to remain
about his premises for a period of five days, shall be rebuttably deemed to
be the owner thereof for purposes of this chapter.
Sec. 4-8. Collar and license tag to be worn. [Ord. No. 804]
No person shall own, keep or house any dog four months old or older that
does not, at all times when such dog is off the premises of the owner, wear a
collar or harness with a license tag issued pursuant to the laws of this state
or the City.
Sec. 4-9. Production of proof of licensing. [Ord. No. 804]
A person who owns or harbors a dog shall produce proof of a valid license
upon request of a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter.
Sec. 4-10. Dogs running at large; leash required. [Ord. No. 804;
Ord. No. 1346, 8-7-2002]
No person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any dog
shall cause, permit, or allow the same to run at large or to be upon any
highway, street, lane, alley, court or other public place, or upon any private
property or premises other than those of the person owning or having
charge, care, custody, or control of such dog, within the City, unless such
dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is in the charge, care,
custody, or control of the person with the ability to restrain it.
Sec. 4-11. Impoundment—Generally. [Ord. No. 804]
The Animal Control Officer may seize any animal running at large in the City
in violation of Section 4-10. The Animal Control Officer, upon seizing such
animal, shall impound such animal and shall make a complete record of the
breed, color and sex of such animal; the date and manner of its disposal; and
if redeemed, reclaimed or sold, the name of the person by whom redeemed,
reclaimed or purchased, the address of such person and the amounts of all
the fees received or collected for or because of the impounding, reclaiming
or purchasing thereof, and whether it is licensed. If licensed, he shall enter
the number and year of the license tag and the name of the owner if upon
the animal collar or if known; provided, that if any animal so found running
at large cannot be seized and impounded, the Animal Control Officer or any
Sec. 4-6 CHARTER Sec. 4-11
C:205
police officer shall have the right to kill such animal and there shall be no
liability in damages or otherwise for such killing involved in the scope of the
Animal Control Officer's duties.
Sec. 4-12. Same—Period; notice to owner; redemption. [Ord. No.
804; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1706]
Any animal seized under the provision of Section 4-11 shall be placed in the
animal shelter. Not later than 48 hours after the impounding of any animal
by the Animal Control Officer, if the owner is known or can be ascertained,
such owner shall be notified by the Animal Control Officer personally, by
telephone or in writing, of the fact of impounding and the place where
such animal may be reclaimed. For purposes of this section, the Animal
Control Officer shall have presumptively discharged the responsibility of
notifying the owner if contact is made with the person indicated on a dog
identification tag or license tag of the impounded animal. The owner of any
dog impounded may claim and redeem such animal after first securing a
license if such animal is unlicensed. In the event such animal is redeemed
from the animal shelter, the owner shall pay an impounding fee and an
additional fee per day for each succeeding day the animal is impounded in
such amount as is established by resolution of the City Council. This fee
shall be in addition to any charge or assessment by the Ottawa County
Humane Society and shall be remitted to the City. Upon the expiration of
a period of five calendar days, the animal shall be sold, adopted out or
destroyed. In the event such animal is redeemed from the Ottawa County
Humane Society animal shelter, the owner shall pay such impounding fee
and such further fees for the keeping of such animal as may from time
to time be set and charged by the Ottawa County Humane Society. All
impounding fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer and all fees collected by
the Ottawa County Humane Society shall be retained by such society.
Sec. 4-13. Same—Unlawful claiming or redemption. [Ord. No. 804]
It shall be unlawful for any person to claim or redeem an impounded animal
under the provisions of this article when such person is not the legal owner
having right or property in such animal. No person shall wilfully make a
false or misleading statement or representation regarding the ownership
or right to custody or control of an animal for which a license is required,
or regarding the ownership of an animal redeemed from, turned over
to, impounded by or coming under the jurisdiction of the animal shelter
pursuant to this article.
Sec. 4-14. Permitting dog to soil public or private property. [Ord.
No. 804]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care or control
of any dog to allow or permit such dog to soil any public or private property
other than that of the owner, keeper, custodian or person having control of
such dog without promptly removing or disposing of, in a sanitary manner,
any excreta deposited by a dog upon any public or private property.
Sec. 4-11 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4-15
C:206
Sec. 4-15. Animal biting incident; quarantine; penalty. [Ord. No.
804]
The Police Department or Animal Control Officer, upon receiving verified
information from the owner, victim, director of the county Health
Department, physician or any other person, that an animal is involved in
a biting incident, shall order the quarantine of the animal causing the
bite. Upon issuing an order for quarantine the rules provided for in this
section for quarantine shall be enforced and every person having actual
or constructive knowledge of the order shall obey all requirements of the
quarantine.
(a) Every animal that bites a human or other animal shall be immediately
confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify the Police Department
or Animal Control Officer. The owner shall not permit the animal to
come in contact with any other person or animal. The owner shall
surrender possession of the animal to the Animal Control Officer on
demand for supervised quarantine. Supervised quarantine shall be in
the animal shelter, a veterinary hospital or by any other method of
adequate confinement approved by the Animal Control Officer. The
quarantine period shall be for not less than 10 days immediately
following the time of the biting incident. A release from quarantine may
be issued if signs of rabies have not been observed during the
quarantine period. Any costs of such quarantine shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
(b) If the Animal Control Officer orders quarantine other than supervised
quarantine in an animal shelter or veterinary hospital, the owner shall
be responsible for confining the animal as designated by the Animal
Control Officer so as to prevent further exposure to humans or animals
during the quarantine period.
(c) All animal bite reports shall be investigated by the Police Department or
Animal Control Officer. Without permission of the Animal Control
Officer, a person shall not kill or remove from the county limits an
animal that has bitten a human or other animal, or that has been placed
under quarantine, except when it is necessary to kill that animal to
protect a person or other animal.
(d) The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be or suspected of being rabid.
(e) An animal exposed to rabies shall be handled in one of the following
methods:
(1) Humane destruction with notification to or under supervision of the
Animal Control Officer.
(2) If the animal is not currently vaccinated, quarantine in a veterinary
hospital or at the animal shelter for at least six months,
immediately following the date of exposure.
Sec. 4-15 CHARTER Sec. 4-15
C:207
Sec. 4-16. Use of dog runs, etc., restricted. [Ord. No. 804.]
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a dog to keep such
dog in any run, pen, chain, rope or any other outside enclosure when any
one or more of the following facts exist:
Sec. 4-17. Injured animals requiring emergency care. [Ord. No.
804]
An animal requiring medical or veterinary care resulting from an accident,
injury or other activity may be removed by the Animal Control Officer for
appropriate medical or veterinary treatment and care. Any costs incurred
for the medical or veterinary treatment of the animal shall be paid by
the owner. Failure to pay the costs incurred pursuant to this section shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
Sec. 4-18. Female dogs in heat. [Ord. No. 804]
No person shall own, keep or house any female dog in the City, while such
dog is in heat, except when confined within the dwelling of such owner or
person.
(3) If the animal is currently vaccinated, immediate revaccination and
quarantine for at least 30 days immediately following the date of
exposure.
(4) A person shall not fail or refuse to surrender an animal for
supervised quarantine or humane destruction as required herein
for rabies control when demand thereof is made by the Animal
Control Officer.
(5) A person having possession of or responsibility for a quarantined
animal shall immediately notify the Police Department or the
Animal Control Officer if the animal escapes, becomes or appears
to become sick or dies, and in case of death of the animal while
under quarantine, the person shall immediately surrender the dead
body to the Animal Control Officer for diagnostic purposes.
(f) A person who owns an animal that has been placed under quarantine
for biting a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under this section if
such animal is found running free during this quarantine period.
(a) That such dog is kept within 20 feet of any occupied dwelling other than
the owners', unless the dog is kept loose within a completely enclosed
yard rather than a run, pen or on a chain or rope.
(b) That such pen, run, enclosure or area where dog is kept has not been
properly cleaned and is in an unsanitary condition and is causing
offensive odors in the area where dog is kept.
Sec. 4-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4-19
C:208
Sec. 4-19. Killing of animals. [Ord. No. 804]
The Animal Control Officer may kill an animal in the course of his lawful
discharge of this chapter which shows immediate vicious habits, has
molested any person or animal lawfully in or upon any public street, place
or is an immediate danger to any person, animal or property.
Sec. 4-20. Resisting officers. [Ord. No. 804]
No person shall hinder, resist, oppose or interfere with the Animal Control
Officer or any police officer in the performance of their duties under this
chapter or conceal or secrete any animal from any such officer or person
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this
section, interference shall include attempting to release or free and animal
seized or confined by the Animal Control Officer whether located in a
vehicle or animal shelter of the City or county.
Sec. 4-21. Kennels. [Ord. No. 804]
No person shall establish or maintain any boarding kennel, or any breeding
kennel, or permit any such kennel to be maintained on any premises owned,
leased or occupied by him, except as an accessory use to an animal hospital
or a doctor of veterinary medicine.
Sec. 4-22. Penalty. [Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 1242, 3-24-1999]
A person who violates or fails to comply with Sections 4-3, 4-8, 4-9, 4-10,
4-14, 4-16 or 4-18 of this chapter or any of the subsections of those sections
is responsible for a Class I municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and
any other relief that may be imposed by the court. A person who violates or
fails to comply with Section 4-21 of this chapter is responsible for a Class
II municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the
schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief that
may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which
such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 4-19 CHARTER Sec. 4-22
C:209
Chapter 5
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 5 was repealed by Ordinance No. 830]
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical Code enforcement — See Ch. 9, Art.
I.
Sec. 4-22 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 4-22
C:210
ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 6-1. State of Michigan Building Code, administration and
enforcement assumed. [Ord. No. 661; Ord. No. 805; Ord. No. 1307,
7-3-2001]
Pursuant to the power granted cities by Section 3k of Act 279 of the Public
Acts of 1909, as amended,32 and pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code Act of 1972, Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), the City of Holland hereby assumes
the responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the Michigan
Building Code throughout its corporate limits.
Sec. 6-2. State of Michigan Mechanical Code, administration and
enforcement assumed. [Ord. No. 661; Ord. No. 805; Ord. No. 1307,
7-3-2001]
Pursuant to the power granted cities by Section 3k of Act 279 of the Public
Acts of 1909, as amended, and pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code Act of 1972, Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), the City of Holland hereby assumes
the responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the Michigan
Mechanical Code throughout its corporate limits.
Sec. 6-2.1. Board of Appeals members. [Ord. No. 1579, 1-18-2012]
(a) Construction Board. The Construction Board of Appeals shall have six
members and two alternates. The members of the Construction Board
of Appeals shall be the same as the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The alternate members of the Construction Board of Appeals
shall be the same as the alternate members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(b) Term. The term served by the members of the Construction Board of
Appeals shall be three years and shall be staggered the same as
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The initial appointments
under this section shall be for terms equal to the remainder of the terms
of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(c) Meetings. The Construction Board of Appeals shall meet as a separate
meeting immediately following the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or
Housing Board of Appeals when agenda items are brought before it.
Notice of this separate shall be posted as required by the Open
Meetings Act.
32.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 117.3(k).
Sec. 6-1 CHARTER Sec. 6-3
C:211
Sec. 6-3. State of Michigan Plumbing Code, administration and
enforcement assumed. [Ord. No. 661; Ord. No. 805; Ord. No. 1307,
7-3-2001]
Pursuant to the power granted cities by Section 3k of Act 279 of the Public
Acts of 1909, as amended, and pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code Act of 1972, Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), the City of Holland hereby assumes
the responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the Michigan
Plumbing Code throughout its corporate limits. In addition to the Michigan
Plumbing Code, the requirements of Chapter 29 shall also apply with
respect to the sanitary sewer system and connections.
Sec. 6-3.1. License required. [Ord. No. 1402, 12-15-2004]
No person shall engage in the work of a residential builder or residential
maintenance and alteration contractor, as defined in MCLA § 339.2401,
unless such person first obtains a license to perform such work or unless the
work is exempt from the licensing requirements. No person shall perform
installations, alterations or servicing work for which a license is required
under the provisions of MCLA § 338.977 (mechanical work), MCLA
§ 338.885 (electrical work), or MCLA § 338.3525 (plumbing work) unless
such person first obtains a license to perform such work.
Sec. 6-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6-3.1
C:212
ARTICLE II
Moving Buildings
Sec. 6-4. License—Required. [Code 1955, § 7-9.1]
No person shall engage in the business or occupation of moving buildings
into or upon the public streets and avenues of the City without having first
obtained a license to engage in such business or occupation in the manner
provided in this article and in Chapter 17, and no person shall so move any
buildings unless he is licensed to engage in such business.
Sec. 6-5. Same—Insurance prerequisite to issuance. [Code 1955,
§ 7-9.2; Ord. No. 995, 1-3-1990; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1707]
Sec. 6-6. Permit for buildings of certain dimensions—Required; to
whom issued, bond required. [Code 1955, § 7-9.3; Ord. No. 1024,
9-18-1991; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1707]
(a) Such applicant shall, as a condition of the issuance of such license, file
with the City Clerk evidence that he is covered by one or more public
liability and property damage policies of insurance, through one or
more companies approved by the Commissioner of Insurance of the
state, in the amounts specified by resolution of the City Council. Such
policies of insurance shall insure both the applicant and the City against
loss or damage to any person or property as a result of the moving of
any building by the applicant.
(b) In the event that any policy of insurance required herein shall lapse or
become void for any reason whatsoever, the license issued under this
chapter shall become inoperative and void until a new policy of
insurance shall have been provided and filed with the City Clerk, or the
existing policy of insurance reinstated in full force, and all of applicant's
activities pursuant to such license shall be suspended and discontinued
until the filing of such new policy of insurance, or proof of
reinstatement thereof. Every policy of insurance, both original and
renewal, shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form and shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
(a) No person shall move a building or prepare to move a building or make
any site preparations for moving a building, the exterior dimensions of
which exceed eight feet in width or 10 feet in length or 12 feet in height,
without first obtaining a permit for the building to be moved and paying
the fee provided by resolution of the City Council. No such permit shall
be issued except to a licensed building mover or his authorized agent. If
the site to which such building will be moved is located within the City
of Holland, no site preparations at the proposed new site shall be made
prior to the issuance of a permit and payment of the fee required by
resolution of the City Council.
Sec. 6-4 CHARTER Sec. 6-6
C:213
Sec. 6-7. Same—Application generally. [Code 1955, § 7-9.4; Ord. No.
491; Ord. No. 1024, 9-18-1991]
An application for a building moving permit required by Section 6-6 shall be
made to the Department of Environmental Health upon forms provided by
that Department. The application shall be signed by the licensed building
mover and the person(s) responsible for complying with the requirements
of Section 6-10. The application shall include the following information:
(b) No person shall move a building described in Subsection (a) and no
permit shall be issued until the owner of the building to be moved or the
licensed building mover shall file with the City Treasurer's office:
(1) A performance bond in the form of a collected funds cash
instrument (i.e., bank certified check, money order, etc.) or a surety
performance bond in the amount of $1,000 or such higher amount
as determined by the City Council. Disposition of the deposit or
bond shall be conditioned upon the timely and proper performance
of the duties imposed under this chapter and the representations
set forth in the application for permit. If the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services certifies that the building
has not been moved and completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the deposit or bond shall be forfeited.
If the responsible person complies with all of the requirements of
this chapter, the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services shall notify the finance office to release the bond; and
(2) A deposit for the estimated cost of services to be rendered by the
various City of Holland departments described in Section 6-8 to
assist with the building moving. The total estimated amount of this
deposit shall be determined by the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services.
(c) The requirements of Subsection (a) shall not apply to new modular
prefabricated structures moved into the City of Holland or buildings
moved to a different location on the same tax parcel.
(d) The licensed building mover, the person responsible for complying with
Section 6-10, or their contractors or subcontractors shall also obtain all
applicable building, plumbing and other permits required by the codes
of the City of Holland in addition to the building moving permit.
(1) A detailed description of the condition of the building to be moved;
(2) The location from and to which the building will be moved;
(3) The route over which it will be moved;
(4) Evidence that the provisions of Sections 6-11 and 6-12 have been
satisfied;
Sec. 6-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6-7
C:214
Sec. 6-8. Same—Reviews, referrals and approvals required. [Code
1955, § 7-9.4; Ord. No. 491; Ord. No. 1024, 9-18-1991; 1-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 1707]
The Building Inspector shall review the application to determine whether
the building complies with the Housing Law of the State of Michigan, Article
I of this chapter, Article II of Chapter 14, and Chapters 9, 25, and 39 and
Section 29-8. In addition, the Building Inspector shall refer the application
to:
Sec. 6-9. Grant or denial of application. [Code 1955, § 7-9.4; Ord.
No. 491; Ord. No. 1024, 9-18-1991]
(5) A time schedule setting forth the schedule for preparing the building,
moving the building, restoring the site from which the building will be
moved and completing the site to which the building will be moved;
(6) Copies of easements obtained for all private property which will be
crossed or encroached upon by the applicant in moving the building;
(7) A site restoration plan for the property from which the building will be
removed (including, but not limited to, safety and security measures
pending site restoration);
(8) Proof that all utilities serving the building to be moved have been
disconnected by the utility;
(9) A site plan for the proposed new site which will indicate building and
land elevations, water drainage and safety or security measures to be
used pending completion of the site;
(10) Such other information as the City Building Inspector may require.
(a) The City Engineer for his written approval of the proposed route;
(b) The Board of Public Works for approval of the provisions made for the
temporary removal of all City electrical wires and cables, the proposed
capping of water and sewer services, and the arrangements for the
payment of the cost thereof;
(c) The Parks and Recreation Director for its report as the effect such
moving will have on existing trees and shrubs located in public places
and the arrangements for payment of the costs of trimming and
removing same and for his approval;
(d) The Chief of Police for approval with respect to scheduling a police
escort, necessary detours and arrangements for directing traffic;
(e) The City Treasurer for certification that all outstanding accounts
receivable invoiced to the mover have been paid in full and that there
are no outstanding taxes, assessments, or liens for public utilities on
the real property from which or to which the building is moved.
Sec. 6-7 CHARTER Sec. 6-9
C:215
Sec. 6-10. Duties imposed upon permit holders—Generally. [Code
1955, § 7-9.5; Ord. No. 1024, 9-18-1991]
A person holding a permit to move a building under this article shall:
(a) If the property to which the building will be moved is located outside of
the corporate limits of the City, the Department of Environmental
Health shall issue the building moving permit after compliance with the
provisions of Sections 6-6, 6-7, and 6-8 and payment of the required
permit fee.
(b) If the property to which the building will be moved is located within the
corporate limits of the City and upon compliance with the provisions of
Sections 6-7 and 6-8, the City Clerk shall schedule the application for a
public hearing and review by the City Council. Notice of the public
hearing shall be sent to all persons owning property (according to the
tax rolls) within 300 feet of the proposed new site. The Council may
refuse to authorize the permit whenever it determines that the
proposed building moving would involve a violation of this code, the
proposed building will be a substantial detriment to the property
adjacent to the proposed new site, or the moving will adversely affect
the public health, safety or general welfare. If the Council authorizes
the permit, the Department of Environmental Health shall issue the
building moving permit upon payment of the required fee and
compliance with Section 6-6.
(1) Follow the route prescribed in the permit issued;
(2) Observe all rules, regulations and provisions of this code now in force
and which shall be hereafter passed for the protection of streets or for
the regulation of the business of house moving;
(3) Move the building with all dispatch and in a manner least calculated to
obstruct public travel;
(4) If it shall be necessary to leave the building in any street over night,
place good and sufficient lights, shining a bright red light upon the
same as a warning to persons passing over the street or avenue, and
keep the lights burning throughout the night;
(5) Comply with the time schedule filed with the Department of
Environmental Health and approved by City Council under Section 6-7
or any amendments approved by the Department of Environmental
Health and City Council;
(6) Comply with the site restoration plan for the property from which the
building was removed or any amendment approved by the Department
of Environmental Health; and
(7) Construct a foundation under the building at the property to which it is
moved within the time limit set forth in the schedule filed with the
Sec. 6-9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6-10
C:216
Sec. 6-11. Same—Removal of cables and wires. [Code 1955, § 7-9.6;
Ord. No. 1024, 9-18-1991]
If it shall be found that in moving any building, the building may come
in contact with the lines, wires or cables of any person having authority
to string such wires or cables, the permit holder under this article shall
forthwith notify the principal local officer or agent of such person, or both,
as the case may be, that the moving of such building will interfere with such
wires or cables. It shall also be the duty of such permit holder thereupon to
pay or arrange for payment to such agent, the actual expense of removing
and replacing such equipment.
Sec. 6-12. Same—Removal, trimming and replacement of trees.
[Code 1955, § 7-9.7; Ord. No. 1024, 9-18-1991]
If it shall be found that in moving any building, the building will come into
contact with any trees located in a public place to such an extent as to
require the trimming or removal of the trees and if the removal is approved
by the Department of Environmental Health, the permit holder shall pay the
cost of trimming or the cost of removing and the replacement thereof as the
case may be.
application or any amendment approved by the Department of
Environmental Health.
Sec. 6-10 CHARTER Sec. 6-12
C:217

ARTICLE III
Land Use Permits33
Sec. 6-13. Land use permits required, exception. [Ord. No. 1307,
7-3-2001]
Sec. 6-14. Conditions for obtaining land use permit, fees. [Ord. No.
1307, 7-3-2001]
In order to obtain a land use permit, the applicant must file an application
with the Department of Environmental Health on a form adopted by the
Department for such purposes, shall provide the information required by
the application form and shall pay the fee required for land use permits, as
established by resolution adopted by the Council.
(a) The owner of property or the owner's agent shall obtain a land use
permit from the City prior to constructing or installing any of the
following improvements to or on real property located in the City:
(1) A one-story detached accessory structure with a floor area of 200
square feet or less for one-family or two-family residential property
or with a floor area of 120 square feet or less for other property;
(2) Fences;
(3) Driveways and parking lots that are not more than 30 inches above
grade and not over any basement or story below;
(4) Antennas; and
(5) Signs; except those exempt from permits under Sections 39-353
and 39-354 of the Holland City Code.
(b) A land use permit is not required for any of the above if the owner is
required to obtain, and does obtain, a building permit.
(c) If property is leased to a tenant, the reference to the owner in
Subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to refer to the tenant if
the tenant is constructing or installing an improvement that requires a
land use permit.
33.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, which pertained to the Mechanical Code, adopted by Ord.
No. 806, as amended 10-7-1992 by Ord. No. 1069, was replaced 7-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1307.
For current provisions on the Mechanical Code, see Section 6-2.
Sec. 6-13 CHARTER Sec. 6-14
C:219

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 6-15. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1307, 7-3-2001]
The Building Official under Chapter 39 of the Holland City Code shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter 6.
Sec. 6-16. Violations; penalties and remedies. [Ord. No. 1307,
7-3-2001; Ord. No. 1402, 12-15-2004]
(a) A person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of
Section 6-13 for land use permits or the requirements of the Michigan
Building Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, or Michigan Plumbing Code
(other than those violations described in Subsection (b) of this section
shall be misdemeanors) in the City of Holland is responsible for a Class
III municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fine set forth in the
schedules of civil fines in Section 2-118 of the Holland City Code and
any other relief that may be imposed by the court.
(b) A person who violates Sections 6-3.1 through 6-12 of this chapter, a
person who commences any construction, work or other activity that
requires a permit under the Michigan Building Code without first
obtaining the permit or any person who violates or fails to comply with
a stop-work order issued by the City under the Michigan Building Code,
Michigan Mechanical Code, or Michigan Plumbing Code is guilty of a
misdemeanor subject to the penalties described in Section 1-10 of the
Holland City Code.
(c) Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs
shall constitute a separate violation.
(d) A violation of the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Mechanical Code,
or the Michigan Plumbing Code shall also constitute a nuisance per se,
subject to the remedies provided in Sections 1-10 through 1-10.2 of the
Holland City Code.
Sec. 6-15 CHARTER Sec. 6-16
C:221

ARTICLE V
Floodplain Management Provisions
Sec. 6-17. Agency designated. [Ord. No. 1573, 11-16-2011]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Construction Code, in
accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended,34 the Building Official of the City of Holland is hereby designated
as the enforcing officer to discharge the responsibility of the City of Holland
under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan.
The City of Holland assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the City of
Holland.
Sec. 6-18. Code appendix enforced. [Ord. No. 1573, 11-16-2011]
Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended,
Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the City of
Holland within the corporate limits of the City of Holland.
Sec. 6-19. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas. [Ord.
No. 1573, 11-16-2011]
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for Ottawa County, Michigan with an effective date of December
16, 2011, and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) panel number(s) of
0292E, 0293E, 0294E, 0311E, 0312E, 0316E, and 0318E, with an effective
date of December 16, 2011, are adopted by reference for the purposes of
administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part
of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content
of the "flood hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential
Code.
Sec. 6-20. Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 1573, 11-16-2011]
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby designated as the "Board of Appeals"
under Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code and is hereby designated
to hear all appeals of decisions made by the enforcing agency.
34.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1508b(6).
Sec. 6-17 CHARTER Sec. 6-20
C:223
Chapter 7
CABLE TELEVISION AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Sec. 6-20 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 6-20
C:224
ARTICLE I
Cable Television
Sec. 7-1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1230,35 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-2012]
The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction, maintenance, and
operation of cable systems in the City and to provide for the granting and
renewal of franchises for the construction, maintenance and operation of
cable systems and set forth a procedure for applications for a franchise and
renewal of a franchise. This article is adopted to promote the development
of cable systems that meet the community's needs for cable system(s) at
present and into the future. The City also desires to provide for public,
educational and governmental channels and to regulate the presence of
improvements in the public right-of-way to avoid unnecessary clutter and
congestion. This article is designed to require adequate compensation for
the use of the public right-of-way by the operators of cable systems.
Sec. 7-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-2012]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense and vice versa, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and vice versa, and the masculine
gender includes the feminine gender and vice versa. The words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly
stated, terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations not defined herein shall
be given their common and ordinary meaning. If a franchise issued under
this Chapter 7 contains a different definition than the definition of any of
the following terms, the franchise definition will control for purposes of
interpreting that franchisee's obligations.
(a) ACT — The Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
(b) BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any cable service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and shall include all
operable PEG channels.
(c) CABLE SERVICE —
(1) The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service;
(2) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service; and
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended former Ch. 7, which pertained to cable
television and telecommunications, adopted by Ord. No. 509, as amended by Ord. No. 635,
Ord. No. 820, Ord. No. 995, adopted 1-3-1990, Ord. No. 1069, adopted 10-7-1992, and Ord.
No. 1098, adopted 10-3-1993.
Sec. 7-1 CHARTER Sec. 7-2
C:225
(3) Cable modem Internet service, when consistent with applicable law
and when provided in conjunction with a cable system. Cable
service does not include telecommunications services which are
not included in the definition of cable services in Section 602 of the
Act.
(d) CABLE SYSTEM — A facility or system, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service within the
City which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include:
(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
(2) A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-ofway;
(3) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Act, except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system [other than for purposes of Section
621(c) of the Act] to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless
the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
(4) An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Act; or
(5) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
A person that provides cable services using facilities owned by an
affiliated person shall also be deemed to operate a cable system.
(e) CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION — The advisory body created by
Sections 2-60 to 2-63 of the Holland City Code.
(f) CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a
television channel, as television channel is defined by the FCC by
regulation.
(g) CITY — The City of Holland.
(h) COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Holland.
(i) FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC — The present
federal agency of that name as constituted by the Act, or any successor
agency created by the United States Congress.
(j) FRANCHISE — For purposes of this article, a nonexclusive, limited
authorization awarded by the Council and set forth in a written
Sec. 7-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-2
C:226
Sec. 7-3. through Sec. 7-4. (Reserved)36
Sec. 7-5. Franchise required. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No.
1285, 10-4-2000]
No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise operate a cable
system in the City except pursuant to a franchise issued by the City. A
franchise granted for a cable system shall not be deemed to authorize
the grantee to use City property, easements or public rights-of-way to
provide services other than cable services. Notwithstanding the preceding
sentence, a grantee may provide services other than cable services over
the cable system if (a) no further authorization is required by law for
such other services or (b) the grantee obtains and maintains all further
authorizations required by law. The holder of a franchise or other right
to use the City's property, easements, or public rights-of-way for purposes
other than operating a cable system shall be required to obtain a franchise
prior to operating a cable system.
Sec. 7-6. Franchise issuance; amendments; renewal. [Ord. No.
1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586,
5-16-2012]
agreement for the construction, maintenance, upgrade and operation of
a cable system in the City.
(k) GRANTEE — Any holder of a cable system franchise granted pursuant
to this article.
(l) GROSS REVENUES — The same as that term is defined in the Act and
the Uniform Act.
(m) PEG — Public, educational and/or governmental channels.
(n) PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization or entity.
(o) SUBSCRIBER — Any person who contracts with the grantee for, or is in
any manner lawfully provided with, cable services.
(p) UNIFORM ACT — The Michigan Uniform Video Services Local
Franchise Act, MCLA § 484.3301 et seq.
(q) USER — Any person who is provided the use of the grantee's cable
system, channels, equipment or facilities.
(a) Council may grant application(s) for one or more franchises, or deny an
application, for the construction and operation of a cable system in the
City after consideration of the franchise applicant(s) proposal(s)
36.Editor's Note: Former Sections 7-3 and 7-4, which pertained to license requirements,
application and investigation and license expiration, renewals, suspension and revocation,
adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, was
repealed 5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
Sec. 7-2 CHARTER Sec. 7-6
C:227
Sec. 7-7. (Reserved)37
Sec. 7-8. Submission of plans. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No.
1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-2012]
consistent with the Act and the Uniform Act. Any franchise shall be
subject to this article and the City's Charter.
(b) The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises for a cable system as it deems appropriate.
Additional franchises shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate
or damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee except as
required by federal or state law or explicitly required under a prior
franchise.
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Applications for a new, renewed or amended franchise shall be made in
such form as required under the Uniform Act and shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application review fee as the Council may prescribe
by resolution and filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall report
such filing to the Council which shall direct appropriate investigation to
allow it to act upon the application within any time limits imposed by
law.
(e) Any franchise or renewal of a franchise and the rights, privileges,
authority, and responsibilities established shall take effect and be in
force from and after final approval by Council and compliance with the
requirements of the franchise and this article, and shall continue in
force and effect for a period of 10 years from the effective date of the
franchise. A new franchise or a renewal shall only be effective if the
grantee files with the City Clerk all required letters of credit,
construction bonds and insurance certificates. If a grantee fails to
comply with this subsection, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or
authority whatsoever.
(f) Grantees shall apply to any appropriate utility companies and other
agencies (including the Holland Board of Public Works) for all
necessary pole attachment or line agreements, authorizations, or
registrations for the construction of a cable system, and for all permits
then normally available.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) Each application for a building, electrical, street cut or other required
permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications for the
proposed construction. Plans and specifications for use of City property,
37.Editor's Note: Former Section 7-7, which pertained to construction time tables, adopted
12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, was repealed
5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
Sec. 7-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-8
C:228
Sec. 7-9. (Reserved)38
Sec. 7-10. Franchise fee payments. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1549, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 1586,
5-16-2012]
utility easements or the public rights-of-way shall be submitted to the
City Planning Department for processing and review.
(c) No plans and specifications shall be approved and no building,
electrical, street cut or other required permits shall be issued by the
City unless the following conditions are met:
(1) A franchise has been awarded to the applicant by the City and has
not been terminated;
(2) Except as may otherwise be provided in a specific pole attachment
agreement, franchise or similar authorization, the applicant agrees
to indemnify and hold harmless the City and existing users of the
City property, utility easements or the public rights-of-way from all
costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing
poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities,
and all other costs or fees, including those incident to
administration, inspections, engineering and legal review, incurred
by the City or other users of the City utility easements and the
public rights-of-way;
(3) The plans and specifications have been reviewed and approved by
the City's Board of Public Works;
(4) Grantee has executed and filed pole attachment agreements or
similar authorization with the City.
(5) Grantee has provided certificates of insurance and surety bonds or
letters of credit in the same manner as required of others seeking
to do construction in the right-of-way.
(d) Changes to plans. Changes to approved construction plans shall be
made only with the prior approval of the City.
(e) Detailed "as built" plans shall be submitted for all new construction or
installations in the City utility easements and the public rights-of-way,
subject to any appropriate trade secret protections.
(a) A grantee shall pay to the City for use of its streets, public places, and
other facilities, as well as for the City's maintenance, improvements,
and supervision of the franchise, a franchise fee in an amount equal to
maximum amount allowed by law upon execution of the franchise or
execution of a renewal of a franchise. Payments due the City under the
38.Editor's Note: Former Section 7-9, which pertained to rates, adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, was repealed 5-16-2012 by Ord. No.
1587.
Sec. 7-8 CHARTER Sec. 7-10
C:229
Sec. 7-11. Insurance. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000]
Sec. 7-12. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No.
1285, 10-4-2000]
terms of this subsection shall be paid quarterly on or before 45 days
following the end of the quarter. The City shall be furnished a certificate
with each payment reflecting the gross revenue, deductions and
computations for the period covered by the payment.
(b) Franchise fee payments shall be in addition to any other lawful tax,
charge, fee, or payment due the City by a grantee.
(c) The franchise fee shall be used for those purposes determined pursuant
to appropriations approved by the City Council.
(a) A grantee shall at all times during the life of a franchise carry personal
and public liability insurance, automobile liability insurance coverage,
broadcaster's liability insurance, and workers' compensation insurance
in amounts as shall be reasonably determined by the City. A grantee
shall require its contractors and subcontractors carry workers'
compensation insurance as required by law and shall maintain
certificates of such insurance on file with the grantee. The City shall be
named as an additional insured on the liability insurance and the
broadcaster's liability insurance.
(b) All required insurance coverage shall provide for a thirty-day notice to
the City prior to any material alteration or cancellation of such
coverage. Failure of the grantee to provide appropriate insurance
certificates to the City within 30 days after the execution of a franchise
or notice of cancellation or alteration in coverage shall render the
franchise null and void.
(a) By acceptance of a franchise granted by the City, grantee agrees to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards,
commissioners, agents and employees from any and all actions, claims,
suits, penalties and judgments for damages at law or equity (including
any administrative or arbitration proceedings) of any nature
whatsoever relating to, arising out of or through, or alleged to arise out
of or through:
(1) The acts or omissions of the grantee, its servants, employees,
contractors and agents;
(2) The conduct of its business as a cable television communications
service; and
(3) The granting of a franchise to grantee pursuant to this article.
(b) The grantee shall defend in the name of the City, and pay all expenses
incurred in defending City, all suits, administrative proceedings, or
Sec. 7-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-12
C:230
Sec. 7-13. Compliance with law. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord.
No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-1912]
other types of claims with regard to all damages, penalties or other
requested relief the City may legally be required to pay or suffer as a
result of the franchise granted hereunder. Damages and penalties shall
include but not be limited to damages arising out of the construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of its cable communications
system, whether or not any such act or omission is authorized, allowed
or prohibited by this article or the license granted hereunder. Expenses
shall include all expenses including reasonable attorney fees and shall
also include a reasonable value of any services rendered by the office
of the City Attorney, whether such services were rendered to the City,
or in cooperating with counsel selected by grantee. In all instances
where grantee may be required to indemnify the City, the City shall give
prompt notification of any claims to grantee and shall cooperate with
grantee in the defense thereof.
(c) The City shall indemnify and hold the grantee harmless from any
damage resulting from any such acts of the City or its officials, boards,
commissions, agents or employees in utilizing any PEG access
channels, equipment or facilities and for any such acts committed by
the City in connection with work performed by the City and permitted
by a franchise on or adjacent to the cable system. Furthermore, City
shall indemnify and hold grantee harmless from any claims, losses or
damages arising from the use of the emergency broadcast system by
City or use of grantee's facilities during an emergency, including, but
not limited to, the transportation and delivery of emergency
information much as the occurrence police, fire, and/or ambulance/
rescue crews.
(a) A grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the
state and federal government or any administrative agency unless
released by law. However, if such state or federal law or regulations
shall require a grantee to perform any service, or shall permit a grantee
to perform any service, or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any
service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or
regulation of the City, a grantee shall notify the City of the point of
conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or
regulations of the City or the franchise.
(b) If any provision of the franchise is held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule
or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law,
rule or regulation, said provision may be considered a separate, distinct
and independent part of the franchise, and such holding shall not affect
the validity and enforceability of all other provisions. In the event that
such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded,
amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which has been
Sec. 7-12 CHARTER Sec. 7-13
C:231
Sec. 7-14. (Reserved)39
Sec. 7-15. Public, educational and/or governmental channels. [Ord.
No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586,
5-16-2012]
Sec. 7-16. through Sec. 7-17. (Reserved)40
held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules or
regulations said provision shall return to full force and effect and shall
be binding on the parties.
(c) If the City, after a public hearing, determines that a material provision
of a franchise is affected by action of a court or of the state or federal
government, the City shall have the right to seek modification of any of
the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry
out the full intent and purpose of the franchise.
(a) A grantee shall donate use of PEG channels for use by the City or its
designees as set forth in its franchise. A grantee shall also provide
financial support for the PEG use of the PEG channels and the
development of PEG programming for those channels as set forth in the
franchise and to the maximum extent allowed under the Act and the
Uniform Act.
(b) Every cable system franchise issued pursuant to this article shall
provide for PEG access channels capable of carrying digital, video and
audio transmissions pursuant to the provisions of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, Section 611 (47 U.S.C. 531), as may
be amended, and the Uniform Act.
(c) The system will have upstream capability for audio and video
origination on the assigned PEG channels as set forth in the franchise.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) A grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to coordinate the
cablecasting of PEG access programming upon the cable system at the
same time and upon the same channel designations as such
programming is cablecast upon other cable television systems within
the area.
(f) To the extent that it is technically and economically feasible, the cable
system shall be interconnected with other cable systems within or
contiguous to the City so as to enable each cable system to carry and
cablecast the PEG programming of the other cable systems.
39.Editor's Note: Former Section 7-14, which pertained to general capability, adopted
12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, was repealed
5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
40.Editor's Note: Former Section 7-16, which pertained to service to customers, and Section
7-17, which pertained parental lockout, as adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230 and
amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, were repealed 5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
Sec. 7-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-18
C:232
Sec. 7-18. Other business activities. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000]
Neither a grantee nor any shareholder of a grantee shall engage in the
business of selling, repairing, or installing television or radio receivers
within the City during the life of a franchise. This section shall not prohibit
the installation of available, special devices or appliances by a grantee
which are not normally otherwise available.
Sec. 7-19. Conditions of street occupancy. [Ord. No. 1230,
12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000]
(a) The poles, wires, and appurtenances of a grantee's system shall be
located, erected, and maintained upon existing utility facilities
wherever feasible. A grantee shall use underground equipment where
other utilities use underground equipment and where City ordinance
requires underground installation.
(b) A grantee shall be allowed, subject to appropriate regulations, to set its
own poles, anchors, guys, and similar facilities within public rights-ofway
within the City when necessary if other poles are not available and
upon the securing of permits from the City.
(c) All facilities erected by a grantee within the City shall be so located as
to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public rights-ofways
and public places and to cause minimum interference with the
rights and conveniences of adjoining property owners.
(d) In case of disturbance or damage to any street, sidewalk, alley, public
way, other public property, or private property, a grantee shall, at its
own expense, promptly and in a manner acceptable to the City or
private property owner, replace, repair, and otherwise restore such
disturbance of damage.
(e) If, at any time during the term of a franchise, the City shall properly
elect to undertake public building or construction, altering the grade,
alignment or location of any street, sidewalk, alley, or public way, a
grantee shall promptly, upon reasonable notice from the City, remove
and relocate its facilities at grantee's expense in a manner acceptable
to the City.
(f) A grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain industry standards and services for preventing failures and
accidents which would cause damage, injuries, or nuisance to the
public.
(g) A grantee shall not erect or otherwise install any poles, buildings,
underground or aboveground facilities, anchors, guys, or any other type
of structure or equipment on private property without first obtaining
appropriate easements from private property owners.
Sec. 7-18 CHARTER Sec. 7-20
C:233
Sec. 7-20. Technical standards. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord.
No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-2012]
(a) Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its cable system in a
manner consistent and in compliance with all generally applicable laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements and
FCC technical standards or applicable successor standards.
(b) Each grantee shall at all times comply with building, electrical, and
other applicable federal, state and local regulations or codes and other
applicable ordinances of the City. If any codes conflict, the grantee shall
comply with the most protective.
(c) In any event, the cable system shall be constructed so as to not
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property.
(d) All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring
during construction of the cable system shall comply with the standards
of the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or its
successor.
(e) Construction, upgrades, installation and maintenance of a cable system
shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close
coordination with public and private utilities serving the City following
accepted industry construction procedures and practices and working
through existing committees and organizations.
(f) All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
considerations.
(g) Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall comply with
construction, marking and lighting of antenna structures, required by
any applicable federal or state law or regulation and any local
ordinance, including Chapter 39 of this Code.
(h) RF leakage (ingress and egress) shall be checked as required by FCC
regulations to prove no harmful interference signal combinations are
possible. Radiation shall be measured as required by FCC regulations
to prove no harmful interference.
(i) A grantee shall develop an adequate preventive maintenance policy.
Such policy shall be available for inspection by the City.
(j) Suitable connections between all City and county government,
educational and library facilities within the City, with capability to
provide for full two-way audio, video and data communications may be
required of grantee under a franchise, without cost, so long as the City
can prove reasonable need for the interconnect. The need for this
interconnect shall be addressed at any review of a franchise pursuant to
this article.
Sec. 7-20 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-21
C:234
Sec. 7-21. Maps, records and reports. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000]
(a) A grantee, upon request, shall provide the City with current maps of its
existing and proposed installations, subject to any appropriate trade
secret protections.
(b) Upon request, but not more than once per year, a grantee shall furnish
to the City a current listing of any of its users, officers, owners,
partners, shareholders, bondholders and any guarantor which holds 5%
or more shares of, or other ownership interest in, grantee or any
guarantor of grantee.
(c) An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of all
subscriber and user complaints regarding the cable system. A
procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation
of the system to quickly and reasonably remedy complaints. Complete
records of grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept.
Each customer's files and records shall be made available for inspection
upon request by the customer during normal business hours subject to
applicable privacy laws.
(d) Grantee shall submit to the City such other information or reports
reasonably related to grantee's performance of its obligations under the
franchise, in such form as maintained by grantee and at such times as
the City may reasonably request.
(e) A grantee shall allow the City to make inspections of any of the
grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon reasonable notice
or, in case of emergency, upon demand without notice.
(f) Subject to the privacy rights of Section 7-32 of this article and to federal
and state laws and regulations, the City shall have the right, upon
reasonable request, to inspect at any time during normal business
hours all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial
statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other
like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the cable
system. Subject to applicable protection for trade secrets, access to the
aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis
that the records contain proprietary information. The inspection under
this subsection shall be limited to determining a grantee's compliance
with its obligations under this article and a franchise.
(g) All records and reports submitted to the City under this section shall be
available for public inspection in the City Clerk's office during normal
business hours except to the extent such records and reports are
entitled to be withheld from public disclosure under applicable law.
(h) Willful refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee, or repeated failures to
provide the information or documents required under this chapter or a
franchise after 30 days' notice by the City of such willful refusal, failure,
or neglect, shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall
Sec. 7-21 CHARTER Sec. 7-21
C:235
Sec. 7-22. Litigation. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000]
A grantee shall give the City notice of any litigation or administrative
proceedings brought against it directly or indirectly related to its
construction, rebuild, repair or operation of a cable system under a
franchise. A grantee agrees not to oppose intervention by the City in any
suit or proceeding. A grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this article
and its franchise and further agrees that it will not at any future time set
up as against the City any claim that the provisions of this chapter or its
franchise are unreasonable, arbitrary, or void.
Sec. 7-23. through Sec. 7-26. (Reserved)41
Sec. 7-27. Removal. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000]
subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to the City under the franchise or the ordinance.
(i) Any material, false or misleading statement or representation
knowingly made by the grantee in any report required under the
franchise shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall
subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to the City.
(a) Upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, if the franchise is not
renewed and if neither the City nor an assignee purchase the cable
system, the grantee may remove any underground cable from the
streets which has been installed in such a manner that it can be
removed without trenching or other opening of the streets along the
extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any
underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other
opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed,
except as hereinafter provided. The grantee shall remove, at its sole
cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or
opening of the streets along the extension thereof or otherwise which is
ordered to be removed by the City based upon a determination, in the
sole discretion of the City, that removal is required in order to eliminate
or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the
streets for public purposes. Any order by the City to remove cable or
conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than 30 calendar days
following the date of expiration or revocation of the franchise. A
grantee shall file written notice with the City Clerk not later than 30
calendar days following the date of expiration or revocation of the
franchise of its intention to remove cable, the cable intended to be
41.Editor's Note: Former Sections 7-23 through 7-26, which pertained to transfer of rights;
construction and performance bond; review, renewal, termination and cancellation; and
purchase option, adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No.
1285, were repealed 5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
Sec. 7-21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-27
C:236
Sec. 7-28. Continuity of service. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord.
No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-1912]
It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar
as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored.
Sec. 7-29. (Reserved)42
Sec. 7-30. Acceptance of agreement and incorporation of
application and article by reference. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000]
Upon execution of a franchise by grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound
[by] all of its terms and conditions and accepts unconditionally the franchise
and promises to comply with and abide by all of their terms, provisions
and conditions. The grantee also agrees to provide all services set forth in
removed and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and
timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the
City. Removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the
date of expiration of the franchise. Underground cable and conduit in
the streets which is not removed shall be deemed abandoned and at its
sole option title thereto may be vested in the City.
(b) Upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, if the franchise is not
renewed and if neither the City nor an assignee purchases the system,
the grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation
by the City, remove from the streets all above ground elements of the
cable service system, including but not limited to amplifier boxes,
pedestal mounted terminal boxes, and cable attached to or suspended
from poles, which are not purchased by the City or its assignee.
(c) The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits,
licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and
deposit such security as required by applicable ordinance of the City,
shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all
such applicable ordinances, and shall restore the streets to the same
condition they were in before the work of removal commenced. The
work of removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following
expiration of the franchise.
(d) In the event a grantee seeks renewal of a franchise, the obligations
under this Section 7-27 shall apply only after a final decision on
nonrenewal and exhaustion of appeals.
(e) The obligations under this Section 7-27 shall not apply until after a
grantee satisfies the continuity of service requirements under Section
7-28.
42.Editor's Note: Former Section 7-29, which pertained to guaranty of parent, adopted
12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, was repealed
5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
Sec. 7-27 CHARTER Sec. 7-30
C:237
its application and proposal, to provide cable service within the confines
of the City of Holland and, by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee
specifically grants and agrees that its application and proposal is thereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this agreement. In addition,
the grantee specifically agrees that this article of the City of Holland is
incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise.
Sec. 7-31. Severability. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of the franchise
or this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions thereof. If a material provision of a franchise is
affected by action of a court or of the state or federal government, the
City and the grantee may modify any such provisions to such reasonable
extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of the
franchise.
Sec. 7-32. Right of privacy. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No.
1285, 10-4-2000]
A grantee shall at all times comply with the applicable provisions of 47
U.S.C. § 551.
Sec. 7-33. (Reserved)43
Sec. 7-34. Tampering with cable equipment; penalty. [Ord. No.
1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000]
(a) A person who willfully or maliciously damages, or causes to be
damaged, any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of the
grantee, or who commits any act with intent to cause damage to any
wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of the grantee, or who
taps, tampers with, or connects any wire or devise to a wire, cable,
conduit or equipment of the grantee with intent to obtain a signal or
impulse therefrom without authorization of the grantee, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(b) This section shall not prevent the grantee from removing,
disconnecting or otherwise rendering inoperable any of the grantee's
apparatus or equipment attached or in any way connected to such
person's facilities, if done for reasonable cause.
43.Editor's Note: Former Section 7-33, which pertained to rights of tenant resident, adopted
12-16-1998 by Ord. No. Ord. No. 1230, as amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 1285, was
repealed 5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1587.
Sec. 7-30 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-34
C:238
Sec. 7-35. Agent for service of process. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998;
Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1708]
A grantee shall appoint or designate an agent in Michigan for service of any
legal or administrative process, which may be the resident agent designated
by the grantee with the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs or the Department's successor. A change of the agent shall not be
effective with respect to the City until written notice is received by the City.
Acceptance of a franchise or renewal shall be deemed consent to service of
legal or administrative process by certified mail, postage prepaid and return
receipt requested, addressed to the agent.
Sec. 7-36. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1230, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285,
10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-2012]
Violation of Sections 7-5 or 7-34 of this article shall be deemed a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1-10 of the Holland City
Code.
Sec. 7-37. Applicability to existing franchise. [Ord. No. 1230,
12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000; Ord. No. 1586, 5-16-2012]
Unless otherwise expressly set forth in a franchise, the provisions of this
article shall apply to any franchise granted or renewed on, before or after
the effective date of this article [June 6, 2012].
Sec. 7-38. Applicability to open video systems. [Ord. No. 1230,
12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1285, 10-4-2000]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to operators of an open video
system as defined by the Act except that such an operator shall be subject
to a fee in lieu of a franchise fee in an amount equal to the same rate
paid by the operator of a cable system based on the open video system's
gross revenues. An operator of an open video system shall enter into an
agreement with the City providing for such fee and such other matters as
the City may require, to the extent allowed by law, for use of City property,
easements and public rights-of-way.
Sec. 7-39. (Reserved)
(c) The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this section are in
addition to the penalties and remedies for theft of cable service
provided by federal and state law.
Sec. 7-34 CHARTER Sec. 7-39
C:239

ARTICLE II
Telecommunications/Right-of-Way Ordinance44
Sec. 7-40. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-200245]
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under
the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the
Act.
Sec. 7-41. Conflict. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
Sec. 7-42. Terms defined. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002; 1-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 1708]
(a) The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002),46 as amended
from time to time.
CITY — The City of Holland.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Holland or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Council.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager or his or her designee.
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the City for its telecommunications facilities.
(b) All other terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the
following:
44.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1351, adopted 11-6-2002, repealed Art. II, §§ 7-40 through
7-43, and enacted new provisions designated as Art. III, §§ 7-40 through 7-62. In order to
maintain the continuity of numbering, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. II,
at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II pertained to fiber optics pole attachment and
right-of-way installation policy, and derived from Ord. No. 1230, adopted 12-12-1998.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, pertaining to fiber optics pole
attachment and right-of-way installation policy, adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1230, and
enacted new provisions as Art. III. Said Art. III was redesignated as Art. II to maintain the
organizational structure of the Code.
46.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
Sec. 7-40 CHARTER Sec. 7-42
C:241
Sec. 7-43. Permit required. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
AUTHORITY — The Local Community Stabilization Authority
referenced in § 3 of the Act.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Michigan
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, and shall have the
same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. "Public right-ofway"
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The equipment
or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires,
switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or
facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas,
equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial
mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR
20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in
§ 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA
§ 484.2102. "Telecommunications provider" does not include a person
or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also
includes all of the following:
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(a) Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-
Sec. 7-42 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-43
C:242
way in the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and
obtain a permit pursuant to this article.
(b) Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, and
one copy with the City Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make
additional copies of the application and distribute a copy to the Holland
Board of Public Works, the Street Department, the Planning Office and
such other departments as the City Manager may deem appropriate.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by
the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location
of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with
Section 6(5) of the Act.
(c) Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCLA
§§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the
telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face
of each map.
(d) Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of $500.
(e) Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Manager deems
reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all
such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such
additional information established by the City Manager. If the City and
the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional
information requested by the City, the City or the applicant shall notify
the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act.
(f) Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA
§ 484.2251, and authorizations or permits issued by the City to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall
satisfy the permit requirements of this article.
(g) Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-ofway
in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan
telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA § 484.2251, shall submit
Sec. 7-43 CHARTER Sec. 7-43
C:243
Sec. 7-44. Issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 7-45. Construction/engineering permit. [Ord. No. 1351,
11-6-2002]
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the City without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under the
ordinance code of the City, as amended, for construction within the public
rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or
engineering permit.
to the City an application for a permit in accordance with the
requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
subsection is not required to pay the $500 application fee required
under Subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be
given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if
allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act.
(a) Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to Section
15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application
for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications
provider files an application for a permit under Section 7-43(b) of this
article for access to a public right-of-way within the City. The report of
the City Manager approving or denying the permit shall be filed with
the City Council and the Holland Board of Public Works. Pursuant to
Section 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when
the City Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information
regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on
which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not
unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
(b) Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with
or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with
Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.
(c) Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the
public right-of-way.
(d) Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on Subsection (c) above, the City Manager may require that a
bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of
the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost
to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original
condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access
and use.
Sec. 7-43 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-46
C:244
Sec. 7-46. Conduit or utility poles. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles of the
City or the Holland Board of Public Works.
Sec. 7-47. Route maps. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the City, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
City. The route maps should be in [paper or electronic] format unless and
until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of
the Act.
Sec. 7-48. Repair of damage. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all
damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below,
or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public rightof-
way to its preexisting condition.
Sec. 7-49. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. [Ord.
No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the City set forth
in Subsection 7-43(d) above, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall pay an
annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.
Sec. 7-50. Modification of existing fees. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the City
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date
of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under
the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the
requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the City also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the City's boundaries, so that those providers
pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall
provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of
this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act.
To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess
of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent
Sec. 7-46 CHARTER Sec. 7-50
C:245
with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's
policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the
City, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
Sec. 7-51. Savings clause. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to
be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 7-50
above shall be void from the date the modification was made.
Sec. 7-52. Use of funds. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City from the
authority shall be used by the City solely for rights-of-way related purposes,
in conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the City from
the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local
street fund maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of
1951.47
Sec. 7-53. Annual report. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual
report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the authority.
Sec. 7-54. Cable television operators. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.
Sec. 7-55. Existing rights. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the City may have under a permit issued
by the City or under a contract between the City and a telecommunications
provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
Sec. 7-56. Compliance. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is
to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof
should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The City
shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but
not limited to the following:
47.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 247.651 et seq.
Sec. 7-50 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-56
C:246
Sec. 7-57. Reservation of police powers. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the City's
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and
(a) Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in Section 7-43(c)
of this article;
(b) Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 7-43(f) of this article;
(c) Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with Section 7-43(g) of this article;
(d) Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the City, in
accordance with Section 7-44(a) of this article;
(e) Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with Section 7-44(a) of this article;
(f) Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with Section 7-44(a) of this article;
(g) Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section 7-44(b) of
this article;
(h) Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with Section 7-44(c) of this article;
(i) Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's
access and use, in accordance with Section 7-44(d) of this article;
(j) Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Section 7-45 of
this article;
(k) Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the City's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with Section
7-50 of this article;
(l) Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with
Section 7-53 of this article; and
(m) Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 7-54 of this article.
Sec. 7-56 CHARTER Sec. 7-57
C:247
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the City's authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Sec. 7-58. Severability. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction,
the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 7-59. Authorized City officials. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized City official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing
alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation
notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau) for violations under this article as provided by the City
Code.
Sec. 7-60. Violations. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
A violation of this article shall be a violation of the City Code. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the City in
the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit.
Sec. 7-61. Repealer. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 7-62. Effective date. [Ord. No. 1351, 11-6-2002]
This ordinance shall take effect on or before November 1, 2002.
Sec. 7-62.1. Small cell wireless facilities. [Added 6-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 1769]
(a) All ordinances and portions of ordinances inconsistent with this
ordinance are hereby repealed.
(b) Article II of Chapter 7 (Sections 7-40 through 7-43, adopted by Ord. No.
1230) is hereby repealed.
(a) Definitions.
(1) For purposes of this section, the following words, terms, and
phrases shall be defined as follows:
ACT — Public Act 365 of 2018, as amended, the Small Wireless
Communications Facilities Deployment Act.48
48.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 460.1301 et seq.
Sec. 7-57 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-62.1
C:248
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager or the City Manager's
designee.
CO-LOCATE — To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole. "Co-location" has a corresponding
meaning. Co-locate does not include make-ready work or the
installation of a new utility pole or new wireless support structure.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW — The area on, below, or above
a public roadway, highway, street, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or utility
easement dedicated for compatible uses. Public right-of-way does
not include any of the following:
SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets
both of the following requirements:
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is or may be
used in whole or in part for cable or wireline communications
service, electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a
similar function, or a pole or similar structure that meets the height
requirements in Section 13(5) of the Act and is designed to support
small cell wireless facilities. Utility pole does not include a sign
pole less than 15 feet in height above ground.
WIRELESS FACILITY — Equipment at a fixed location that enables
the provision of wireless services between user equipment and
a communications network, including, but not limited to, radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless
a. A private right-of-way.
b. A limited access highway.
Land owned or controlled by a railroad as defined in § 109 of
the Railroad Code of 1993, 1993 PA 354, MCLA § 462.109.
c.
d. Railroad infrastructure.
Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than
six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
would fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet.
a.
All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric
meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services.
b.
Sec. 7-62.1 CHARTER Sec. 7-62.1
C:249
of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes a small
cell wireless facility. Wireless facility does not include any of the
following:
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person,
including a person authorized to provide telecommunications
services in this state but not including a wireless services provider,
that builds or installs wireless communication transmission
equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures and
who, when filing an application with the City Manager under this
section, provides written authorization to perform the work on
behalf of a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless services provider. Wireless provider does not include an
investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the MPSC.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services provided using permitted
or unpermitted spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a
fixed location or mobile.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person that provides
wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure
designed to support or capable of supporting small cell wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is co-located.
a.
b. A wireline backhaul facility.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between utility poles or wireless
support structures or that otherwise is not immediately
adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna.
c.
(2) All other terms and phrases used herein shall be defined consistent
with the Act.
(b) Permit required. Except for those activities exempt under MCLA
§ 460.1315 (5), a wireless provider may not co-locate a small cell
wireless facility or install, modify, or replace a utility pole or wireless
support structure on which a small cell wireless facility will be colocated
within the public right-of-way without first applying for and
receiving a small cell wireless permit from the City Manager in a form
and subject to such terms and conditions as are acceptable to the City
Manager and a pole attachment agreement with the pole owner.
(c) Permitting process. The processing of an application for a permit under
this section is subject to all of the following:
(1) An application in such form as prepared by the City Manager shall
be completed and submitted as set forth in this section.
Sec. 7-62.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-62.1
C:250
(2) The City Manager may require an applicant to provide information
and documentation to enable the City Manager to make a
compliance determination with regard to the criteria in this section
involving, without limitation, Subsection (d)(3). The City Manager
may also require a certificate of compliance with FCC rules related
to radio frequency emissions from a small cell wireless facility.
(3) The City Manager may require an applicant to attest that the small
cell wireless facilities will be operational for use by a wireless
services provider within one year after the permit issuance date,
unless the City Manager and the applicant agree to extend this
period or delay is caused by lack of commercial power or
communications transport facilities to the site.
(4) An applicant may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated
application and receive a single permit for the co-location of up to
20 small cell wireless facilities within the City Manager. The small
cell wireless facilities within a consolidated application must
consist of substantially similar equipment and be placed on similar
types of utility poles or wireless support structures. The City
Manager may approve a permit for one or more small cell wireless
facilities included in a consolidated application and deny a permit
for the remaining small cell facilities.
(5) The application for a permit under this section shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set by resolution of the City
Council from time to time.
(6) The permit application shall be accompanied by a map(s) for any
proposed small cell wireless facilities which shall be legible, to
scale, labeled with streets, and contain sufficient detail to precisely
identify the proposed small cell wireless facilities' locations and
surroundings. Where applicable, the required map(s) shall include
and identify any requested pole height(s), all attachments and
detailed drawings of any attachment.
(7) The permittee shall field-stake all proposed locations for small cell
wireless facilities which shall be subject to the advance approval by
the City or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as
applicable. All approved small cell wireless facilities' locations shall
be on a per pole/equipment/other basis.
(8) Once precise locations have been approved, the permittee shall
provide latitude and longitude coordinates for the small cell
wireless facilities' locations to the City Manager's Engineering
Department as well as detailed as-built drawings within 90 days of
the completion of installation.
(9) The permittee shall be responsible to obtain such other pole
attachment agreements, permits and approvals as otherwise
required by law.
Sec. 7-62.1 CHARTER Sec. 7-62.1
C:251
(d) Determination of application.
(1) Within 25 days after receiving an application, the City Manager
shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is
complete. If the application is incomplete, the notice shall clearly
and specifically identify all missing documents or information.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Manager shall
approve or deny the application and notify the applicant in writing
within the following period of time after the completed application
is received:
a. For an application for the co-location of small cell wireless
facilities on a utility pole, 60 days, subject to the following
adjustments:
1. Add 15 days if an application from another wireless
provider was received within one week of the application
in question.
2. Add 15 days if, before the otherwise applicable sixty-day or
seventy-five-day time period elapses, the City Manager
notifies the applicant in writing that an extension is
needed and the reasons for the extension.
b. For an application for a new or replacement utility pole that
meets the height requirements of Section 13(5)(a) of the Act
and associated small cell facility, 90 days, subject to the
following adjustments:
1. Add 15 days if an application from another wireless
provider was received within one week of the application
in question.
2. Add 15 days if, before the otherwise applicable ninety-day
or 105-day time period elapses, the City Manager notifies
the applicant in writing that an extension is needed and
the reasons for the extension.
c. If the City Manager fails to comply with this subsection, an
application otherwise complete is considered to be approved
subject to the condition that the applicant provide the City
Manager not less than seven days' advance written notice that
the applicant will be proceeding with the work pursuant to this
automatic approval, and the applicant shall be responsible to
comply with all provisions of this section and the Act.
d. The City Manager and an applicant may extend a time period
under this subsection by mutual agreement.
(3) The City Manager may deny a completed application for a proposed
co-location of a small cell wireless facility or installation,
modification, or replacement of a utility pole that meets the height
Sec. 7-62.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-62.1
C:252
requirements in Section 13(5)(a) of the Act if the proposed activity
would do any of the following:
a. Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control
equipment.
b. Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation or pedestrians.
c. Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, Public Law 101-336, or similar federal,
state, or local standards regarding pedestrian access or
movement.
d. Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed use
of public utility infrastructure under the jurisdiction of the City
Manager.
e. With respect to drainage infrastructure under the jurisdiction
of the City Manager, either of the following:
1. Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed
use of the drainage infrastructure as it was originally
designed.
2. Not be located a reasonable distance from the drainage
infrastructure to ensure maintenance under the Drain
Code of 1956, 1956 PA 40, MCLA §§ 280.1 to 280.630, and
access to the drainage infrastructure.
f. Fail to comply with reasonable, nondiscriminatory, written
spacing requirements of general applicability adopted by the
Holland Board of Public Works that apply to the location of
ground-mounted equipment and new utility poles and that do
not prevent a wireless provider from serving any location.
g. Fail to comply with applicable codes.
h. Fail to comply with any provision of this section.
i. Fail to meet reasonable, objective, written disguise, or
concealment criteria for small cell wireless facilities applicable
in an historic district or other designated area, as specified in
an ordinance or otherwise and nondiscriminatorily applied to
all other occupants of the ROW, including electric utilities,
incumbent or competitive local exchange carriers, fiber
providers, cable television operators, and the City.
(4) Within one year after a permit is granted, a wireless provider shall
complete co-location of a small cell wireless facility that is to be
operational for use by a wireless services provider, unless the City
Manager and the applicant agree to extend this period or the delay
is caused by the lack of commercial power or communications
Sec. 7-62.1 CHARTER Sec. 7-62.1
C:253
facilities at the site. If the wireless provider fails to complete the
co-location within the applicable time, the permit is void, and the
wireless provider may reapply for a permit.
(5) Approval of an application authorizes the wireless provider to do
both of the following:
a. Undertake the installation or co-location.
b. Subject to relocation requirements that apply to similarly
situated users of the ROW and the applicant's right to
terminate at any time, maintain the small cell wireless facilities
and any associated utility poles or wireless support structures
covered by the permit for so long as the site is in use and in
compliance with the initial permit under this section.
(6) The City Manager may propose an alternate location within the
ROW or on property or structures owned or controlled by the City
within 75 feet of the proposed location to either place the new
utility pole or co-locate on an existing structure. The applicant shall
use the alternate location if, as determined by the applicant, the
applicant has the right to do so on reasonable terms and conditions
and the alternate location does not impose unreasonable technical
limits or significant additional costs. The City Manager may request
written confirmation of any decision rendered by the applicant
under this subsection and the specific basis for the same.
(7) Nothing herein shall prohibit the City Manager from requiring a
separate ROW access permit for work that will unreasonably affect
traffic patterns or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the
ROW.
(8) As a condition of the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall obtain
and maintain a bond, in the amount of $1,000 per small cell
wireless facility, in a form reasonably satisfactory to the City
Manager, for the small cell wireless facilities as applicable to
similarly situated users of the ROW for one or more of the following
purposes:
a. To provide for the removal of abandoned or improperly
maintained small cell wireless facilities, including those that an
authority determines should be removed to protect public
health, safety, or welfare.
b. To repair the ROW as provided under the Act.
c. To recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a wireless
provider in more than 12 months, if the wireless provider has
received sixty-day advance notice from the authority of the
noncompliance.
(9) It is a condition of any permit issued under this section that:
Sec. 7-62.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-62.1
C:254
a. A wireless provider, with respect to a small cell wireless
facility, a wireless support structure, or a utility pole, shall
defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its officers,
agents, and employees against any claims, demands, damages,
lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, and
attorney fees resulting from the installation, construction,
repair, replacement, operation, or maintenance of any wireless
facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles to the
extent caused by the applicant, its contractors, its
subcontractors, and the officers, employees, or agents of any of
these. A wireless provider has no obligation to defend,
indemnify, or hold harmless the City, or the officers, agents, or
employees of the City against any liabilities or losses due to or
caused by the sole negligence of the City or its officers, agents,
or employees.
b. A wireless provider, with respect to a small cell wireless
facility, a wireless support structure, or a utility pole, shall
obtain insurance, in an amount and of a type reasonably
satisfactory to the City Manager, naming the City and its
officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds against
any claims, demands, damages, lawsuits, judgments, costs,
liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees. A wireless provider
may meet all or a portion of the City's insurance coverage and
limit requirements by self-insurance. To the extent it selfinsures,
a wireless provider is not required to name additional
insureds under this subsection. To the extent a wireless
provider elects to self-insure, the wireless provider shall
provide to the City Manager evidence demonstrating, to the
City Manager's satisfaction, the wireless provider's financial
ability to meet the City's insurance coverage and limit
requirements.
c. It is the policy of the City to encourage the co-location of small
cell wireless facilities first outside of public rights-of-way and,
secondarily, within the public rights-of-way. The co-location of
uses shall be a condition of approval of any permit granted for
a new wireless support structure or utility pole in the public
right-of-way; provided, however, that the co-location
requirement may be waived if the pole or support structure is
disguised or concealed so as to blend with the immediate
environment (e.g., streetlights, power poles, etc.).
d. The wireless provider shall install signs on equipment, at least
12 feet to 15 feet above ground, with warnings of radio
frequency safety hazards consistent with the FCC rules and
industry standards.
e. Installations shall be compliant with the National Electrical
Safety Code electrical and telecommunications standards.
Sec. 7-62.1 CHARTER Sec. 7-62.1
C:255
f. The wireless provider provides the City with an RF study for
each location and provides safety training sessions for City and
utility employees who will work on or within vicinity of
equipment.
g. The wireless provider provides the name and emergency
contact information for the wireless operator's contact person.
h. The wireless provider allows the Holland Board of Public
Works or City to turn off any AC or DC electric supply in
emergencies.
(e) METRO Act permit. No person shall install or operate
"telecommunications facilities," as defined in the Metropolitan
Extension Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way Oversight Act, Act No. 48
of the Public Acts of 2002, as amended,49 (the "Act") without first
obtaining a permit in accordance with that Act from the City, including
any part of a small cell wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support
structure constituting telecommunication facilities.
(f) Design parameters. The following minimal design parameters shall
apply to small cell wireless facilities, utility poles, and wireless support
structures in the City's public rights-of-way:
(1) A wireless provider may, as a permitted use not subject to zoning
review or approval, but still subject to approval by the City
Manager under this section, co-locate small cell wireless facilities
and construct, maintain, modify, operate, or replace utility poles in,
along, across, upon, and under the ROW consistent with the
following:
a. A utility pole in the ROW installed or modified on or after the
effective date of the Act shall not exceed 40 feet above ground
level, unless a taller height is agreed to by the City Manager
consistent with all applicable laws.
b. A small cell wireless facility in the ROW installed or modified
after the effective date of the Act shall not extend more than
five feet above a utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small cell wireless facility is co-located.
c. Such structures and facilities shall be constructed and
maintained so as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or
public safety on the ROW or obstruct the legal use of the City's
ROW or uses of the ROW by other utilities and communications
service providers.
(2) Any pole installed by a wireless provider shall not be closer than 15
feet to another pole. A pole installed by a wireless provider shall
49.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
Sec. 7-62.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-62.1
C:256
not be taller than existing poles within 300 feet parallel and 20 feet
perpendicular to the nearest right-of-way.
(3) An antenna shall not extend more than five feet above a pole.
(4) There shall be no ground-mounted equipment. Equipment mounted
on a pole shall not be more than six cubic feet in size.
(5) A wireless provider may co-locate a small cell wireless facility or
install, construct, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a utility
pole that exceeds the height limits under Subsection(f)(1), or a
wireless support structure, in, along, across, upon, and under the
ROW only upon issuance of a permit in accordance with this section
and upon receiving any zoning approvals required by Chapter 39.
(6) Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or
applicable codes, the provider's poles shall either maintain a
galvanized silver, gray, or concrete finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, FCC or such codes, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(7) At all pole sites related equipment shall use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the facilities to
the natural setting and environment to the extent reasonably
practical.
(8) All poles shall be similar in style and made of a similar material and
color to other poles on the same and adjoining blocks, unless the
City Manager approves an alternate design. Disguising or
concealing poles is encouraged.
(9) Any such requirements shall not have the effect of prohibiting any
wireless provider's technology.
(10) A wireless provider shall comply with any of the City Manager's
requirements that prohibit communications service providers from
installing structures on or above ground in the ROW in an area
designated solely for underground or buried cable and utility
facilities if each of the following apply:
a. The Holland Board of Public Works has required all cable and
utility facilities, other than poles used for streetlights, traffic
signals, or other attachments necessary for public safety, to be
placed underground by a date that is not less than 90 days
before the submission of the wireless provider's application.
b. The City does not prohibit the replacement of City poles by a
wireless provider in the designated area.
(g) Additional design parameters for locations in an historic, residential, or
C-3 Central Business District. The following additional design and
concealment measures shall apply to the co-location of any small cell
Sec. 7-62.1 CHARTER Sec. 7-62.1
C:257
wireless facility or utility pole in an historic, residential, or C-3 Central
Business District:
(1) Equipment on a supporting structure may not exceed an aggregate
width of four feet (centered on pole) and shall be secured a
minimum of 10 feet from the ground surface or 18 feet where
equipment may overhang the traveled portion of the right-of-way.
Ground-level equipment or shelters are not permitted.
(2) Small cell wireless facilities shall be located no closer than 18
inches from an existing sidewalk/face of curb or 18 inches from a
proposed future sidewalk/face of curb location.
(3) Unless located on an existing utility pole in the right-of-way, small
cell wireless facilities shall be located no closer than 10 feet from
any driveway.
(4) Unless located on an existing utility pole in the right-of-way, small
cell wireless facilities shall be located in line with a side lot line and
not in front of a residence.
(5) Small cell towers shall be disguised or concealed by use of coloring,
camouflaging, banner brackets, or other features determined by
the City Manager.
(h) Modification of design parameters. Upon the written request of an
applicant for a permit, the City Manager may modify or waive the
design parameters of Subsection (f)(7) and (8) in its discretion based on
its review of factors affecting the public health, safety, and welfare,
including, but not limited to, the following: the presence of existing
poles or other structures or equipment in the immediate vicinity; the
ability to reasonably comply with the design parameters set forth in
Subsection (f)(7) and (8); the visual and aesthetic impact of the
proposed pole, antenna or facilities on the adjacent area; the existing
and planned character of the adjacent area; public comment; the scale
and scope of the poles, antennas or facilities relative to the existing
character of the area; whether granting the modification will adversely
impact public safety; and the recommendations of City Manager and
department heads (if any). Following its review, the City Council may
grant, deny or grant with conditions a request to modify or waive the
design parameters and shall provide its decision and the basis for the
same to the applicant in writing. All applications for a waiver or
modification of the design parameters as set forth herein shall be
addressed in a uniform and nondiscriminatory manner. The applicant
shall be responsible to pay all costs of the City associated with the
request to modify or waive the design parameters.
(i) Repair of ROW. As a condition to the issuance of a permit under this
section, a wireless provider is required to repair all damage to the ROW
directly caused by the activities of the wireless provider while
occupying, constructing, installing, mounting, maintaining, modifying,
operating, or replacing small cell wireless facilities, utility poles, or
Sec. 7-62.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-62.1
C:258
wireless support structures in the ROW and to return the ROW to its
functional equivalent before the damage. If the wireless provider fails
to make the repairs required by the City Manager within 60 days after
written notice, the City Manager may make those repairs and charge
the wireless provider the reasonable, documented cost of the repairs.
(j) Discontinuance of use. Before discontinuing its use of a small cell
wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure, a wireless
provider shall notify the City Manager in writing. The notice shall
specify when and how the wireless provider intends to remove the small
cell wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure. The City
Manager may impose reasonable and nondiscriminatory requirements
and specifications for the wireless provider to return the property to its
pre-installation condition. If the wireless provider does not complete
the removal within 45 days after the discontinuance of use, the City
may complete the removal and assess the costs of removal against the
wireless provider. A permit under this section for a small cell wireless
facility expires upon removal of the small cell wireless facility.
(k) Revocation of permit. The City Manager may revoke a permit, upon 30
days' notice and an opportunity to cure, if the permitted small cell
wireless facilities and any associated utility pole fail to meet the
requirements of Subsection (d)(3).
(l) Compliance with applicable law. The permittee shall be responsible to
comply with all applicable legal requirements and to obtain any permits
or approvals otherwise required by law relative to the installation or
operation of small cell wireless facilities in the City's public rights-ofway
(e.g., electrical permits). The City Manager, in reviewing and
authorizing a permit under the Act and/or a permit referred to in this
section, and the permittee, in the establishment and operation of any
small cell wireless facilities, shall comply with all applicable federal and
state laws.
(m) Fees. Fees for the permits as authorized under the Act shall be as
provided for in the Act or those documents and as periodically
authorized by resolution of the City Council; provided, however, that for
installations of utility poles designed to support small cell wireless
facilities or co-locations of small cell wireless facilities installed and
operational in the ROW before the effective date of the Act, the fees,
rates, and terms of an agreement or ordinance for use of the ROW
remain in effect subject to the termination provisions contained in the
agreement or ordinance.
Sec. 7-62.1 CHARTER Sec. 7-62.1
C:259

ARTICLE III
Municipal Broadband Services
Sec. 7-63. Findings and purpose. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No.
1693]
(a) The City of Holland, acting by and through its Holland Board of Public
Works ("HBPW") provides "broadband internet access transport
services" as such term is defined in Act No. 49 of the Public Acts of 2002
(effective November 1, 2002), MCLA § 484.3101, et seq. ("Act").
(b) Before December 31, 2001, the HBPW owned and operated
telecommunications facilities within the City of Holland and Holland
Township that provided broadband internet access transport service.
(c) The HBPW expanded its delivery of broadband internet access
transport services beyond the service territory existing before
December 31, 2001, in order to effectuate the purposes of Holland City
Charter, the Act, and such other authorized and delegated powers and
authority permitted by law.
(d) Prior to November 1, 2005, the HBPW owned and operated
telecommunications facilities within other public entity boundaries.
(e) Prior to November 1, 2005, the HBPW and City conducted a cost/
benefit analysis ("business plan"), as required by MCLA § 484.3114(b),
and public hearings on the HBPW business plan for providing
broadband internet access transport services to third parties, and
conducted a hearing on the business plan.
(f) The HBPW and City have also secured METRO Act permits
(Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight
Act, Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) from the City and
neighboring communities in connection with its utilization of public
rights-of-way for provision of such third-party services since 2003.
(g) As a consequence of the HBPW's pre-existing telecommunication
services and extraterritorial location of such services prior to
November 1, 2005, limitations within Michigan's Telecommunications
Act, MCLA § 484.2252 restricting extraterritorial services are not
applicable to the HBPW and City.
(h) The HBPW has prepared an updated business plan that projects
revenue, capital expenses and operating and maintenance expenses for
three years for provision of broadband services, consistent with the
METRO Act and Uniform Budget and According Act, MCLA § 141.436.
(i) The City Charter, §§ 12.3 and 12.15, reserves to the City the power "to
construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain,
either within or without its corporate limits" public utilities.
Sec. 7-63 CHARTER Sec. 7-63
C:261
Sec. 7-64. Terms defined. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 1693]
The terms used in this Article III shall have the same meanings as such
terms are defined in Article II of Chapter 7 of the Holland City Ordinances
and as otherwise defined by Michigan law.
Sec. 7-65. Approval of business plan. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No.
1693]
In accordance with MCLA § 484.3114, Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Public Act 48 of 2002,
the City has prepared reasonable projections of at least a three-year costbenefit
analysis identifying and disclosing the total projected direct costs
of and the revenues to be derived from constructing the telecommunication
facilities in providing the broadband services directly and through a
broadband internet access transport service to third parties ("business
plan").
Sec. 7-66. Operation of broadband internet access service as part of
electric utility. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 1693]
The City shall operate its broadband services, including but not limited to
dark fiber leasing, active Ethernet, shared gigabit, and Internet access for
wholesale or retail to commercial or residential customers, as part of its
electric utility, operated by the Holland Board of Public Works.
Sec. 7-67. Service types, access restrictions. [Added 8-2-2017 by
Ord. No. 1693]
(j) In order to recognize the value and utility of existing broadband
internet access transport services facilities and systems installed and
operated by the City of Holland, both within and outside the City, and to
promote the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, security,
prosperity and contentment of the City and its residents, the City does
provide authorization by this article for construction and operation of
infrastructure needed to provide broadband services and third-party
access to broadband internet access transport services within or
without its corporate limits.
(a) The broadband services shall include, but not be limited to, dark fiber
leasing, active Ethernet, shared gigabit, and Internet access for
wholesale or retail to commercial or residential customers.
(b) Prior to providing any commercial or residential service to a customer
who is not the owner of the property at which new service is being
provided, the customer shall obtain, and provide the City with, the
property owner's written consent.
(c) No customers shall allow their tenants, licensees or landlord, or other
person to use services in any manner inconsistent with the agreed
Sec. 7-63 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-67
C:262
Sec. 7-68. Rates and fees. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 1693]
scope of property owner's authorization or the HBPW's terms of service
for the account for such services.
(d) No customer shall allow their tenants, licensees, landlord, or other
person to use or share their service or passwords in any manner
inconsistent with property owner's authorization or the HBPW's terms
of service for the account for such services.
(e) No person shall obtain or use commercial or residential service over or
through the HBPW's broadband system without the permission of the
HBPW and compliance with the HBPW's rules of account.
(f) A violation of this section of this article shall be a violation of the City
Code and punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1-10 of the
Holland City Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
the remedies available to the City in the event of a violation by a person
of this section of this article.
(a) User charges shall be levied to defray the costs of capital, operation,
maintenance, replacement, and debt retirement of the broadband
services.
(b) The City Council of the City shall establish rates for the use of and the
connection to broadband services based on the advice and
recommendation of the HBPW. Service rates shall be consistent with
the requirements of MCLA § 484.3114, as may be amended from time to
time.
(c) The City Council of the City shall amend rates from time to time as may
be necessary to support continued operation of the broadband services
in a manner consistent with the Business Plan and terms of this article.
(d) The City may also adopt charges and fees by resolution which shall
include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
broadband services;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures
including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports;
(3) Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing such
applications;
(4) Fees for filing appeals;
(5) Fees for removal of broadband internet access services;
(6) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
Sec. 7-67 CHARTER Sec. 7-68
C:263
Sec. 7-69. Compliance with METRO Act. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord.
No. 1693]
The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article
is to fully comply with the requirements of Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Public Act 48 of 2002 and
Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991.50 The provisions
hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose.
The City shall comply in all respects with the requirements of such Acts, and
shall not do any of the following:
Sec. 7-70. Severability. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 1693]
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction,
the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this article.
matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other
fees chargeable by the City.
(a) Adopt an ordinance, rules or a policy that unduly discriminates against
another person providing the same service; provided, however, that
subject to other requirements of the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, this subsection shall
not be construed as precluding the City from establishing rates
different from those of another person providing the same service or
providing introductory or special rates.
(b) Employ terms more favorable or less burdensome than those imposed
by the City upon other providers of the same service within its
jurisdiction concerning access to public rights-of-way.
(c) Impose or enforce against a provider any local regulation with respect
to public rights-of-way that is not also applicable to the City in its
provision of a telecommunication service provided through broadband
services.
(d) Employ terms more favorable or less burdensome than those imposed
by the City upon other providers of the same service within its
jurisdiction concerning access to, and rates for, pole attachments.
50.Editor's Note: See MCLA §§ 484.3101 et seq. and 484.2101 et seq., respectively.
Sec. 7-68 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 7-70
C:264
Chapter 8
CEMETERIES
Sec. 8-1. City cemeteries public burying grounds; establishment of
private cemeteries prohibited; burials outside cemeteries. [Code
1955, § 5-3.1]
All cemeteries now owned or which may hereafter be acquired by the
City are hereby declared to be public burying grounds, and no person or
organization of persons shall establish any cemetery within the City. No
person shall bury any human body in any place within the City other than in
public burying grounds.
Sec. 8-2. Name of City cemeteries. [Code 1955, § 5-3.2]
The two cemeteries now owned by the City shall all be known respectively
as "Pilgrim Home Cemetery" and "Graafschaq Cemetery."
Sec. 8-3. Records and plats. [Code 1955, § 5-3.3]
The Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries shall keep a full and complete
record of all lots, graves, lot and grave owners and interments in the
cemeteries of the City, and, for such purpose, locations of lots and graves
shall be shown on plats by the necessary surveyor's monuments, and by
a system of recorded measurements from fixed landmarks, indicating
permanently the exact location of lots and graves.
Sec. 8-4. Burials and removals generally. [Code 1955, § 5-3.4; Ord.
No. 1316, 9-19-2001]
(a) No person shall bury any body except a human body in any public
burying ground.
(b) No person shall bury more than one body in a single grave except; (i) in
the case of infants, and then only two infants may be buried in a single
grave space; or (ii) except on perimeter lots where space allows, as
determined by the Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries, a person
may be allowed to bury one body and one cremains in a single grave.
(c) No person shall bury more than four cremains only in a single grave
space.
(d) No person shall bury any body in the public burying grounds without
having purchased a burial right and paid in full therefor.
(e) No person shall bury any body in the public burying grounds except in
accordance with the state law and applicable state and local
ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(f) All graves shall be prepared by the employees of the City.
Sec. 7-70 CHARTER Sec. 8-4
C:265
Sec. 8-5. Burial right and cemetery care certificates—Issuance and
form; restriction upon burials in burial plots; rates and charges for
rights and services. [Code 1955, § 5-3.5]
Sec. 8-6. Same—Transferability; transfer of rights generally. [Code
1955, § 5-3.6]
Burial right and cemetery care certificates are nontransferable.
During the owner's life, he may effect a transfer of his rights under such
certificates by executing an appropriate instrument of transfer and filing
the same with, and surrendering his certificates to, the Superintendent of
Parks and Cemeteries, who shall issue a new certificate to the transferee.
Upon notice being given to the Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries
of the owner's demise, upon satisfactory evidence being filed with such
Superintendent as to the identity of the devisees or heirs of such owner
who are entitled to receive such rights, and upon surrender of the owner's
certificates, the Superintendent shall issue new certificates to the persons
who are entitled to receive the same.
(g) Funerals, while within the cemetery grounds, shall be under the control
of the Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries, and no burial shall be
permitted without a proper burial or transit permit, as provided by the
laws of the state.
(h) No change in location of a grave shall be made after a designation of the
place of interment by the undertaker in charge, except on request of the
owner or undertaker and at the expense of the one making the request.
The City shall not be responsible for any mistake in location occasioned
by anyone except an employee of the City.
(i) Graves shall not be reopened, except in case of necessity for a proper
removal of a body to another location, or upon an order for any
investigation provided or permitted by law. Before a permit is
authorized for the reopening of a grave, except in case of reopening for
an investigation, the one making such request shall exhibit evidence of
the right to remove such body for transfer.
(a) Burial right and cemetery care certificates shall be issued in such form
as the City Council shall prescribe.
(b) Burial in any burial plot shall be restricted to the owner of such plot and
his parents, children and spouse, unless written authorization is
obtained from such owner or his heirs.
(c) Burial rights in the public burying grounds shall be sold and services
shall be paid for at the rates established by resolution of the Council.
Sec. 8-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 8-7
C:266
Sec. 8-7. Care, maintenance and ornamentation—standards and
regulations. [Code 1955, § 5-3.7; Ord. No. 845; 1-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 1709]
For the care, maintenance and ornamentation of the cemeteries of the City,
the standards set forth in Subsections (a) through (j) of this section shall
apply.
(a) The City Manager shall establish grade levels at which all graves in a
given area shall be kept.
(b) No burial shall be made except in underground containers of
construction approved by the City Manager.
(c) The material of and manner of erecting monuments, headstones and
markers, the type, location and trimming of trees and shrubs and the
manner in which they are planted shall be subject to the approval of the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
(d) No person shall erect any enclosure in the nature of a fence, hedge or
curbing upon any lot or plot after April 30, 1955.
(e) No trees or shrubs shall be planted or placed in the cemeteries of the
City, except by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(f) The sale price of all lots hereafter sold shall include a specific amount to
be invested, the income therefrom to be used solely for the care and
maintenance of the cemeteries.
(g) The care and maintenance of lots sold prior to April 30, 1955, may be
provided for by an agreement between the City and the lot owner.
(h) Where lot owners have not provided for care by the City, the record
owner of one or more lots shall trim, mow, weed and sprinkle such lots
in such manner as to maintain such lots in conformity to the general
plan of care and maintenance of the cemetery and in conformity with
the care of surrounding lots; and in the event the Director of Parks and
Recreation shall determine that inadequate care is being given, the City
Manager may direct that care thereof shall be undertaken by the
Director of Parks and Recreation at the rate of annual care as
established by the Council, provided that notice of such care shall be
given by registered mail to the owner of record thereof at his last
known post office address at least 30 days prior to the commencement
of such care. In the event that payment is not made for the care thus
furnished, or personal care thereof is not resumed by the owner during
a period of two years from and after the service of such notice, the
purchase price of such lots may be refunded to the record owner
thereof, deducting therefrom the cost of care and expense of notice,
and the burial rights in the unused lots shall thereupon revert to the
City. In the event that notice cannot be delivered as hereinbefore
provided, the provisions of Act No. 46 of the Public Acts of 1931 and any
amendment thereto shall govern.
Sec. 8-7 CHARTER Sec. 8-7
C:267
Sec. 8-8. Same—Removal of dilapidated, etc., ornamentation, etc.
[Code 1955, § 5-3.9]
Whenever, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries,
any tree, plant, shrub or ornamentation of any kind has become unsightly,
dangerous or detrimental to the adjacent lot owners, or the public use of the
cemetery, the Superintendent may remove the same. Urns and containers so
removed may be sold by the Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries after
one year from the date of removal upon 30 days' written notice delivered
personally or sent by registered mail to the owner of the lot or plot from
which the same were removed, at the last known address of the owner of
the lot or plot.
Whenever any marker, headstone or monument has, in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries, become unsightly, dangerous or
detrimental to adjacent lot owners or the public, the Superintendent may
remove the same 30 days after he has served personally or mailed a written
notice to the last known address of the owner of the lot or plot from which
such marker, headstone or monument is to be removed.
Sec. 8-9. Injuring, removing, etc., trees, flowers, monuments, etc.;
riding or driving in cemetery. [Code 1955, § 5-3.8]
No person shall cut, remove, injure or carry away any tree, flower or other
decorative planting; nor deface, injure, remove or displace any monument,
marker or ornamental equipment; nor carry away, remove, destroy or injure
any flower pot, vase, flowers or other ornamentation; nor shall any person
traverse by mechanical means, or upon any animal, any portion of any City
cemetery except upon ways provided for such purpose.
Sec. 8-9.1. Animals prohibited in cemeteries. [Ord. No. 1492,
2-6-2008]
No person shall permit or lead any animal, fowl, or reptile, whether leashed
or not, in any cemetery (including any buildings located thereon) owned or
maintained by the City.
The prohibition imposed by this section shall not, however, apply to the use
of animals by physically handicapped persons for the purpose of assisting
such persons.
(i) The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall provide
water for personal care of lots as provided in Subsection (h) of this
section at the rate established by resolution of the City Council, per
grave space per annum.
(j) Payment for annual care or water fee shall be made no later than May 1
in each year.
Sec. 8-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 8-10
C:268
Sec. 8-10. Rules and regulations. [Code 1955, § 5-3.10]
The Superintendent of Parks and Cemeteries shall make such rules and
regulations as shall promote the general objects of this chapter, and for the
general improvement of the public burying grounds, subject to the approval
of the Council.
Sec. 8-11. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1495, 3-5-2008]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of Section
8-9.1 or any of the subsections is responsible for a Class I municipal civil
infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines
in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief that may be imposed by
the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation
occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 9
ELECTRICITY
Sec. 8-10 CHARTER Sec. 8-11
C:269

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 9-1. Michigan Electrical Code, administration and
enforcement. [Ord. No. 1284, 9-20-200051]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code and in
accordance with the State Construction Code Act of 1972, Act 230 of
the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.) the City
of Holland hereby assumes the responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Michigan Electrical Code throughout its corporate
limits.
Sec. 9-2. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1284, 9-20-2000]
A person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of the
electric code of the City is responsible for a Class III municipal civil
infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines
in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief that may be imposed by
the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation
occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Arts. I and II of this Ch. 9, adopted
3-16-1994 by Ord. No. 1106, as amended 3-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1164 and 11-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 1266. Ordinance No. 1284 also renumbered former Sections 9-27 through 9-31 as
Sections 9-3 through 9-7, respectively.
Sec. 9-1 CHARTER Sec. 9-2
C:271

ARTICLE II
Lien as Security for Collection of Service Charges
Sec. 9-3. Created. [Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 1284, 9-20-2000]
Except as otherwise provided or limited by state law, the City shall have as
security for the collection of all charges for electric services as authorized
by the Revenue Bond Act of 1933, as amended, a lien upon the premises
to which such electric services were supplied. Such liens shall become
effective immediately upon the distribution or supplying of such electric
service or services to such premises. The term "charges for electric service"
shall mean the rates, fees, rentals and all other charges for furnishing such
service and all repairs, maintenance and alterations of such service which
the City determines to be the responsibility of the service customer.
Sec. 9-4. Placement on tax rolls. [Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 1284,
9-20-2000]
Those charges which are delinquent for three months or more on June 30
of each year shall be reported by the City Auditor to the Council at the
first meeting thereof in the month of July. The Council thereupon shall order
the publication in a newspaper published in the City of notice to all owners
of property within the City that all unpaid electric charges which have
remained unpaid for a period of three months or more prior to June 30,
which have not been paid by October 1, shall be assessed upon the City's
tax roll against the premises to which the electric services were supplied or
furnished and that such charges shall be collected in the same manner as
the City taxes on such tax roll.
Sec. 9-5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 1284, 9-20-2000]
All such electric charges which remain unpaid on October 1 shall be
transferred to the City's tax roll and assessed against the premises to which
the electric service was supplied or furnished. This assessment shall be
collected with, and in the same manner as, City taxes. If the same have
remained delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in
the Treasurer's warrant for the collection of taxes levied in such tax roll,
such charges shall be returned to the County Treasurer to be collected in
the same manner as the lien created by City taxes on the delinquent tax roll
of the City.
Sec. 9-6. Protection of landlord, notice of lease and security
deposit. [Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 1160, 3-6-1996; Ord. No. 1284,
9-20-2000; 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1627]
If the owner of a premises which receives electric services provided by the
Holland Board of Public Works shall lease such premises to a tenant who
is responsible under the lease for the payment of the charges for electric
services, and such property owner notifies the HBPW, in writing, of such
fact, the notice to include a true copy of the lease of the affected premises
Sec. 9-3 CHARTER Sec. 9-6
C:273
executed by the owner or his/her designated agent and the tenant, then
the charges for electric services provided to such leased premises shall not
become a lien against the premises after the date such notice is received
by the HBPW. Immediately after the filing of such notice, the HBPW shall
render no further service to the premises until it receives from the tenant,
or an individual or entity acting on behalf of the tenant, a security deposit as
security for the payment of the electric charges. Deposits shall be refunded
to the tenant, or to the individual or entity that paid the deposit on behalf of
the tenant, upon a customer's completion of 12 consecutive months of good
credit history or upon the termination of utility service with the account in
good standing.
Sec. 9-7. Effect of article on prior revenue bond ordinances. [Ord.
No. 800; Ord. No. 1284, 9-20-2000]
The provisions of this article are intended to amplify and clarify Section
12.18 of the City Charter, Section 13 of Ordinance No. 446, adopted March
23, 1959, and Ordinance No. 733, adopted March 7, 1979. The enactment
of this article shall not be construed to affect the validity of any liens arising
prior to June 9, 1982, under the terms of Section 13 of Ordinance Nos. 446
and 733 to the extent that such liens do not exceed the authority granted to
the City by statute.
Sec. 9-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 9-7
C:274
ARTICLE III
Electrical Service
Sec. 9-8. Contracts for service—electric. [Ord. No. 1537, 7-1-2009]
All contracts for electric service shall be subject to all rules and regulations
heretofore or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City of Holland,
acting by and through its Holland Board of Public Works ("HBPW"), and
all applicable ordinances (or provisions thereof) which may be now or
hereafter in force.
Sec. 9-9. Access to premises. [Ord. No. 1537, 7-1-2009]
Employees of the HBPW shall have the right to enter upon the premises
of any electric customer at any time during normal business hours for
the purpose of meter examination, testing, changing and/or moving any
electrical equipment, meters, apparatus, and/or wiring, making a connected
load count, or measuring the customer's maximum electric demand.
Sec. 9-10. Customer responsibility—electric meters. [Ord. No. 1537,
7-1-2009]
Each customer shall have the responsibility for installing electric metering
sockets to permit the HBPW to connect its meter or metering system to
the City electric distribution system. The meter socket, meter, or metering
device shall be and remain accessible to employees of the HBPW and must
be maintained in front of and to both sides of the meter for installation,
operation, testing, and replacement. The HBPW may promulgate additional
rules and regulations regarding the technical requirements and
specifications for connection to metering devices.
In the event the HBPW should change its meters or implement an alternate
meter reading system, the customer, upon not less than 30 days' notice,
shall arrange for the necessary electrical installation, including but not
limited to the replacement of electric meter sockets, in order to make the
customer connection compatible with the new meters or alternate meter
reading system.
The HBPW may, from time to time, offer an installment payment of costs or
other financial incentive to the customer for the conversion of the customer
equipment in order to construct and install compatible metering sockets
and equipment for the meters or metering system of the HBPW. The terms
of the installment payment of costs or other financial incentive shall be
incorporated into a resolution as adopted, from time to time, by the
directors of the Holland Board of Public Works and/or the Holland City
Council, which shall specify the assistance available to customers.
In the event a customer fails to pay for the conversion of the electric
metering socket and/or equipment, the HBPW shall have the right to enter
on the premises and arrange for such connection work to be done and
place a lien on the customer premises for such costs and installation. The
Sec. 9-8 CHARTER Sec. 9-10
C:275
installation of necessary metering sockets shall be subject to all rights and
remedies as permitted by law and charter for the establishment and priority
of a lien as permitted by law.
Sec. 9-11. Tampering with metering device; theft. [Ord. No. 1537,
7-1-2009; 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1626]
An electric customer of the HBPW shall not tamper with any HBPW
equipment; install or have installed any wiring, connection, apparatus, or
other device which prevents the electric meter or metering system from
registering or recording properly all energy used, or to be used, or which
enables such customer to obtain or use any electric energy without the
same having been registered properly by any electric meter or metering
device of the HBPW. This section shall supplement and not be in lieu of
any provision of state law, including but not limited to MCLA 750.282. A
violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 municipal civil infraction
under Section 9-15 of the City of Holland Code of Ordinances, and shall be
subject to prosecution pursuant to applicable provisions of the City Charter
and state law.
Sec. 9-12. Termination of service. [Ord. No. 1537, 7-1-2009]
The HBPW, upon approval of the Holland City Council, may adopt a
termination of electric service policy establishing the terms and conditions
under which electric service to any customer may be suspended,
discontinued, or terminated. In the event a termination of service
requirement is adopted by state law which is applicable to the HBPW, the
HBPW shall not adopt a policy which is less restrictive than applicable
statutory provisions.
Sec. 9-13. Continuity of service. [Ord. No. 1537, 7-1-2009]
The HBPW and the City of Holland will use ordinary diligence in providing
electric service, but does not guarantee constant or continuous service. By
applying for electric service, each electric customer shall be deemed to
have agreed that the HBPW:
Sec. 9-14. Trimming of trees and obstructions. [Ord. No. 1537,
7-1-2009]
The HBPW shall have the right, privilege, and authority to trim trees,
overhanging branches, hedges, shrubs, or other obstructions which might
endanger the safety or interfere with the construction, operation, and
(1) May interrupt or suspend service at any time, either with or without
notice, for inspection, repair, maintenance, alteration, or change on the
customer's premises or elsewhere; and
(2) Shall have no duty, obligation, responsibility, or obligation for or by
reason of any such interruption or suspension of service, or for any
damage or loss resulting therefrom.
Sec. 9-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 9-14
C:276
maintenance of any cross-arms, wires, conductors, insulators, or other
electrical fixtures, devices, or apparatus of the HBPW. By acceptance of
electric service from the HBPW, each electric customer shall be deemed
conclusively to have granted such right, privilege, and authority to the
HBPW; and if any electric customer thereafter should challenge or object
to the exercise of such service in the general utility function of the HBPW,
service to such customer may be refused and/or discontinued for that
reason alone.
Sec. 9-15. General penalties/civil infraction. [Ord. No. 1537,
7-1-2009]
Any person who violates or participates with another in a violation of
any provision of this article is responsible for a Class 2 municipal civil
infraction and subject to the provisions of Section 2-118 as a Class 2
civil infraction, including any costs which may be imposed by a court of
competent jurisdiction. Each separate act in violation of this article shall
be deemed separate offenses. The service of citations or municipal civil
infractions under this article may be served by personal delivery or by first
class mail. The City may also seek from a court of competent jurisdiction
other remedies to prevent future violations and such other remedies as
provided by Section 1-10.2 of the Ordinance Code.
Sec. 9-14 CHARTER Sec. 9-15
C:277
Chapter 10
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 10, which pertained to fees, bonds and insurance, as
adopted and amended, was repealed 10-7-1992 by Ord. No. 1070,
effective 10-28-1992.]
Chapter 11
FIRE PROTECTION
Sec. 9-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 9-15
C:278
ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 11-1. "Fire hazard" defined. [Code 1955, § 2-2.1; Ord. No. 527]
The term "fire hazard" means any building, premises, structure or thing, or
any accumulation of trash, refuse or combustible matter, which by reason
of its nature, location, occupancy, condition or use may cause loss, damage
or injury to persons or property by reason of fire, explosion or action of the
elements.
Sec. 11-2. State law and rules and regulations. [Code 1955, § 2-2.2;
Ord. No. 527]
The Fire Chief and his authorized representatives shall have full powers
under, and no person shall violate, any law of the state, or any rule or
regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state, pertaining to
fire, fire hazards, fire prevention or fire waste.
Sec. 11-3. Fire hazard inspections; right of entry of Fire Chief, etc.
[Code 1955, § 2-2.3; Ord. No. 527]
The Fire Chief and his authorized representatives are hereby empowered
to enter at any reasonable time upon and into any premises, building or
structure, without any restraint or liability for trespass, to examine, inspect
and ascertain the condition thereof with regard to the prevention of fire and
explosion, and the protection of persons and property therefrom.
Sec. 11-4. Order to abate fire hazard—generally; abatement by Fire
Chief, etc. [Code 1955, § 2-2.3; Ord. No. 527]
The Fire Chief or his authorized representatives shall order the abatement
of any fire hazard, or any deficiency which may cause an otherwise
preventable fire or explosion, endanger persons or property, or be
dangerous to the public security or safety. If any such hazard or deficiency
requires immediate action, the Fire Chief and his authorized
representatives may abate the same, and the cost of abating such hazard or
deficiency may be charged against the premises and the owner thereof as a
special assessment in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XV of the
Charter of the City.
Sec. 11-5. Same—Appeals to Fire Chief. [Code 1955, § 2-2.3; Ord.
No. 527]
Should any person receiving an order of abatement under the provisions
of Section 11-4 consider himself aggrieved, he may, within 48 hours of the
receipt of such order, excluding Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, appeal to
the Fire Chief, who shall hear the grievance and make such written order as
he determines reasonable and proper.
Sec. 11-1 CHARTER Sec. 11-6
C:279
Sec. 11-6. Same—Failure to comply with order; prohibited condition
constitutes nuisance. [Code 1955, § 2-2.3; Ord. No. 527]
No person shall fail to comply with any order of the Fire Chief or his
authorized representatives issued under the provisions of Section 11-4,
unless pending appeal, as provided for by Section 11-5, and any condition
permitted to exist contrary to the terms of such order shall constitute a
public nuisance.
Sec. 11-7. Accumulations of combustible wastes. [Code 1955,
§ 2-2.10; Ord. No. 527]
Sec. 11-8. Ashes. [Code 1955, § 2-2-9; Ord. No. 527]
No ashes, except at factories where ashes are used for manufacturing
purposes, shall be kept or deposited in any part of this City in or within 20
feet of any building unless the same be in a metallic or earthen vessel, or
brick or stone ash room.
Sec. 11-9. Fires in streets, etc. [Code 1955, § 2-2.11; Ord. No. 527]
No person shall kindle any fire in or upon any street or alley, or upon any
public place, except in publicly provided outdoor grills.
Sec. 11-10. Fires on private property. [Code 1955, § 2-2.12; Ord. No.
527]
No person shall kindle or light any fire on any private property within 15
feet of any building or other structure, or within 50 feet of any lumber,
timber, wood, hay, straw, shavings or other combustible material, and no
open fire shall be kindled or lighted without first informing, and receiving
permission of, the Fire Department.
Sec. 11-11. False alarms; molesting fire fighting equipment, etc.
[Code 1955, § 2-2.13; Ord. No. 527]
No person shall turn in, sound or cause to be communicated to the Fire
Department a false alarm of fire, or molest any fire fighting apparatus or
equipment, or anything pertaining to the fire alarm system, without the
express permission of the Fire Chief or his authorized representative.
(a) Generally. No person owning or being responsible for any premises
shall permit any wastepaper, oil, rags, excelsior, refuse or any material
of a similar nature to accumulate therein or thereon, to such extent that
such accumulation creates a fire hazard.
(b) Private garages. No person owning or being responsible for any private
garage shall permit any wastepaper, ashes, oil, rags, excelsior, refuse or
any material of a similar nature to accumulate therein.
Sec. 11-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-12
C:280
Sec. 11-12. Fire hydrants—obstruction of. [Code 1955, § 2-2.14;
Ord. No. 527]
No person shall place any building material or other obstruction whatever,
nor shall any person who is responsible for any such material or obstruction,
permit the same to remain within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
Sec. 11-13. Same—Opening or taking water from. [Code 1955,
§ 2-2.15; Ord. No. 527]
No person, except members of the Fire Department, Board of Public Works
or the Street Department, shall use any fire hydrant, except in case of
emergency, without first securing permission from the Fire Chief or his
authorized representative for such use and agreeing to pay for the water to
be used. In no case shall any wrench or tool be used on a fire hydrant other
than a regulation Fire Department hydrant wrench.
Sec. 11-14. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1243, 3-24-1999]
A person who violates or fails to comply with Sections 11-9 or 11-10 of this
article is responsible for a Class II municipal civil infraction and subject to
the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this
Code and any other relief that may be imposed by the court. Each act of
violation and each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a
separate violation.
Sec. 11-12 CHARTER Sec. 11-14
C:281

ARTICLE II
Explosives; Fireworks
Sec. 11-15. State law, rules and regulations adopted. [Code 1955,
§ 2-6.1]
Pursuant to the power granted to cities by Subsection (k) of Section 3 of
Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended,52 the Michigan State Police
Rules and Regulations for Storage and Handling of Explosives, adopted
and promulgated by the Commissioner of the state police and published in
Michigan Administrative Code, 1944, page 1403 et seq., as amended, which
constitute a code within the meaning of such Act, are hereby adopted as a
part of this Code; provided, that whenever any act is prohibited in the state
by such regulations, such prohibition shall extend only to the City for the
purpose of this Code.
Sec. 11-16. Possession, etc., of certain explosives prohibited. [Code
1955, § 2-6.2]
No person shall introduce or have in his possession any nitroglycerine or
other explosives, except dynamite, detonators and caps therefor, within the
City, except for explosives in legal transit.
Sec. 11-17. Fireworks. [Code 1955, § 2-6.3; Ord. No. 715; amended
4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 1603; 6-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1610; 2-20-2019
by Ord. No. 1764]
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC — Pyrotechnic devices for professional use
that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and
construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight
limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are
classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Firework devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply
with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission under 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in
American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.3.3, or
3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA
Standard 87-1, 4.1.
52.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 117.3(k).
Sec. 11-15 CHARTER Sec. 11-17
C:283
FIREWORK or FIREWORKS — Any composition or device, except for
a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the purpose
of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact
fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, homemade fireworks
and special effects.
HOMEMADE FIREWORKS — Any composition or device designed for
the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion,
deflagration, or detonation that is not produced by a commercial
manufacturer and does not comply with the construction, chemical
composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer
Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS — Ground and handheld sparkling devices
as that phrase is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to
3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
NOVELTIES — That term as defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.2,
3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following:
Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls,
or individual caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of
explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the
maximum explosive content per cap.
(1)
Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy
guns in which toy caps as described in Subsection (1) above are
used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not
designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a projectile
or missile by the explosion.
(2)
(3) Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter.
Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the
manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are
printed on the box; and toy smoke devices.
(4)
(b) Limitation on use of consumer fireworks. No person shall ignite,
discharge or use consumer fireworks in the City except in a manner not
otherwise prohibited by law and except during the following times and
dates:
(1) From 11:00 a.m. on December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1.
(2) From 11:00 a.m. on the Saturday and Sunday immediately
preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
(3) From 11:00 a.m. on June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of
those days.
Sec. 11-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-17
C:284
(4) From 11:00 a.m. on July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until
11:45 p.m.
(5) From 11:00 a.m. on the Saturday and Sunday immediately
preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
(c) Prohibited consumer firework use locations. No person shall ignite,
discharge, use or leave remnants of consumer fireworks within the City
on public property, public streets, public rights-of-way, school property,
church property, or the property of another person without that
organization's or person's express permission. "Property of another
person" includes, but is not limited to, hotel and motel property,
apartment property, and condominium property, where an owner,
management company, or association has or retains authority and
control over the use of the property or common areas.
(d) Prohibited transfer to minors. No person shall offer for sale, expose for
sale or retail, give or furnish to any person under the age of 18 years
any consumer fireworks, as defined herein, within the City.
(e) Prohibited acquisition by minors. No person under the age of 18 years
shall buy, purchase, acquire or obtain any consumer fireworks, as
defined herein, within the City.
(f) Limitations on use by minors. No person under the age of 18 years shall
ignite, discharge or use any consumer fireworks, as defined herein,
within the City, unless under the direct supervision of an adult;
provided, however, that such adult is not otherwise disqualified from
using consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks pursuant to MCLA
§ 28.462(3).
(g) Knowingly allow use in violation of prohibition. No person owning or
having control over property within the City shall knowingly allow
another person to ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on such
property in violation of the prohibition as stated in Subsection (b)
herein.
(h) Limitations on use of articles pyrotechnic and display fireworks. No
person shall ignite, discharge or use articles pyrotechnic or display
fireworks within the City without first securing a permit for such use
from the Chief of the Department of Public Safety.
(i) Permit for public display. Upon application, in writing, by any
association or group of individuals for the public display of fireworks,
the Chief of the Department of Public Safety may grant a permit for
such display, subject to such conditions as they may impose to properly
safeguard the public, both as to persons and property.
(j) Enforcement. The Chief of the Department of Public Safety, his
designees and sworn law enforcement officers are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this section.
Sec. 11-17 CHARTER Sec. 11-17
C:285
(k) Violations, fines, penalties and seizure.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating Subsection (g) or
(h) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine up to $500.
(2) Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating Subsection (b) of
this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
subject to the civil fine of $1,000, with $500 remitted to the City of
Holland for enforcing this section pursuant to MCLA § 28.457(3).
(3) Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating Subsection (c), (d),
(e) or (f) of this section shall be responsible for a Class III municipal
civil infraction and subject to the civil fine set forth in the schedules
of civil fines in Section 2-118 of the Holland City Code and any
other relief that may be imposed by the court.
(4) If the Chief of the Department of Public Safety, his designee or a
sworn law enforcement officer determines that a violation of this
section has occurred, he or she may seize the consumer fireworks
as evidence of the violation.
(5) Following the final disposition of a finding of responsibility for
violating this section, the City may dispose of or destroy any
consumer firework retained as evidence in that prosecution.
(6) In addition to any other penalty, a person, firm, corporation, or
entity that is found responsible for a violation of this section shall
be required to reimburse the City for the costs of storing, disposing
of, or destroying the consumer fireworks that were confiscated for
a violation of this section.
Sec. 11-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-17
C:286
ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 11-18. Adoption of International Fire Code. [Ord. No. 852; Ord.
No. 1499, § 2, 3-19-2008; amended 9-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1635]
Pursuant to the power granted to cities by Section 3(k) of Act No. 279
of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, MCLA § 117.3(k) and Section
5.9 of the Holland City Charter, the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition
(including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F and G), as published by
International Code Council, regulating and governing the safeguarding of
life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises in the City of Holland; and providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor, is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part hereof as if fully set forth in this article. Complete printed copies of the
Fire Code adopted herein are available for public use and inspection at the
office of the City Clerk or at another office designated by the City Clerk.
Sec. 11-19. Amendments to the International Fire Code, 2012
Edition. [Ord. No. 852; Ord. No. 1499, § 3, 3-19-2008; amended
9-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1635]
The following sections and subsections of the International Fire Code,
2012 Edition, referred to in Subsections (a) through (m) below are hereby
amended as set forth herein. The following section and subsection numbers
refer to like numbers of sections and subsections of the International Fire
Code, 2012 Edition:
(a) Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations adopted by reference in Section 11-18
of the City of Holland Code shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code
of the City and are herein referred to as "the Code" or "this Code."
(b) Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
103.2 Appointment. The Public Safety Director, Fire Operations
Captain, Fire Marshal, and Fire Inspector are each designated as "Fire
Code Official" under this code.
(c) Section 105.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 11-18 CHARTER Sec. 11-19
C:287
105.1.1 Permits required. Any property owner or authorized agent
who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or modify
systems and equipment which is regulated by this code shall obtain a
permit by the fire code official, or other City department as directed by
the fire code official. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance
of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated
therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the
fire code official.
(d) Section 105.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or
structure shall not be occupied prior to the Fire Code Official issuing
a permit and conducting associated inspections that indicate the
applicable provisions of this Code have been met. Provided, however,
that nothing in this section, Section 105.3.4 or any other section of this
Code shall authorize a building or structure to be occupied without
meeting all other applicable occupancy permit requirements of the
City of Holland.
(e) Section 109.4 is amended to read follows:
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official,
or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall
be guilty of a Class III municipal civil infraction and subject to the
civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of the
Holland City Code and shall be subject to any other relief that may be
imposed by a court for such conduct, which shall also be considered a
nuisance per se. Each act of violation and each day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(f) Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be guilty of a Class III municipal civil infraction and
subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section
2-118 of the Holland City Code and shall be subject to any other relief
that may be imposed by a court for such conduct, which shall also be
considered a nuisance per se.
(g) Section 505.1 (Premises identification) is deleted in its entirety and is
replaced with the requirements of Article IV, Chapter 32, of the Holland
City Code entitled "Numbering Buildings."
Sec. 11-19 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-19
C:288
(h) Section 506 (Key Boxes) is deleted in its entirety and is replaced with
the requirements of Article VI, Chapter 11, of the Holland City Code
entitled "Emergency Access Lock Boxes."
(i) Section 5003.3 (Release of hazardous materials); Section 5003.3.1
(Unauthorized discharges); Section 5003.3.1.1 (Records); Section
5003.3.1.2 (Preparation); Section 5003.3.1.3 (Control); and Section
5003.3.1.4 (Responsibility for cleanup) are deleted in their entirety and
are replaced with the requirements of Chapter 11, Article V, of the
Holland City Code entitled "Discharge of Hazardous/Toxic Material."
(j) Section 5504.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
5504.3.1.1 Location. Stationary containers shall be separated from
exposure hazards in accordance with the provisions applicable to the
type of fluid contained and the minimum separation distances
indicated in Table 5504.3.1.1. Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not
be located within dyked areas containing other hazardous materials.
Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside
of buildings is prohibited within any residential zoning district in the
City or at any nonagricultural zoned parcel upon which a dwelling unit
is located.
(k) Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is amended to read as follows:
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground
tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within any residential zoning
district in the City or at any nonagricultural zoned parcel upon which
a dwelling unit is located.
(l) Section 5706.2.4.4 is amended to read as follows:
5706.2.4.4 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited.
The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is
prohibited within any residential zoning district in the City or at any
nonagricultural zoned parcel upon which a dwelling unit is located.
(m) Section 6104.2 is amended to read follows:
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within
residential zoning districts in the City or at any nonagricultural zoned
parcel upon which a dwelling unit is located, the aggregate capacity of
any one installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2,000 gallons.
Exception. In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be
determined by the Fire Code Official, after consideration of special
features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and
proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of
fire protection to be provided, and capabilities of the local Fire
Department.
Sec. 11-19 CHARTER Sec. 11-20
C:289
Sec. 11-20. Smoke detectors—Definitions. [Ord. No. 852; Ord. No.
932, 11-4-1987]
For the purposes of Sections 11-21 through 11-27, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
APPROVED SMOKE DETECTORS — All devices or systems which comply
with the specifications of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or any other
nationally recognized laboratory standards and bear a label indicating that
the detector has been so listed and approved.
DWELLING — Shall have the same meaning as used in Section 14-4.6 of
this Code.
MALFUNCTION — For the purposes of Section 11-25, any defect or other
problem with a smoke detector or smoke detection system; except, that
such term shall not include dead, weak or defective batteries.
MIXED OCCUPANCY DWELLING — A building containing one or more
dwelling units and a business other than a home occupation.
OWNER — The person who holds legal title to the premises; however,
should a land contract be in existence, the land contract purchaser shall be
considered the owner.
RENTAL UNIT — Any residence apartment, flat, motel room, hotel room,
boarding room or boardinghouse for which consideration is paid by one
person to another for use or occupancy thereof.
SINGLE STATION ALARM DEVICE — Any assembly incorporating the
approved smoke detector, control equipment and the signaling device in one
unit, operating from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the
point of installation.
SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM — One or more smoke detectors in any
system composed of self-supervised smoke detection and signaling devices
operating on an approved, permanently wired electric circuit, so arranged
that the activation of any one smoke detection device will activate all
signaling devices throughout the building.
SMOKE DETECTOR — An instrument which detects visible or invisible
particles of combustion and activates a signaling device.
USE GROUP R-1 STRUCTURES — This use group shall include all hotel,
motel and dormitory buildings arranged for the shelter and sleeping
accommodations of more than 20 individuals.
USE GROUP R-2 STRUCTURES — This use group shall include all multiplefamily
dwellings having more than two dwelling units and all dormitories,
boarding and lodging houses arranged for shelter and sleeping
accommodations of more than five and not more than 20 individuals.
USE GROUP R-3 STRUCTURES — This use group shall include all buildings
arranged for the use of one-family or two-family dwelling units, including
Sec. 11-20 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-20
C:290
not more than five lodgers or boarders per family or any dwelling not
included in use group R-1 or R-2.
Sec. 11-21. Same—Installation and maintenance requirements.
[Ord. No. 852; Ord. No. 932, 11-4-1987]
All new and existing structures used as dwellings in use groups R-1, R-2 and
R-3 and mixed occupancy dwellings shall have approved smoke detectors
installed by the owner, in accordance with the following requirements:
Sec. 11-22. Same—Alternate installations. [Ord. No. 852]
The Chief of the Fire Department or his duly authorized representative
may waive the requirements of Sections 11-20 to 11-27 upon approval and
installation of an alternate form of smoke detector or system designed to
adequately safeguard the safety of the occupants of the particular dwelling.
Any person requesting approval of an alternate form of smoke detector or
system shall submit adequate proof to the Fire Chief or his duly authorized
representative showing that the alternate system adequately safeguards the
occupants of the dwelling.
(a) A structure in use group R-1 shall have a minimum of one single station
smoke detector in each guest room, suite or sleeping area.
(b) Each building in use groups R-2 and R-3 shall have at least one single
station smoke detector for each level on which there are bedrooms. The
smoke detectors shall be in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. In
addition, the owners of any new or converted dwellings shall comply
with the smoke detector requirements of the building and other codes
adopted by the City of Holland.
(c) The installation and maintenance of all smoke detectors shall be in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and with the
requirements of the National Fire Protection Association's Pamphlet
Number 74, as may be amended.
(d) The owner of any existing rental structure in use groups R-1, R-2 or R-3
shall have until November 15, 1984, to comply with this section. The
owner of any existing single-family dwelling not used as a rental unit
shall have until January 31, 1988, to comply with this section. The
owners of all other dwellings shall comply with this section prior to
occupancy.
(e) The owner of property covered by this section shall be deemed to have
complied with the maintenance requirement set forth in Subsection (c)
if he corrects any malfunctions of which he has actual knowledge or
which are reported by the tenant pursuant to Section 11-25 and if such
corrective action is taken as soon as reasonable and practical under the
circumstances.
Sec. 11-20 CHARTER Sec. 11-23
C:291
Sec. 11-23. Same—Compliance with provisions of Code concerning
electricity. [Ord. No. 852]
If any smoke detector device is directly connected to the electrical system of
a building, the person installing the device shall comply with the provisions
of Chapter 9 of this Code dealing with electricity and shall obtain an
electrical permit. A permit shall not be required for installation of a batterypowered
single station alarm device.
Sec. 11-24. Same—Tampering or interfering with. [Ord. No. 852]
No person shall tamper with or interfere with the operation or effectiveness
of a smoke detector.
Sec. 11-25. Same—Notification concerning malfunctioning or
inoperable detectors. [Ord. No. 852]
A tenant shall immediately notify the property owner or an agent thereof
upon discovery of a malfunctioning or inoperable smoke detector or smoke
detection system.
Sec. 11-26. Same—Administration and enforcement of provisions by
Fire Chief. [Ord. No. 853]
The Chief of the Fire Department or his authorized representative shall
have the responsibility for enforcement and administration of Sections
11-20 to 11-27 and shall have the authority to enter premises to inspect the
same for compliance.
Sec. 11-27. Same—Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 852; Ord. No.
861]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of Section
11-21, 11-23 or 11-24 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both.
In addition, the violation of such sections shall be deemed a nuisance per
se, subject to abatement as provided in this Code and by state law.
Sec. 11-23 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-27
C:292
ARTICLE IV
Escrow of Fire Insurance Proceeds
Sec. 11-28. Definitions. [Ord. No. 893; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 1724]
The City shall proceed under provisions of Michigan Compiled Law (MCL)
§ 500.2845 regarding escrow of insurance payments due to fire or explosion
and loss to insured real property.
Sec. 11-29. through Sec. 11-35. (Reserved)53
53.[Editor's Note: Former Sections 11-29., Insurer to withhold percentage of settlement
proceeds; notice; 11-30., Escrow account procedure; 11-31., Receipt of amount withheld;
interest; commingling of funds; release of funds to satisfy mortgages; 11-32., Release of
funds to insured; 11-33., Use of retained proceeds upon failure to show reasonable proof.;
11-34., Applicability of article.; and 11-35., Severability; saving clause., were repealed
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1724]
Sec. 11-28 CHARTER Sec. 11-29
C:293

ARTICLE V
Discharge of Hazardous/Toxic Material
Sec. 11-36. Discharge of hazardous/toxic material prohibited;
public nuisance. [Ord. No. 1071, 10-21-1992; Ord. No. 1243,
3-24-1999]
No person shall cause, suffer to be caused, or in any way contribute to,
the discharge, release, or accumulation of any hazardous/toxic material
upon any public way or any other area open to the public within the
City of Holland; and any such discharge, release, or accumulation shall be
deemed to be a public nuisance. This provision is intended to impose strict
liability upon the driver of every vehicle which is involved in an accident
resulting in the discharge, release, or accumulation of any such hazardous/
toxic material and is intended to include, without limitation, all instances of
passive fault or no fault at all.
Sec. 11-37. "Hazardous/toxic material" defined. [Ord. No. 1071,
10-21-1992]
"Hazardous/toxic material" as used in this article means any material or
substance which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics, presents a direct or immediate
threat to the public health or safety or to the environment and which
requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
Sec. 11-38. Abatement. [Ord. No. 1071, 10-21-1992]
The Fire Chief or his authorized representative may immediately abate the
discharge, release, or accumulation of any such hazardous/toxic material
without approval of the City Council.
Sec. 11-39. Assessment of expenses; joint and several
responsibility; assessment of insurer. [Ord. No. 1071, 10-21-1992]
The Fire Chief or his authorized representative shall have the ability to
recover by assessment all expenses incurred in abating such discharge,
release, or accumulation. Such expenses shall include but not be limited
to the actual labor and materials costs to the City of Holland (including
workers compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead,
cost of equipment operation, cost of materials, cost of disposal, cost of any
contract labor or materials, and any other cost) associated with abatement,
mitigation, and cleanup in order to ensure the safety of the City of Holland
and its populace. Such expenses shall be assessed to, and shall be, the
joint and several responsibility of each person who has caused, suffered
to be caused, or in any way contributed to, such discharge, release, or
accumulation, regardless of whether that person has any other legal liability
therefor apart from this section. The Fire Chief or his authorized
representative may assess such expenses directly to the insurer of any
person made responsible therefor under this section.
Sec. 11-36 CHARTER Sec. 11-40
C:295
Sec. 11-40. Failure to pay; procedure to recover. [Ord. No. 1071,
10-21-1992; Ord. No. 1243, 3-24-1999]
All assessments shall be paid within 30 calendar days unless otherwise
approved by the Fire Chief or his authorized representative. Any person
who fails to pay expenses addressed pursuant to this section within 30
calendar days of service of the assessment, shall be considered in default.
In case of default, the City of Holland may commence suit to recover the
assessed expenses together with interest, costs, and attorneys fees incurred
in collection of such assessment or otherwise allowed by law.
Sec. 11-41. Severability; saving clause. [Ord. No. 1071, 10-21-1992]
(a) If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end, the provisions of
this article are hereby declared severable.
(b) This article shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code, or
regulation of the City existing prior to (ordinance effective date), and
any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be
punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those
ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the time the violation was
committed.
Sec. 11-40 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-41
C:296
ARTICLE VI
Emergency Access Lock Boxes
Sec. 11-42. Installation of lock boxes; when required, location and
guidelines. [Ord. No. 1308, 7-18-2001]
Sec. 11-43. Contents of lock boxes. [Ord. No. 1308, 7-18-2001]
Each lock box shall contain the following:
(a) A lock box for keys shall be installed on the outside of each building or
structure in the City of Holland which is equipped with an automatic
fire suppression system, equipped with an automatic fire detection
system, or equipped with a medical emergency alarm system, except
that a lock box is not required to be installed on one- and two-family
residential dwellings. A lock box shall also be installed on any other
building or structure in the City of Holland if it is deemed necessary by
the Fire Chief. Written approval of a proposed lock box shall be
obtained from the Fire Chief or his or her designee before a lock box is
installed.
(b) A lock box required by this article shall be installed on the outside of the
building or structure in a location approved by the Fire Chief or his or
her designee. Written approval of a proposed location for a lock box
shall be obtained from the Fire Chief or his or her designee before a
lock box is installed. Stickers supplied by the Fire Department shall be
affixed to the main entry door of the building or structure to indicate
the presence of a lock box.
(c) The Fire Chief shall develop and publish written guidelines governing
the requirements for an approved lock box and approved locations for
the installation of lock boxes.
(a) Keys to the building or structure, including keys to exterior and interior
doors, except for doors to individual residences within a multifamily
building or structure. If a master key is available, then it shall be
provided to eliminate multiple keys.
(b) Keys to mechanical and equipment rooms.
(c) Keys to elevator controls.
(d) Keys to specific areas as required and deemed necessary by the Fire
Chief.
(e) Keys necessary for the control of a fire protection system.
(f) A list of the names and contact numbers of three people familiar with
the building or structure who may be contacted in an emergency.
Sec. 11-42 CHARTER Sec. 11-44
C:297
Sec. 11-44. Responsibility. [Ord. No. 1308, 7-18-2001]
It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other
party in control of a building or structure to assume all costs associated
with the purchase and installation of a lock box required by this article;
to maintain the lock box in good condition; and to insure that all keys
contained therein are those currently in use in the building or structure. The
Fire Department shall have the right to periodically inspect lock boxes for
proper maintenance, visibility, accessibility, a current emergency contact
list and keys when it conducts a routine, fire safety inspection of a building
or structure, when it performs an incident response plan site visit at a
building or structure, or when it reasonably believes that the keys or
contents of a lock box are out of date.
Sec. 11-45. Effective date for compliance. [Ord. No. 1308,
7-18-2001]
Sec. 11-46. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1308, 7-18-2001]
A person who violates or fails to comply with this article shall be responsible
for a Class I municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth
in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other
relief that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day
upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(a) If required by this article, then a lock box shall be installed on a new or
remodeled building or structure before it is occupied.
(b) If required by this article, then lock boxes shall be installed on all
existing buildings or structures within six months of the effective date
of this article.
Sec. 11-44 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-46
C:298
ARTICLE VII
False Fire Alarms
Sec. 11-47. False alarms; purpose. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-19-2008]
Sec. 11-48. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-19-2008]
(a) The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and fire alarm
contractors to properly install, use, and maintain fire alarm systems in
order to improve the reliability of such systems and thereby reduce or
eliminate false fire alarms.
(b) This article governs the use of fire alarm systems intended to summon
the City of Holland Fire Department; allows for the assessment of
service fees; and provides for civil and criminal penalties.
(a) ADOPTED CODE(S) — The 2006 International Fire Code as adopted, in
part, by the City of Holland.
(b) ALARM USER — Any person, whether owner, occupant, or tenant, upon
whose premises a fire alarm system is maintained or operated within
the City of Holland.
(c) DEPARTMENT — The City of Holland Fire Department.
(d) ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The City of Holland Fire Chief or his/her
designated representative.
(e) FALSE FIRE ALARM — For the purposes of this article, the activation of
any fire alarm system not caused by heat, smoke or fire, resulting in
response by the Department. A false fire alarm includes, but is not
limited to, activation of a fire alarm system through any of the
following:
(1) Negligent or intentional use or misuse of the system;
(2) Mechanical failure;
(3) Malfunction; or
(4) Improper installation.
A false fire alarm does not include an alarm caused by naturally
occurring weather, seismic or other condition; interruption of
electrical or telephone service to the alarm user; or malicious or
criminal activity by a third party who is not an agent, employee,
resident or guest of the alarm user.
(f) FIRE ALARM CONTRACTOR — Any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity appropriately licensed as a fire alarm
contractor by the State of Michigan, State Electrical Administrative
Board.
Sec. 11-47 CHARTER Sec. 11-48
C:299
Sec. 11-49. Responsibility for compliance; requirement of alarm
user to respond to scene. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-19-2008]
Sec. 11-50. False fire alarms. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-19-2008]
(g) FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or equipment designed to signal
visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of
these methods, the presence of a heat, smoke or fire hazard by or
through a communication to the Department and to which the
Department is trained to respond. The term "fire alarm system" does
not include an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a
premises.
(h) LETTER FOR EXCESSIVE FALSE FIRE ALARMS — A notification
provided to an alarm user by the Department for two or more false fire
alarms within a twelve-month calendar year.
(i) PREMISES — Any building or structure in which a fire alarm system is
installed.
(j) QUALIFIED FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN — Any person who inspects,
installs, repairs or performs maintenance on fire alarm systems and is
factory trained and licensed by the State of Michigan.
(k) RECORD OF COMPLETION — The form required to be filed with the
Department pursuant to the National Fire Protection Association's
National Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 72).
(l) REPORT OF CORRECTIVE MEASURES AGAINST IMPROPER USE —
Documentation in a format acceptable to the enforcement official that
verifies the alarm user has taken appropriate corrective measures to
prevent future improper use of a fire alarm system.
(m) REPORT OF SERVICE/REPAIR — Documentation in a format acceptable
to the enforcement official that verifies proper repairs or maintenance
have been performed by both the fire alarm contractor and the alarm
user.
(n) SERVICE FEE — The monetary charge payable to the City of Holland to
defray the expenses of implementing the purposes of this article and
the expenses of responding to false fire alarms.
(a) Unless otherwise stated herein, the alarm user shall be responsible for
complying with all provisions of this article.
(b) The alarm user or designated agent of the alarm user shall appear at
the premises upon request of the Department when a fire alarm system
has been activated.
(a) If the Department records two or more false fire alarms at one premises
within a twelve-month calendar year, a letter for excessive false fire
alarms shall be mailed by first class mail to the alarm user and any fire
Sec. 11-48 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-50
C:300
Sec. 11-51. Service fee. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-19-2008]
alarm contractor. Said notice shall direct the alarm user to submit a
report of service/repair and/or a report of corrective measures against
improper use within 15 calendar days of receipt of said letter to the
Department confirming that:
(1) The fire alarm system has been examined by a qualified fire alarm
technician; and
(2) A description of the bona fide attempt made to identify and correct
any defect of design, installation, operation, or misuse of the fire
alarm system which was identified as a possible cause of the false
fire alarm.
(b) Failure of the alarm user to return a satisfactory report required by
Subsection (a) herein within said fifteen-day period shall result in the
imposition of a service fee for the current and each prior false fire alarm
within the previous 12 months.
(c) A service fee shall be assessed for the third and each subsequent false
fire alarm at the same premises requiring response by the Department
during any calendar year.
(d) A fire alarm contractor, alarm user, or any other individual shall not
conduct testing or perform repair work on any fire alarm system,
sprinkler system or fire suppression system without first notifying the
Department that such testing or repair work is being performed.
Violation of this subsection shall result in the imposition of a service
fee.
(e) False fire alarms activated by any components connected to the fire
alarm system shall be included in computing the total number of false
fire alarms for purposes of this article.
(f) During the fifteen-day period after receipt of a letter for excessive false
fire alarms, any additional false fire alarms will not be counted toward
the present year's total false fire alarms, provided that the provisions of
Subsections (a)(1) and (2) above have been met.
(a) A service fee required by this article may be imposed on an alarm user
45 days after the date of installation of the fire alarm system for existing
buildings and 45 days after the date an occupancy permit is issued to an
alarm user for newly constructed buildings in which a fire alarm system
is installed.
(b) Should any service fee assessed pursuant to this article remain unpaid
in excess of 30 days, a late fee shall be assessed and shall be payable in
addition to the original service fee.
(c) The service fee and late fee established by this article shall be
calculated periodically based on employee labor rates, equipment costs
Sec. 11-50 CHARTER Sec. 11-51
C:301
Sec. 11-52. Conflict with other City ordinances. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1,
3-19-2008]
If the provisions of this article conflict with any ordinance or resolution
previously adopted by the City, the provisions of this article shall control.
Sec. 11-53. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-19-2008]
In addition to any service fee, late fee or other sanction that may be
imposed, any person who violates a provision of this article shall be guilty
of a Class III municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth
in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of the Holland City Code, and
shall be subject to any other relief that may be imposed by a court for such
conduct, which shall also be considered a nuisance per se.
and the Department service costs and established by appropriate
resolution adopted by City Council.
Sec. 11-51 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 11-53
C:302
Chapter 12
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 12, Food Service Sanitation, adopted 6-2-2004 by Ord.
No. 1389, was repealed 10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1661.]
Chapter 13
HARBOR, WHARVES, DOCKS AND VESSELS
Sec. 11-53 CHARTER Sec. 11-53
C:303

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 13-1. Harbor defined. [Code 1955, § 6-1.1]
The harbor shall include all the waters of Lake Macatawa and all lagoons
connected with such lake, lying within the City.
Sec. 13-2. Dumping, etc., in harbor, etc. [Code 1955, § 6-1.2]
No person shall throw, discharge, dump or deposit any garbage or rubbish,
as defined in Section 27-1 or any untreated sewage, dead animals, refuse of
any kind or the effluent of any septic tank on the banks or into the waters of
the harbor.
Sec. 13-3. Construction and alteration of permanent docks,
wharves, etc. [Code 1955, § 6-3.2]
No person shall construct or alter any permanent dock, wharf, seawall,
revetment, piling or fill in without compliance with federal statutes and
regulations applicable to such activity.
Sec. 13-4. Maintenance of private docks, wharves, etc.; abandoned
docks, etc., deemed nuisances, etc. [Code 1955, § 6-3.1]
No person shall allow any dock, wharf, pier or similar landing strip operated
by him to fall into disrepair or to remain in a dangerous condition. Any such
structure, when no longer in use, shall be deemed to be a nuisance and
shall be posted in a manner approved by the Building Inspector and may be
removed in the manner provided in Section 15.17 of the Charter of the City.
Sec. 13-5. Lake Macatawa—skiing. [Code 1955, § 6-2.7]
No person shall ski or tow water skiers within 500 feet from the shore of
Lake Macatawa.
Sec. 13-6. Same—Fishing. [Code 1955, § 6-2.9]
No person shall fish from any boat in any anchorage or in the ship channel,
unless such person shall give the right-of-way to all passing craft legally in
such places.
Sec. 13-6.1. Same—Swimming or diving—generally. [Ord. No. 816]
No person shall dive from, or swim in the waters near or adjacent to,
any dock, wharf, pier, launching ramp or similar landing strip or property
owned, controlled or operated by the City abutting Lake Macatawa unless
such areas are expressly designated for diving or swimming. This section
shall not prohibit maintenance or repair work on any dock, wharf, pier,
launching ramp or similar landing strip authorized by the City Manager or
his designated representative.
Sec. 13-1 CHARTER Sec. 13-6.2
C:305
Sec. 13-6.2. Same—Same—Signs to be posted in prohibited areas.
[Ord. No. 816]
The City Manager, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized
to construct, place or erect signs or other notices prohibiting diving and
swimming in those areas designated in Section 13-6.1 hereof.
Sec. 13-6.3. Kollen Park boat launch ramp. [Ord. No. 1533,
5-13-2009]
(a) Definitions. The following words as used in this section shall be defined
as provided herein. All other words and phrases shall be defined as they
are in the ordinary and customary usage.
(1) PERMIT — The daily or seasonal sticker or decal issued by the City
of Holland evidencing payment of required fees for the use of the
Kollen Park boat launch facility from the pay station located at
Kollen Park.
(2) MOTOR VEHICLES — Any and all kinds or types of motor-driven or
motor-propelled automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters,
mopeds, and any kind or type of off-road or all-terrain vehicle.
(3) LITTER — Any offal or refuse, including, but not limited to paper,
cans, bottles, and animal feces.
(4) PETS — Dogs, cats, horses, or other domesticated animal or any
other animal under the custody or control of a person.
(5) WATERCRAFT — Any and all kinds or types of flotation vessels
designated for use on the water whether or not motorized,
including, but not limited to, boats, canoes, kayaks, jet skis, skidoos,
pedal craft, pontoon boats, inflatable craft, tubes, or windpropelled
surf boards.
(6) KOLLEN PARK BOAT LAUNCH RAMP — The launch owned and
operated by the City for purposes of launching and recovering
watercraft at Kollen Park.
(7) POWER LAUNCHING/RECOVERY — Watercraft driven onto or off
of trailers by the watercraft's propulsion system. This means that
launched watercraft must be floated and the trailer then pulled out
from beneath; and that recovered vessels must be floated onto or
pulled onto the trailer by a winch or other mechanism.
(b) Required permit. No person shall use the Kollen Park boat launch ramp
to launch any watercraft into or retrieve any watercraft from the waters
of Lake Macatawa without first securing a permit ("permit") and paying
the appropriate fee in an amount established by resolution of the
Holland City Council.
Sec. 13-6.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 13-6.3
C:306
(c) Posting of permit. The permit shall be visibly posted on the windshield
or dashboard of the motor vehicle used to trailer or transport the
watercraft to the Kollen Park boat launch ramp.
(d) Prohibited conduct. No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in any
of the following conduct at the Kollen Park boat launch ramp:
(1) Occupy or use any portion of the Kollen Park boat launch ramp area
for purposes of overnight camping.
(2) Utilize the Kollen Park boat launch ramp for any swimming or
diving activities.
(3) Possess any type of fireworks or explosives within any portion of
the Kollen Park boat launch ramp facility area.
(4) Allow a pet to run loose at any time within the Kollen Park boat
launch ramp area. For purpose of this section, "allow a pet to run
loose" shall mean that the pet is neither on a leash held by, nor
otherwise under the immediate control, of the person in custody of
the pet.
(5) Damage, destroy, deface, or remove any tree, shrub, planting,
fence, sign, marker, or other equipment or structure, including the
pay station, within the Kollen Park boat launch ramp area.
(6) Light or maintain a fire within the Kollen Park boat launch ramp
area.
(7) Deposit or cause any litter to remain in the Kollen Park boat launch
ramp area, including but not limited to any fecal material
generated by the pets or animals under the control of any person.
(8) Fail to observe any of the requirements of the permit or fail to abide
by the rules and regulations for the use of the Kollen Park boat
launch ramp area.
(9) Leave unattended any launched or moored watercraft at any time.
(10) Engage in the practice of power launching or power recovery of
any watercraft.
(11) The commercial use of the Kollen Park boat launch ramp area,
including but not limited to the launching of commercial
watercraft, dredge cranes or pile drivers by a marine contractor,
and the maintenance of watercraft by a marina or other similar
activities.
(e) Permit term. A permit may be terminated or revoked for violating any
City ordinance provision; for violating any of the posted rules for use of
the Kollen Park boat launch ramp; for damage to the ramp facility; or
for any criminal act in connection with the use of that facility for a
watercraft launch or retrieval at the Kollen Park facility. The City
Sec. 13-6.3 CHARTER Sec. 13-6.3
C:307
Manager may make such additional rules and regulations regarding the
use of the Kollen Park boat launch ramp consistent with this section, the
City Charter, the Ordinance Code, and the laws of the State of Michigan
as may be necessary to promote and protect the health, safety, and
welfare at the Kollen Park boat launch ramp.
(f) General penalties/civil infraction. Any person who violates or
participates with another in a violation of any provision of this section is
responsible for a Class I municipal civil infraction and subject to the
provisions of Section 2-118 as a Class I civil infraction, including any
costs which may be imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction. Each
separate act in violation of this section (i.e., launching and retrieving
are separate acts) shall be separate offenses. The service of citations or
municipal civil infractions under this section may be served by personal
delivery, by first class mail, or by affixing the citation to the vehicle,
watercraft, or trailer in violation of this section. The City may also seek
from a court of competent jurisdiction other remedies to prevent future
violations and such other remedies as provided by Section 1-10.2 of the
Ordinance Code.
In addition to the sanctions provided in this section for the violation
of its provisions, any person who is determined to be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction because of any damage that he or she has
caused to the Kollen Park boat launch facility area shall reimburse
the damage for which the person is responsible, and if that person
is responsible for an act of vandalism (including but not limited to
graffiti), that person shall reimburse the City for up to three times the
amount of damages, as determined by the court.
Sec. 13-6.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 13-6.3
C:308
ARTICLE II
Boats Generally
Sec. 13-7. Definition. [Code 1955, § 6-2.1]
The word "boat" shall be deemed to mean and include every kind of craft,
vessel, barge, raft, float or scow, whether power driven, sail, or otherwise
propelled, and hydroplanes when upon the water.
Sec. 13-8. Rules and regulations generally. [Code 1955, § 6-2.2]
No person shall handle or moor any boat in such fashion as to interfere with
other boats or endanger them. The Pilot Rules as prescribed by the United
States Department of Commerce shall be applicable as the general rules for
safe conduct.
Sec. 13-9. Speed regulations—generally. [Code 1955, § 6-2.8]
No person shall operate any boat at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent, having due regard for the conditions then existing.
Sec. 13-10. Same—Speed through anchorages. [Code 1955, § 6-2.6]
No boats shall proceed through anchorages at a speed in excess of four
miles per hour.
Sec. 13-11. Same—Speed of certain boats when passing other boats.
[Code 1955, § 6-2.3]
Boats more than 30 feet in length shall not pass within 60 feet of each other
at a speed of more than 15 miles per hour. When passing smaller boats, such
as rowboats, canoes and the like, all power driven boats shall slow down so
that small craft will not be endangered.
Sec. 13-12. Wake from power driven boats. [Code 1955, § 6-2.4]
No power driven boats may proceed so as to throw a wake of more than one
foot in height, when within 100 feet of a rowboat, canoe or small sailboat.
Sec. 13-13. Report of damage by or to boats. [Code 1955, § 6-2.5]
Any person operating a boat which causes damage to any other boat or to
any dock or other property shall report such damage forthwith to the Chief
of Police.
Sec. 13-14. Commercial boats—requirements generally. [Code 1955,
§ 6-2.10]
No person shall offer for hire any boat unless such boat has been inspected
by the sheriff of the county, as required by state law, and meets the safety
standards established thereby.
Sec. 13-7 CHARTER Sec. 13-15
C:309
Sec. 13-15. Same—Carrying passengers for hire. [Code 1955,
§ 6-2.11]
No person shall carry any passenger for hire in a boat which is not subject
to federal inspection unless such boat is inspected by the Chief of Police
who shall determine whether or not it complies with federal standards of
safety.
Sec. 13-16. Occupying boat in harbor for residence purposes. [Code
1955, § 6-2.12]
No person shall use or occupy any boat for residence purposes anywhere
within the harbor for a period exceeding 48 hours without permission of the
Chief of Police.
Sec. 13-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 13-16
C:310
ARTICLE III
Special Local Watercraft Controls
Sec. 13-17. Definitions. [Ord. No. 677; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 1710]
All words and phrases used in this article shall be construed and have the
same meanings as those words and phrases defined in MCLA § 324.80101
et seq., Marine Safety, as amended.
Sec. 13-18. Slow—no-wake speed—Lake Macatawa, "The Narrows."
[Ord. No. 677; Ord. No. 1289, 1-3-2001; 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1670;
6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1692]
Sec. 13-19. Same—Lake Macatawa, Kollen Park. [Ord. No. 677; Ord.
No. 849; 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1670; 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1692]
On the waters of Lake Macatawa, on that portion of the lake located within
the City of Holland and being east of a line beginning where Thomas Street
as extended meets the water's edge and thence north to the City's northern
boundary and west of a line beginning where Washington Boulevard as
extended intersects the water's edge and thence north to the City's
northern boundary, City of Holland, County of Ottawa, State of Michigan, it
is unlawful for:
(a) On the waters of Lake Macatawa, known as "The Narrows," on that
portion bound to the west by longitudinal line 86° 10' 0.76" W
(-86.16688) and to the east by longitudinal line 86° 9' 16.110" W,
(-86.15447) within the City of Holland, County of Ottawa, State of
Michigan, it is unlawful for:
(1) The operator of a vessel 26 feet or more in length to exceed a slow
no-wake speed.
(2) The operator of a vessel less than 26 feet in length to exceed a slow
no-wake speed when within 200 feet of any shore, dock, or pier
head, and within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of
Holland.
(b) The longitudinal line 86° 10' 0.76" W, (-86.16688) is approximated by
extending Old Orchard Road (western City boundary) north to the
northern City boundary. The longitudinal line 86° 9' 16.110" W,
(-86.15447) can be approximated by extending a line south from the
navigational aid, Point Superior Light 7, to the southern shore of Lake
Macatawa.
(c) The boundaries of the area described above shall be marked with signs
and/or with buoys and maintained by the City. All buoys must be placed
as provided in a permit issued by the Department of Natural Resources
and be in conformance with the State Uniform Waterway Marking
system. Buoys shall not be placed in a commercial shipping channel.
Sec. 13-17 CHARTER Sec. 13-19
C:311
Sec. 13-19.1. Slow—no-wake speed—Lake Macatawa. [Ord. No.
1412, 5-4-2005; Ord. No. 1424, 9-21-2005; 6-1-2016 by Ord. No.
1670]
On the waters of Lake Macatawa, on that portion of the lake located within
the City of Holland and being east of a line beginning where Thomas
Avenue, as extended, intersects the water's edge and thence north to the
City's northern boundary and west of a line beginning where Cleveland
Avenue, as extended, intersects the water's edge, and thence northwesterly
to the City's northern boundary, City of Holland, County of Ottawa, State of
Michigan, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel, 26 feet or greater in
length, to exceed a slow — no-wake speed.
The boundaries of the area described immediately above shall be marked
with signs and with buoys. All buoys must be placed as provided in a permit
issued by the Department of Natural Resources and be in conformance with
the State Uniform Waterway Marking System.
Sec. 13-20. Same—Macatawa River. [Ord. No. 677]
On the waters of the Macatawa River, City of Holland, County of Ottawa,
from a line where Fourth Street as extended west intersects the water's
edge and thence northeasterly to the nearest north shore, upstream to
a point 1,500 feet upstream from the North River Avenue bridge, it is
unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow — no-wake speed.
Sec. 13-21. Same—Lake Macatawa. [Ord. No. 1028, 11-6-1991]
Within the area hereafter described, on the waters of Lake Macatawa within
the City of Holland, Ottawa County, it is unlawful for the operator of a
vessel to exceed a slow — no-wake speed. Commencing at a point where
Thomas Avenue meets the water's edge, due north to the south side of
the shipping channel, then northeast along the south side of the shipping
channel to a point of intersection with Cleveland Avenue extended, due
south along Cleveland Avenue extended to the shore. The boundary of the
area to be marked with buoys placed pursuant to permit issued by the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
(a) The operator of a vessel less than 26 feet in length to exceed a slow —
no-wake speed when within 200 feet of any shore, dock or pierhead;
and
(b) The operator of a vessel 26 feet or more in length to exceed a slow —
no-wake speed when within 600 feet of any shore, dock or pierhead.
Sec. 13-19 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 13-21
C:312
Chapter 14
HOUSING
Sec. 13-21 CHARTER Sec. 13-21
C:313

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 14-1. Tax exemption established by certain state law not
applicable to housing projects within City. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-200254]
In accordance with Subsection (5) of Section 15a of Act No. 346 of the
Public Acts of 1966, as amended, and by Act No. 334 of the Public Acts
of 1968, as amended by Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of 1969, the tax
exemption established in Subsection (1) of Section 15a of Act No. 346 of
the Public Acts of 1966, as amended, shall not apply to all or any class of
housing projects within the boundaries of the City to which such Subsection
(1) applies.55
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended and restated Ch. 14 in its entirety. Former Ch.
14 was adopted by Ord. No. 555, amended by Ord. No. 574; Ord. No. 862; Ord. No. 875;
Ord. No. 878; Ord. No. 880; Ord. No. 906, adopted 7-16-1986; Ord. No. 919, adopted
3-4-1987; Ord. No. 922, adopted 4-1-1987; Ord. Nos. 961, 962 and 963, adopted
9-21-1988; Ord. No. 1021, adopted 7-10-1991; Ord. Nos. 1022 and 1023, adopted
7-10-1991; Ord. No. 1051, adopted 5-6-1992; Ord. No. 1069, adopted 10-7-1992; Ord. No.
1080, adopted 3-31-1993; Ord. No. 1124, adopted 9-24-1994; Ord. No. 1201, adopted
10-1-1997; and Ord. No. 1263, adopted 9-15-1999.
55.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a.
Sec. 14-1 CHARTER Sec. 14-1
C:315

ARTICLE II
Housing-Property Maintenance Code
DIVISION 1
Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 14-2. Short title; purpose; scope. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Sec. 14-3. Applicability of article to related ordinances and existing
buildings. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended 8-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 1589]
(a) Short title. This article shall be known as the "Minimum Properties
Standards Code of the City of Holland" for all structures and properties
and is herein referred to as "the Housing-Property Maintenance Code"
or "this article."
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in buildings and on the premises as hereinafter
provided by:
(1) Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from
fire; for space, use and location; for safe and sanitary maintenance;
and for cooking equipment in all structures now in existence;
(2) Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
structures; and
(3) Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
(c) Scope generally. The provisions of this article shall apply to all
structures and premises which are now, or may become in the future,
substandard with respect to structure, premises, protection against fire
hazard, equipment or maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and
air, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions, overcrowding or
welfare of their occupants. The existence of such conditions, factors or
characteristics adversely affects public safety, health and welfare and
leads to the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight.
Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the
establishment and enforcement of these minimum standards.
(d) Applicability to travel trailers and mobile homes. All moveable units
used for human occupancy, and the areas, grounds or parcels on which
they are located, insofar as they are applicable thereto shall comply
with the requirements of this article.
(a) Generally. Every portion of a building or premises used or intended to
be used shall comply with the provisions of this article, irrespective of
when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired,
except as hereinafter provided.
Sec. 14-2 CHARTER Sec. 14-3
C:317
Sec. 14-4. Enforcement authority. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002;
amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589]
(b) Construction Codes. Any alterations to buildings, or changes of use
therein, which may be caused, directly or indirectly, by the enforcement
of this article shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of
the Construction Codes of the City.
(c) Zoning Law. Nothing in this article shall permit the establishment or
conversion of a multifamily dwelling in any zone district except where
permitted by the Zoning Law, or the continuation of such
nonconforming use in any zone except as provided therein.
(d) Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a provision of this
code conflicts with the provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or Code of the City of Holland, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of
safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case where a
provision of this code conflicts with a provision of any other ordinance
or code of the City of Holland and the other ordinance or code
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the
safety and health of the people, the provisions of this code shall prevail.
In any case where a provision of this code conflicts with the provision of
any other ordinance or code of the City of Holland and the provisions of
this code and the provisions of the other ordinance or code establish
comparable standards for the safety and health of the people, the
enforcing officer shall allow compliance with either code or ordinance.
(e) Existing buildings. This article establishes minimum requirements for
the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings and structures and
does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or
facilities, except as provided in this section.
(f) Existing remedies. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the City or its officers or agencies relating
to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
(g) Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are required or caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement
of this article shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner
and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
(a) Enforcing officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services to enforce the
provisions of this article as herein provided. The term "enforcing
officer" shall mean the Director of the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services or his duly authorized representative.
Sec. 14-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4
C:318
(b) Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises and the issuing of
orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this article shall
be the exclusive responsibility of the enforcing officer. Wherever, in the
opinion of the enforcing officer, it is necessary or desirable to have
inspections of any condition by any other department, he or she shall
arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or
occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous
inspectors or to multiple or conflicting orders, to the extent reasonably
practicable under the circumstances. No order for correction of any
violation under this article shall be issued without the approval of the
enforcing officer.
(c) Administrative liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by the
state statute, local law or ordinance, an officer, agent or employee of
the City charged with the enforcement of this article shall not render
himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this article. A person who institutes
or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this article
shall not be liable for damages hereunder, as long as the person who
institutes or assists in the prosecution has reasonable cause to believe
that the party accused or prosecuted was guilty of any unlawful act or
omission. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the
jurisdiction, as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this article, shall be defended by
the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final determination
of the proceedings.
(d) Inspections. The enforcing officer may make or cause to be made
inspections to determine the conditions of all structures and premises
in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under
the provisions of this article.
(e) Right of entry. When an inspection shall be made, the enforcing officer
may request permission to enter the premises at any reasonable time
for the purpose of performing his or her duties under this article.
Permission to access the premises may be granted by the owner of the
premises, his or her agent, and a tenant occupying the premises or any
other occupant of the premises. If there is an emergency, then the
enforcing officer shall have the right to enter at any time.
(f) Warrants for nonemergency situations. In a nonemergency situation
where the owner, his or her agent, a tenant or other occupant of the
premises demands a warrant for the inspection of the premises, the
enforcing officer shall obtain a warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction. The enforcing officer shall prepare the warrant, stating the
address of the structure to be inspected, the nature of the inspection as
defined in this article or other applicable acts, and the reason(s) for the
inspection. It shall be appropriate and sufficient to set forth the basis
for inspection (e.g. complaint, compliance, etc.) established in this
article and other applicable acts or in rules or regulations. The warrant
Sec. 14-4 CHARTER Sec. 14-4
C:319
Sec. 14-4.1. Condemnation of dangerous or unsafe structures. [Ord.
No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589;
2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1695; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1711]
shall also state that it is issued pursuant to this subsection, and that it
is for the purposes set forth in this article and other acts which require
that inspections be conducted. If the court finds that the warrant is in
proper form and in accord with this subsection, then it shall issue the
warrant forthwith. In the event of an emergency, no warrant shall be
required.
(g) Access by owner. Every tenant or other occupant of a property in the
City shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee,
access to any part of the premises at reasonable times for the purpose
of making such inspections, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are
necessary to comply with the provisions of this article.
(h) Rules and regulations. The Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services shall adopt rules to govern the procedures
under this division and interpretation thereof. The rules shall set forth
the procedures for inspections, registration of rental units, issuance of
rental certificates of compliance and temporary rental certificates of
compliance, proceedings affecting the status of a certificate and
appeals. Copies of such rules shall be placed on file in the office of the
City Clerk for inspection by the public.
(a) Generally. Structures shall be condemned as dangerous structures or
unsafe for human occupancy as herein provided.
(b) Dangerous structures. If all or part of any building or structure
(including, among others, a fence, billboard or sign) or the equipment
for the operation thereof (including, among others, the heating plant,
plumbing, electric wiring, moving stairways, elevators and fireextinguishing
apparatus) shall be found, in the opinion of the enforcing
officer, to be in an unsafe condition or dangerous to life, limb or
property, the enforcing officer shall proceed to have the same
condemned pursuant to the applicable provisions of codes of the City or
the state pertaining to unsafe structures including but not limited to the
procedures under Chapter 19 for dangerous structures.
(c) Structures unfit for human occupancy. Whenever the enforcing officer
finds that any structure constitutes a hazard to the safety, health or
welfare of the occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance;
or is in disrepair, unsanitary or vermin-infested; or lacks the sanitary
facilities or equipment, or lacks proper means of disposal of refuse as
defined in Section 27-1 of the Holland City Code; or otherwise fails to
comply with the minimum provisions of this article, but has not yet
reached such state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as a
dangerous structure as hereinbefore provided, he may declare such
structure as unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated.
Sec. 14-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.1
C:320
(d) Notice - generally. Notice of the declaration of any building under this
article as unfit for human occupancy and the order to vacate it shall be
served as provided in this article or such other codes or ordinances of
the municipality pertaining to unsafe buildings.
(e) Same - posting. Any structure declared as unfit for human occupancy
shall be posted with a placard by the Building Official. The placard shall
include the following:
(1) The name of the City;
(2) The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction;
(3) The chapter and section of the Code under which it is issued;
(4) An order that the structure, when vacated, must remain vacant
until the provisions of the order are complied with and the order to
vacate is withdrawn;
(5) The date that the placard is posted; and
(6) A statement of the penalty for defacing or removing the placard.
(f) Same - form. Whenever the enforcing officer has declared a structure as
unfit for human habitation, he shall give notice to the owner of such
declaration and placarding of the structure as unfit for human
occupancy. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(4) State the time to correct the conditions; and
(5) State the time the occupants must vacate the structure.
(g) Same - service. Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of
record, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally, or if he
is not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a
person of suitable age and discretion, who shall be informed of the
contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by certified mail to his
last known address, or, if the letter with the copy is returned showing it
has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place or on or about the structure affected by the notice.
(h) Same - unauthorized removal of placard or notice. A person shall not
deface or remove the placard from any structure that has been declared
or placarded as unfit for human habitation, except by authority in
writing from the enforcing officer. A violation of this subsection shall be
a misdemeanor subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the
Holland City Code and shall be deemed a nuisance per se.
Sec. 14-4.1 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.1
C:321
Sec. 14-4.2. Violations. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended
8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589]
(i) Vacating of placarded building. Any structure that has been declared
and placarded as unfit for human occupancy by the enforcing officer
shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by the enforcing
officer, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to let any
person continue to occupy or reside in structure, and a person shall not
occupy any structure that has been declared or placarded by the
enforcing officer as unfit for human occupancy after the date set forth
in the placard. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor
subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the Holland City Code
and shall be deemed a nuisance per se.
(j) Written approval for occupancy of building. A structure that has been
declared or placarded as unfit for human occupancy shall not again be
used for human occupancy until written approval is secured from the
enforcing officer. The enforcing officer shall remove such placard
whenever the defects upon which the declaration and placarding action
were based have been eliminated.
(k) Furnishing copies of notice to other City departments or officials. The
enforcing officer may furnish a copy of each notice to vacate a building
to the Department of Public Safety and any other designated official of
the City concerned therewith.
(a) Notice – Service. Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of
record, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally, or if he
is not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a
person of suitable age and discretion, who shall be informed of the
contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by mail to his last known
address, or, if the letter with the copy is returned showing it has not
been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place
or on or about the structure affected by the notice.
(b) Same – Contents. Whenever the enforcing officer determines that there
has been or is a violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been or is a violation, of any provision of this
article, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the
person responsible therefor. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required;
and
(4) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
Sec. 14-4.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.2
C:322
Sec. 14-4.3. Appeals and administrative variances. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002; amended Ord. No. 1480, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 1544,
4-14-2010; Ord. No. 1579, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589;
6-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1651]
(c) Same – Noncompliance; legal action or proceeding. In case any notice
of violation is not complied with within the time set forth in the notice,
the enforcing officer may issue a citation for a municipal civil infraction
or request the City Attorney to institute an appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity against the person responsible for the
violation, ordering him:
(1) To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
(2) To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such
building;
(3) To require the removal or work in violation;
(4) To prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure or part
thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or
not in compliance with, the provisions of this article, or in violation
of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or
certificate was issued;
(5) To comply with the penalty provisions of this article; or
(6) To pay the attorney fees and costs incurred by the City with respect
to the action or proceeding at law or in equity and the
administrative expense incurred by the City in efforts to enforce
the notice of violation.
(d) Change in ownership; sale or transfer of premises. A person shall not
sell or transfer premises which are subject to an outstanding housing
order unless a copy of the order issued by the enforcing officer is
provided to the person acquiring the premises at the time of sale or
transfer of the premises.
(e) Seller's notice to City upon sale or transfer of premises. The person
selling or transferring the premises shall notify the City of same in
writing within 10 days of transferring ownership of the premises
subject to the outstanding housing order. The notice to the City shall
include the name, address and telephone number of the person
acquiring the premises and the effective date of the transfer of
ownership. The City shall immediately issue a new housing order to the
person acquiring the premises. The person selling or transferring the
premises who has failed to comply with an outstanding housing order
shall not be relieved of the responsibility of having violated any
provision of this article by selling or transferring the premises.
Sec. 14-4.2 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.3
C:323
(a) Housing Board of Appeals established. The City establishes a Housing
Board of Appeals pursuant to this section. The Housing Board of
Appeals shall have six members and two alternates. The members of the
Housing Board of Appeals shall be the same as the members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals. The alternate members of the Housing Board
of Appeals shall be the same as the alternate members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, the
composition of members and their terms shall at all times be as
required by MCLA § 125.541c.
(b) Board duties. The Housing Board of Appeals shall hear appeals from
decisions of the enforcing officer and shall act upon questions relating
to the administration, enforcement and interpretation of this article,
including variances from the requirements of this article. The Housing
Board of Appeals shall conduct its hearings in accordance with this
section and such other sections of this Code.
(c) Appeal of enforcing officer order; public hearing. Any aggrieved party,
including an occupant, may appeal an order issued by the enforcing
officer to the Housing Board of Appeals. The Housing Board of Appeals
shall hold a public hearing to review the decision of the enforcing
officer and shall allow the enforcing officer and the aggrieved party and
any other person to be heard and present evidence.
(d) Staying of an order. An appeal shall stay an order denying or
suspending a rental certificate of compliance, unless such suspension is
for a major violation. In such cases, an appeal shall not stay the
suspension of the rental certificate of compliance, unless the Director of
the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services orders that
it be stayed.
(e) Administrative variances.
(1) Ceiling height requirements. Upon a written request of a property
owner, the enforcing officer may grant an administrative variance
from the existing ceiling height requirements imposed under this
Code if the enforcing officer determines that all of the following
conditions are met:
a. An inspection of the property reveals that it fully complies with
this Code (except as to ceiling height) including light and
ventilation requirements and floor area to height ratio
requirements;
b. Any ceiling light fixtures in the rooms covered by the variance
request are recessed;
c. The applicant does not request a variance greater than three
inches from the ceiling height requirements under this Code;
and
Sec. 14-4.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.3
C:324
d. The applicant does not request a variance to allow a ceiling
height of less than six feet eight inches in any room.
(2) Guardrail height requirements. Upon a written request of a
property owner, the enforcing officer may grant an administrative
variance from the existing guardrail height requirements imposed
under this Code if the enforcing officer determines that all of the
following conditions are met:
a. An inspection of the property reveals that it fully complies with
this Code (except as to guardrail height);
b. The surface area below and/or immediately adjacent to the
balcony, deck, landing, porch, stair or walking surface on
which is located the guardrail for which the variance is sought
is not hard-surfaced; that is, it shall not be a surface created
out of asphalt, concrete, gravel, wood, or other hard-surface
material;
c. The guardrail for which the variance is sought is at least 24
inches in height or more;
d. The general pattern of traffic on the balcony, deck, landing,
porch, stair or walking surface is not right along the portion of
the balcony, deck, landing, porch, stair or walking surface
where the guardrail for which the variance is sought is located;
e. The surface area of the balcony, deck, landing, porch, stair or
walking surface on which is located the guardrail for which the
variance is sought is not more than six feet directly above the
floor, grade, ground or surface area below, measured
perpendicularly; and
f. Spindle spacing and handrail height comply with this Code.
(3) Room width requirements. Upon a written request of a property
owner, the enforcing officer may grant an administrative variance
from the existing room width requirements imposed under this
Code if the enforcing officer determines that all of the following
conditions are met:
a. The room is an existing room, not a proposed room;
b. An inspection of the property reveals that it fully complies with
this Code (except as to room width) including, but not limited
to, light and ventilation requirements and ceiling height, and
the room in question has a minimum of 70 square feet of
qualifying floor area;
c. The room has a window which is either an approved egress
window, or is as large as any other bedroom windows in the
structure;
Sec. 14-4.3 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.3
C:325
d. The room cannot be made wider without substantial
reconstruction, including, but not limited to: relocation of
exterior or bearing walls, relocation of a stairway, or relocation
of plumbing or mechanical equipment. Substantial
construction does not include the removal of a closet or the
relocation of a nonbearing partition wall;
e. The room is equipped with a hard-wired, interconnected smoke
detector inside the room in addition to other smoke detectors
required by this Code;
f. The room does not require, and has not been granted, an
administrative ceiling height variance;
g. The door and the required window in the room are not, and
shall not be, obstructed by furniture or other materials; and
h. The room, at any point in the room, is not less than six feet nine
inches in width.
(4) Accommodations for persons with disabilities. Upon a written
request of an eligible person (as defined in Section 39-17.4), the
enforcing officer may grant an administrative variance from
requirements imposed under this Chapter 14 if the enforcing
officer determines that all of the following conditions are met:
a. The housing subject to the request for reasonable
accommodation will be used by individuals with disabilities
protected under fair housing laws;
b. The requested accommodation is reasonable and necessary to
make housing available to an individual with disabilities as
required under the fair housing laws;
c. The requested accommodation will not impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the City;
d. The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of the City's housing program; and
e. There are no alternative accommodations which may provide
an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant.
(f) Appeals. Any owner or person who is aggrieved by the ruling or
decision of the enforcing officer in any matter relative to an
administrative variance or the interpretation or enforcement of any of
the provisions of the Housing-Property Maintenance Code may appeal
the decision or interpretation to the Housing Board of Appeals.
(g) Filing. Such appeal must be filed with the City Clerk, in writing, within
30 days of the date of the issuance of the decision or interpretation. An
appeal shall not be received if the City has commenced prosecution
proceedings pursuant to Section 14-4.2(c).
Sec. 14-4.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.3
C:326
Sec. 14-4.4. Severability; saving clause. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
(h) Decision; Housing Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be decided by the
following procedure:
(1) The Housing Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing to hear
evidence of violations from the enforcing officer and the appellant.
The appellant shall attend in person or may be represented by legal
counsel.
(2) The Housing Board of Appeals shall render its decision not more
than 60 days after the conclusion of the hearing. The failure to
decide an appeal within 60 days shall be deemed a denial. The
decision of the Housing Board of Appeals shall include findings of
fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence presented by
the enforcing officer and appellant. Witnesses and other
documentary evidence shall be permitted in the proceedings before
Housing Board of Appeals.
(3) The Housing Board of Appeals shall have the authority and
jurisdiction to affirm, amend or reverse the decision or
interpretation of the enforcing officer. The Housing Board of
Appeals shall also have the authority and jurisdiction to grant a
variance from this article for any requirement if compliance with
the requirement imposes undue burden upon the applicant due to
unforeseen uses or circumstances or an alternate proposal will
satisfy the spirit of the requirements of this chapter. The Housing
Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to grant a variance
from any of the requirements of this article unless it determines
that the health, welfare, and safety of occupants of the affected
property will not be compromised. The Housing Board of Appeals
may not grant a variance from or waive any fees or late charges.
(a) Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
article, which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable.
(b) Saving clause. This article shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the City existing prior to March 13,
1985, and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be
punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those
ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was
committed.
Sec. 14-4.3 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.4
C:327

DIVISION 2
Definitions
Sec. 14-4.5. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Sec. 14-4.6. Words and phrases defined. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002;
amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733]
For the purposes of this article, and in accordance with Section 14-4.5, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
APPROVED — As applied to a material, device or method of construction,
approved by the Code Official under the provisions of this article, or
approved by other authority designated by law to give approval in the
matter in question.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade.
BATHING ROOM — A room with a bathtub or shower and with a latching
door so as to give privacy to a person in the room.
BATHROOM — A room with a bathtub or shower, toilet, sink and with a
latching door so as to give privacy to a person in the room.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Director of the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services, or his duly authorized representative.
CENTRAL HEATING — The heating system permanently installed and
adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments from a source outside of these
rooms.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy.
CONDEMNATION — The act of judicially condemning.
CONSTRUCTION CODES — The Michigan Building Code, Michigan
Residential Code, Michigan Electrical Code, Michigan Mechanical Code,
(a) Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms listed in this
division shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings
indicated.
(b) Tense; gender; number. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter,
and the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
(c) Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
article and are defined in the Michigan Construction Codes, they shall
have the same meanings ascribed to them in those codes.
(d) Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined, through the methods
authorized by this section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings, such as the context may imply.
Sec. 14-4.5 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.6
C:329
and Michigan Plumbing Code are enforced by the City of Holland as
resolved in Chapters 6 and 9 for the regulation of construction, alteration,
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES — The
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services of the City, formerly
known as the "Department of Environmental Health."
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLINGS —
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Director of the Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services of the City, or his duly authorized
representative.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a single-family
unit.
(a)
DORMITORY — A space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same
family group, in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms.
(b)
HOTEL — Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended
or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied, or which are occupied, for sleeping purposes by guests.
(c)
(d) MOTEL — A hotel as defined in this section.
MULTIFAMILY APARTMENT HOUSE — A building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units.
(e)
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit
with not more than five lodgers or boarders.
(f)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units
with not more than five lodgers or boarders per family.
(g)
ROOMING HOUSE — Any one- or two-family residential building, or
any part thereof, containing one or more rooming units, in which space
is let by the owner or operator to more than five persons who are not
members of a family. (See "Dwellings, boardinghouse.")
(h)
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
(i)
Sec. 14-4.6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.6
C:330
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating or trapping; or by any other approved pest-elimination methods.
FAMILY — As used in this article shall have the same meaning as set forth
in Section 39-2.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
space and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or
premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
INVENTORY CHECKLIST — Such written itemization of the condition of a
dwelling unit as required by the Michigan Security Deposit Act.56
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit possession or occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by a person,
who shall be the legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license.
LOCAL AGENT — The owner or designated representative of the owner who
lives within 35 miles from the property and is available 24 hours a day,
seven days a week to respond to and mitigate any complaints regarding a
short-term rental.
MAINTENANCE — Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in
the condition of grounds, structures and equipment such that the condition
does not fall below the standards established by this article and other
applicable statutes, codes and ordinances.
MAJOR VIOLATION — Any violation of the provisions of this article or
any code adopted by the City which poses a hazard or risk to the health
and safety of the occupants of a dwelling unit, including any violation that
substantially affects the habitability of the dwelling unit.
MINOR VIOLATION — Any violation of this article that is not deemed a
major violation.
OCCUPANT — Any person having the right of possession or use of any
premises, building or structure.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door that is available for
unobstructed ventilation and that opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER/OWNERSHIP — Any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, trust or corporation having a legal or equitable
56.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 544.601 et seq.
Sec. 14-4.6 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.6
C:331
interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state,
county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court. For the purposes of
this article, ownership shall be presumed to be by the designated person
or entity listed on the tax rolls maintained by the City for a structure or
building, unless the enforcing officer is otherwise notified in writing. For a
property owned by a partnership, limited liability company or corporation,
each partner, member, trustee or shareholder shall be deemed to have an
ownership interest for purposes of the sections regulating short-term rental
units.
PERSON — A person or other entity capable of owning a dwelling pursuant
to the laws of the state.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances within the scope of the Michigan Plumbing Code.
PLUMBING FIXTURE — A receptacle or device that is either permanently
or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises
and demands a supply of water therefrom, or discharges used water, liquidborne
waste materials or sewage, either directly or indirectly, to the
drainage system of the premises, or that requires both a water supply
connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes but is not limited to the following:
The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law; or
(a)
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including,
but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and
unsafe fences or structures; or
(b)
(c) Any premises that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
(d) Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is
manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property; or
(e)
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or other facilities
required by this article have been removed, or from which utilities
have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective,
or where the required precautions against trespassers have not been
provided; or
(f)
Sec. 14-4.6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.6
C:332
RENOVATION — The act of making a building and its facilities conform to
present-day minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building in which sleeping accommodations
or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided,
except when classified as an institution under the Construction Code.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — The person who is responsible for correcting all
major or minor violation(s), or both, pursuant to the provisions of Section
14-4.25.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
RULES — The rules as adopted by the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services as approved by City Council resolution.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — A dwelling unit offered for rent in part or in its
entirety for less than 30 consecutive days per occupant.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including, without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy of use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings,
water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or
anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
Any premises that is unsanitary, or that is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
(g)
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay or contains faulty construction; is overcrowded; is open,
vacant or abandoned; is damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter; or is in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone
on or near the premises.
(h)
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A dwelling unit where owners reside and rent or
offer for rent one room up to 365 days per calendar year or the entire
dwelling unit for up to 60 days while all owners are away.
(a)
NONOWNER-OCCUPIED — A dwelling unit that is not an individual
owner's residence, and is rented or offered for rent in its entirety for
less than 30 consecutive days per occupant and is permitted by Chapter
39.
(b)
TULIP TIME — A dwelling unit that is offered for rent in part or in its
entirety for not more than 10 days during the designated Tulip Time
Festival in May.
(c)
Sec. 14-4.6 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.6
C:333
TOILET ROOM — A room with a toilet/water closet and with a latching door
so as to give privacy to a person in the room. A toilet room must either
contain within the room a sink supplied with hot and cold running water or
such a sink must be located in close proximity to the exterior of the room.
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.
WASHROOM — A room with a toilet, sink and with a latching door so as to
give privacy to a person in the room.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of street or rear or interior lot line.
(a) MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind-driven devices.
(b)
Sec. 14-4.6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.6
C:334
DIVISION 3
Environmental Requirements
Sec. 14-4.7. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
All properties covered by this article, whether or not occupied, shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition, so as not to
cause a blighting problem or to adversely affect the public health or safety.
Violations of this article causing a blighting problem or adversely affecting
the public health or safety shall be violations of one or more of the sections
of this division.
Sec. 14-4.8. Exterior premises. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended
8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733; 6-19-2019
by Ord. No. 1772]
(a) Sanitation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from the
accumulation of rubbish and garbage.
(b) Containers. Occupants shall store all garbage, vegetable wastes or
other organic materials that can rot and produce odors in leakproof,
approved containers in accordance with § 27-5 of this Code.
(c) Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so
as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon. "Stagnant water" is defined as any
accumulation that has not dispersed within seven days of the last
recorded rainfall. Water retention areas and/or reservoirs approved by
the Code Official are exceptions to this subsection.
(d) Pest control. All exterior property and premises shall be kept free of
circumstances that are harboring infestations of rodents or insects.
(e) Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair, so as to avoid a risk to public
safety.
(f) Fences and retaining walls. All fences and retaining walls shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair, so as to avoid an
imminent risk to public safety.
(g) Open fires. Open fires shall be prohibited, except as specifically
approved by the Fire Official.
(h) Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a workmanlike and
proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
(i) All short-term rentals shall provide two off-street parking spaces.
(j) Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. All swimming pools, hot tubs and
spas shall be maintained in good repair and be clean, safe and sanitary.
Sec. 14-4.7 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.8
C:335
Sec. 14-4.9. Exterior structure. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002;
amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733;
6-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1772]
(1) Sanitary condition. No swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall have an
accumulation of mold, algae, sedimentation or other condition that
would create a breeding ground for insects, or encourage habitat of
water fowl.
(2) Enclosures. Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas with a capacity to
hold more than 24 inches of water shall be completely surrounded
by a protective fence or other barrier to prevent accidental
drownings. Fences and barriers shall be maintained as originally
installed at the time of construction, or must meet the following
minimum safety standards: fences and barriers shall be at least 48
inches in height above the finished ground on the side of the
barrier away from the pool, hot tub or spa; gates and doors in the
fence or barrier shall be self-closing and self-latching; self-latching
device shall be at least 54 inches above the bottom of the gate or
installed on the pool side of the gate. No existing pool enclosure
shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its
effectiveness as a safety barrier unless immediately replaced with a
fence or barrier that complies with the requirements of this
subsection. If more than 25% of the total fence or barrier is
replaced, a building permit for a pool enclosure is required.
(3) Enclosure exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that
locks, or complies with ASTM F 1346, shall be exempt from the
preceding subsection. Pools with side walls at least 48 inches in
height shall not require a secondary fence or barrier around the
perimeter of the pool.
(a) Generally. The exterior of all structures shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary, so as not to pose a threat to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants and so as to protect the
occupants from the adverse effects of the environment.
(b) Street numbers. Each structure to which a street number has been
assigned shall have the number so displayed in a position easily
observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All assigned street
numbers shall be shown in accordance with § 32-23.
(c) Structural members. All supporting structural members shall be
maintained in a sound condition, free of deterioration and capable of
safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them.
(d) Exterior surfaces. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other
exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a reasonable state of
maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to
exclude rodents.
Sec. 14-4.8 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.9
C:336
(e) Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry
the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be
detrimental to public safety and welfare.
(f) Exterior walls. Every exterior surface, including but not limited to
walls, doors, door and window frames, window panes, cornices,
porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good
condition and shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or
timbers, broken or cracked glass and any other conditions which might
admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the
occupied spaces of the building. Exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay
by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking
and chipped paint shall be eliminated, and surfaces repainted.
(g) Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound and not have
defects that might admit rain. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts
shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
building. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance. Missing or damaged shingles shall be replaced with
shingles of similar style and color.
(h) Decorative features and accessories. All decorative features and
accessories shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in a safe condition.
(i) Chimneys. All chimneys and similar appurtenances shall be maintained
structurally safe, sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay
or rust by periodic application of weatherproofing materials.
(j) Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, fire escape, balcony and railings
and other appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed and
maintained to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated
loads.
(k) Handrails. All stairways consisting of five or more risers shall have a
handrail that measures 30 inches to 38 inches in height above the
nosing of the stair tread for the entire length of the stair. Handrails that
form part of a guardrail system shall be located 30 inches to 42 inches
in height. All new and replacement handrails shall be installed as
required by the Michigan Building Codes.
(l) Guardrails. Every porch, balcony, walking surface and open portion of a
stairway located 30 inches or more above the adjacent floor or grade
below must have a guardrail. Existing guardrails shall be at least 30
inches high with no opening that would allow the passage of a six-inch
sphere. All new and replacement guardrails shall be installed as
required by the Michigan Construction Codes.
Sec. 14-4.9 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.9
C:337
(m) Common areas. Common stairs, porches, fire escapes and railings
shared by three or more units shall be maintained free of hazardous
conditions such as snow, ice, mud and other debris.
(n) Window frames and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, and weathertight.
All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
(o) Openable windows. At least one window in each habitable room shall be
capable of being easily opened. All openable windows shall be provided
with window hardware capable of tightly securing the window.
(p) Insect screens. During that period of time from May 15 to October 15,
at least one openable window in each habitable room shall be supplied
with approved tight-fitting screens of not less than sixteen-mesh per
inch. Screen doors where provided, or if required to meet minimum
standards of ventilation, shall also be supplied with tight-fitting screens
of not less than sixteen-mesh per inch. Torn screens shall be removed.
(q) Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices
designed to provide security for the occupants and the property within.
(1) Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped
with a keyed or other locking mechanism designed to be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the
need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall be capable of
reasonably securing the door against unauthorized entry. Such
dead-bolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's
specifications and maintained in good working order. For the
purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an
acceptable dead-bolt lock.
(2) Windows. Openable windows located in whole or in part within six
feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that
provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping
unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window
sash locking device.
(3) Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units
from unauthorized entry.
(r) Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain
and surface drainage water into the structure.
(s) Basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be
supplied with shields, storm windows or other material affording
protection against the entry of rodents.
Sec. 14-4.9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.9
C:338
Sec. 14-4.10. Interior structure. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002;
amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733]
(t) Exterior structure of vacant premises. All exterior portions of a vacant
premises must be securely fastened or boarded so as not to allow the
entry of unauthorized persons or animals into the structure.
(u) Additional display of property address for short-term rentals. The
assigned property address of the short-term rental shall be prominently
displayed in the backyard, pool area and any other outdoor recreation
areas so that it can be easily identified in the event of an emergency.
Size and type of numbers shall meet the minimum requirements of
Section 32-23.
(v) Garage doors. Garage doors must be installed and maintained in
working order on all garages that were or are originally built and
designed to have a garage door. A garage door is required to provide
protection against the elements and to not allow the entry of
unauthorized persons or animals into the structure.
(a) Generally. The interior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
workmanlike manner, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition, so
as not to pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants
and to protect the occupants from the environment.
(b) Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any
evidence of deterioration that would render them incapable of carrying
the imposed loads. For the purposes of this section, a "structural
member" means any part of a building that provides the principal
strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety to the building including,
but not limited to, plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers, stairs,
subflooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window
frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing,
masonry and all other components essential to the strength, stability,
integrity, shape and safety of the building.
(c) Interior surfaces. Floors, walls (including windows and doors), ceilings
and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean and
sanitary condition. Excessively peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster,
decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be repaired.
(d) Bathrooms, etc. Every bathing room, bathroom, toilet room and
washroom surface shall be constructed and maintained to prevent the
retention of moisture and to avoid the penetration of water to lower
levels of the structure, and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in
a clean, sanitary condition. Every toilet shall be enclosed in a bathroom,
toilet room or washroom as those terms are defined in Section 14-4.6.
Sec. 14-4.9 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.10
C:339
(e) Dampness. In every building, basements and crawl spaces shall be
maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions
conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure.
(f) Sanitation. The interior of every structure and common area shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any
accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage.
(g) Pest control. The interior of all structures shall be kept free of
circumstances that may harbor an infestation of insects or rodents.
Infestations, when found, shall be promptly treated for the elimination
thereof by a treatment program approved by the enforcing officer.
Regular treatments shall continue until the infestation is eliminated. If
the treatment program proves ineffective within a reasonable period of
time, the enforcing officer may require the use of a more effective
treatment program. After the infestation is eliminated, proper
precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
(h) Handrails. All stairways consisting of five or more risers shall have a
handrail that measures 30 inches to 38 inches in height above the
nosing of the stair tread. Handrails that form part of a guardrail system
shall be located 30 inches to 42 inches in height. All new and
replacement handrails shall be installed as required by the Michigan
Building Codes.
(i) Guardrails. Every porch, balcony, walking surface and open portion of a
stairway located 30 inches or more above the surface below must have
a guardrail. Existing guardrails shall be at least 30 inches high with no
opening that would allow the passage of a six-inch sphere. All new and
replacement guardrails shall be installed as required by the Michigan
Construction Codes.
(j) Display of property address for short-term rentals. The assigned
property address of the short-term rental shall be prominently
displayed in the kitchen or other location in the main portion of the
house, so that it can be easily identified in the event of an emergency.
Size and type of numbers shall meet the minimum requirements of
Section 32-23.
(k) Fire extinguishers for short-term rentals. All short-term rental
properties shall provide a fire extinguisher that is visible, accessible,
properly maintained and not expired. The fire extinguisher shall be an
"all-purpose" extinguisher, with a minimum rating of 2A 10B.
Sec. 14-4.10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.10
C:340
DIVISION 4
Light, Ventilation and Space Requirements
Sec. 14-4.11. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Sec. 14-4.12. Light. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Sec. 14-4.13. Ventilation. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
(a) Scope. All properties covered by this article shall meet minimum
standards for the light, ventilation and space for the occupancy of a
structure.
(b) Evidence. Evidence of a violation of minimum standards for the light,
ventilation and space requirements of structures shall be a violation of
one or more of the sections of this division.
(a) Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every
habitable room shall be 8% of the floor area of such room, except when
artificial light may be provided in accordance with the provisions of the
Construction Code. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure
face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than
three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly
to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing
to the required minimum total window area for the room. For the
purposes of determining minimum lighting requirements, skylight
areas shall be considered equivalent to window areas.
(a) Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window,
which can be easily opened, or such other device as may be permitted
under the Construction Code, as will adequately ventilate the room. The
total openable window area in every room shall be equal to at least 4%
of the floor area.
(b) Bathrooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as
required by this article; except, that a window shall not be required in
bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved
mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or water closet compartment must
be exhausted to the exterior and may not be recirculated to any space,
including the space from which it is withdrawn.
(c) Cooking appliances. Cooking shall not be permitted in any sleeping
room or dormitory unit, and a cooking appliance shall not be permitted
to be present in a sleeping room or dormitory unit.
Sec. 14-4.11 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.13
C:341
Sec. 14-4.14. Dwelling units. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended
10-1-2014 by Ord. No. 1641]
(d) Mechanical ventilation. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in
lieu of the natural ventilation, such mechanical ventilation system shall
be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any structure or
portion thereof. When part of the air provided by a mechanical
ventilation system is recirculated, the portion or volume of air
recirculated shall not be recirculated to a different residential space or
occupancy of dissimilar use from which it is withdrawn.
(e) Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations. All clothes dryer vent ducts must
be constructed of a metallic duct material.
(a) Separation of units. Dwelling units shall be separate and apart from
each other and other adjoining spaces. Sleeping rooms shall not be
used as the only means of access to other sleeping rooms or habitable
spaces.
(b) Common access. A habitable space, bathroom or water closet
compartment, which is accessory to a dwelling unit, shall not open
directly into or be used in conjunction with a room used for public
purposes.
(c) Below grade rooms. Rooms partially or completely below grade shall
not be used as sleeping space, unless the following requirements are
met:
(1) Floors and walls are watertight, so as to prevent entry of moisture;
(2) Light and ventilation requirements are met in accordance with
Sections 14-4.12 and 14-4.13 of this Code;
(3) A window or exterior door has a minimum net clear opening of 5.7
square feet, the sill is no more than 44 inches above the floor and
does not require tools or keys to open;
(4) The window or exterior door is above grade or an approved window
well is provided.
(d) Occupancy.
(1) A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by more than one family.
(2) For any dwelling unit that was legally occupied by five or six
unrelated adults as a single housekeeping group as of September 1,
2014, the dwelling unit may continue to be occupied by five or six
unrelated adults as a single housekeeping group, but only if the
owner demonstrates in writing to the Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services on or before December 31, 2014, that
the unit was so occupied.
Sec. 14-4.13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.14
C:342
Sec. 14-4.15. Space requirements generally. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002; amended by Ord. No. 1544, 4-14-2010; 5-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 1691]
(3) Subsection (d)(2) shall not apply to a dwelling unit if the annual
basic housing permit for that dwelling unit is revoked or expires at
any time after September 1, 2014, and is not renewed for at least
six consecutive months. If an annual basic housing permit is
thereafter reinstated, renewed or a new annual basic housing
permit is thereafter issued, occupancy shall be limited as provided
in Subsection (d)(1).
(a) Prohibited use for sleeping purposes. It shall be prohibited to use for
sleeping purposes any kitchen, nonhabitable space or public space.
(b) Minimum area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor
area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant.
(c) Overcrowding. The maximum number of persons occupying a dwelling
or a dwelling unit shall be calculated using the following table:
Minimum Occupancy Area
(in square feet)
Space
1 to 2
Occupants
3 to 5
Occupants
6 or More
Occupants
Living room None required 120 150
Dining room None required 80 100
Kitchen 50 50 60
Bedrooms 50 per occupant, with minimum of 70 for one occupant
(d) Combined spaces. Combined living room/dining room/kitchen spaces
will be construed as meeting the requirements of the above table if the
total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space
is so located that it may practically function as a combination of the two
or three rooms.
(e) Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces created in existing
basements shall be permitted to have ceiling heights of not less than six
feet eight inches (2,030 cm). Obstructions may project to within six feet
four inches (1,930 cm) of the basement floor. Existing finished ceiling
heights in nonhabitable spaces in basements shall not be reduced.
Other habitable (spaces) rooms, hallways, corridors shall have a ceiling
height of not less than seven feet (2,134 cm) measured to the lowest
projection from the ceiling, except that in attics or top half stories the
ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet over not less than 1/3 of
the minimum area required by this Code when used for sleeping,
Sec. 14-4.14 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.15
C:343
studying, or similar activity. In calculating the floor area of attics or top
half stories, only those portions of the floor area of the room having a
clear ceiling height of five feet or more may be included.
(f) Minimum room widths. Every habitable space shall have a clear room
width of not less than seven feet; provided that kitchens shall require a
clear passageway of not less than three feet between counters,
appliances and/or walls.
Sec. 14-4.15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.15
C:344
DIVISION 5
Plumbing Requirements
Sec. 14-4.16. Fixtures and facilities. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
(a) Scope. This section covers the basic plumbing facilities and fixtures
requirements for properties covered by this division.
(b) Evidence of inadequate plumbing. Evidence of inadequate plumbing
facilities or fixtures shall be a violation of one or more of the
subsections of this section.
(c) Requirement for dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall include its
own plumbing facilities which are in proper operating condition, can be
used in privacy and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the
disposal of human waste, and which shall be supplied and maintained in
a sanitary, safe working condition.
(d) Water closet and lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its
walls a room separate from habitable spaces, which affords privacy and
a water closet supplied with cold running water. A lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in another room
in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which
such water closet is located. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and
cold running water.
(e) Bathtub and shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy and that is equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied
with hot and cold running water.
(f) Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from
the lavatory required under this article, and such sink shall be supplied
with hot and cold running water.
(g) Requirement for rooming houses. In every rooming house, at least one
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower properly connected to an
approved water sewer system and in good working condition shall be
supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house, wherever such
facilities are shared. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall
be supplied with hot and cold water at all times, in every rooming
house.
(h) Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged to
provide privacy.
(i) Accessibility in rooming houses, etc. Toilet rooms and bathrooms
serving rooming houses or dormitory units, unless located with such
respective units or directly connected thereto, shall be provided on the
same story with such units and be accessible only from a common
hallway or passageway.
Sec. 14-4.16 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.16
C:345
(j) Maintenance and construction of fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe and usable condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be
of approved nonabsorbent material.
(k) Connecting generally. Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and
drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in working
order and shall be kept free from obstruction, leaks and defects and
capable of performing the function for which they are designed. All
installations shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan
building code or plumbing code.
(l) Sanitary maintenance. All plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition by the occupant, so as not to breed insects
and rodents or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
(m) Access for cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed to permit easy
access for cleaning both the fixture and the area about it.
(n) Connections to water system. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower,
drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly
connected to either a public water system or to an approved private
water system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.
(o) Protection of water supply from contamination. The water supply shall
be maintained free from contamination and all water inlets for
plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture.
Protection against back-siphonage must be provided for the water
system.
(p) Adequate water supply. The water supply system shall be installed and
maintained to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing
fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at
pressures adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily.
(q) Water heating facilities. Where hot water is provided, water-heating
facilities shall be installed in an approved manner, properly maintained
and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to
be supplied with the hot water. Water heating facilities shall be capable
of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate
amount of water and be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other similar unit, at a
temperature of not less than 100° F.
(r) Connections to sewage system. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower,
drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly
connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private
sewage disposal system.
(s) Maintenance of plumbing stacks and waste and sewer lines. Every
plumbing stack and waste and sewer line shall be so installed and
maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from
Sec. 14-4.16 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.16
C:346
obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or
health hazards. All installations shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of the Michigan Construction Codes.
Sec. 14-4.16 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.16
C:347

DIVISION 6
Mechanical Requirements
Sec. 14-4.17. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
(a) Scope. This section covers the basic mechanical facilities and fixtures
requirements for properties covered by this division.
(b) Evidence of inadequate mechanical facilities. Evidence of inadequate
mechanical facilities shall be a violation of one or more of the
subsections of this section.
(c) Heating system. Every structure used as a dwelling shall be provided
with a heating system capable of providing sufficient heat to all
habitable rooms, bathing rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms or washrooms
and, in fact, operating during the hours that the area is occupied and
required to be heated. "Sufficient heat" shall be defined as a room
temperature of no less than 65°, as measured at a point three feet
above the floor and three feet from existing walls, from September 15 to
May 15. In the event exterior temperatures fall below 0° F. and the
heating system is operating at full capacity, "sufficient heat" shall be
defined as a room temperature of not less than 60° F.
(d) Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment,
components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water
heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions and
kept functioning properly, so as to be free from fire, health and accident
hazards. All installations shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of the building code or other laws or ordinances applicable
thereto.
(e) Installation and maintenance of mechanical equipment. All mechanical
equipment shall be properly installed and safely maintained in good
working condition, and be capable of performing the function for which
it was designed and intended.
(f) Inspections. Mechanical heating systems and heating appliances
(including space heaters) shall be inspected and serviced by a licensed
heating contractor under the following conditions:
(1) On or before the expiration date of a three-year rental certificate of
compliance;
(2) After receiving a written notice stating that an inspection and
service is required;
(3) In the third year following the issuance of a six-year rental
certificate of compliance; or
(4) In the sixth year following the issuance of a six-year rental
certificate of compliance in a newly constructed dwelling unit.
Sec. 14-4.17 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.17
C:349
(g) Chimney, flue or vent. All fuel-burning equipment shall be connected to
an approved chimney, flue or vent.
(h) Clearances to combustible materials. All required clearances to
combustible materials shall be maintained.
(i) Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be
maintained in effective operation.
(j) Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and
for ventilation of the space shall be provided the fuel-burning
equipment.
(k) Unauthorized devices. Devices purporting to reduce gas consumption
by attachment to a gas appliance, to the gas supply line thereto or to
the vent outlet or vent piping there from shall not be used, unless
approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory for such use and
unless the installation is specifically approved by the enforcing officer.
Unvented, gas fired, space heating devices are not permitted as an
alternative heat source.
(l) Climate control. When facilities for interior climate control (heating,
cooling and/or humidity) are integral functions of structures used as
dwelling units or other occupancies, such facilities shall be maintained
and operated in a continuous manner in accordance with the designed
capacity.
(m) Elevators—maintenance. Elevators shall be maintained to safely sustain
the loads to which they are subject, to operate properly and to be free of
physical and fire hazards.
(n) Same—Operation. In buildings equipped with elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building
is occupied, unless temporarily out of service for testing and servicing.
(o) Fireplaces, etc. Fireplaces, and other construction and devices
intended for use similar to a fireplace shall be stable and structurally
safe and connected to approved chimneys
(p) Fireplaces—inspections. All fireplaces shall be inspected and serviced
by a qualified mechanical contractor (for gas fueled or for solid fueled
fireplaces under the following conditions:
(1) On or before the expiration date of a three-year rental certificate of
compliance, after receiving a written notice stating that an
inspection and service is required; or
(2) In the third year following the issuance of a six-year rental
certificate of compliance; or
(3) In the sixth year following the issuance of a six-year rental
certificate of compliance in a newly constructed dwelling unit.
Sec. 14-4.17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.17
C:350
(4) Exception. Fireplaces shall not be required to be inspected and
serviced if the owner of a premise determines that the fireplace
shall not be used. In this case he shall submit a written letter, upon
request, stating such to the enforcing officer. Written notice shall
also be given to all current and new tenants. Alternately, the
fireplace may be physically disabled, or affixed with permanent
signage indicating it is not to be used.
Sec. 14-4.17 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.17
C:351

DIVISION 7
Fire Safety Requirements
Sec. 14-4.18. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Sec. 14-4.19. Means of egress. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Sec. 14-4.20. Accumulations and storage. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002]
(a) Scope. All properties covered by this article shall meet the minimum
standards for fire safety, facilities and equipment as contained in this
division.
(b) Evidence of violations. Evidence of a violation of the minimum
standards for fire safety facilities and equipment requirements of a
structure shall be a violation of one or more of the sections of this
division.
(a) Generally. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall
be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, or
to a yard, court or passageway leading to a public open space at grade.
(b) Direct exit. Every dwelling unit or hotel/motel room shall have access
directly to the outside or to an exit access corridor that leads directly to
the outside.
(c) Locked doors prohibited. All doors in the required means of egress shall
be readily openable from the inner side without the use of keys. Exits
from dwelling units, hotel units, lodging houses and dormitory units
shall not lead through other such units, or through toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
(d) Exit facilities. All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of
every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair,
so as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads.
(e) Fire escapes. All required and all existing fire escapes shall be
maintained in working condition and structurally sound.
(f) Exit signs. All exit signs shall be maintained illuminated and visible.
(g) Dual egress. Every residential building (except for one- and two-family
dwellings) exceeding two stories in height above grade, not counting
basements, shall be provided with not less than two approved
independent exits from each floor above the second floor, fully
accessible from each occupancy on the floor.
(h) Emergency escape from basement rooms. Every sleeping room located
in a basement shall have at least one openable window or exterior door
approved for emergency egress or rescue, or shall have access to two
approved independent exits.
Sec. 14-4.18 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.20
C:353
Sec. 14-4.21. Fire resistance ratings. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
Floors, walls, ceilings, doors, door frames, and other elements and
components required to develop a fire resistance rating shall be maintained,
so that the respective fire resistance rating of the enclosure, separation or
construction is preserved.
Sec. 14-4.22. Fire protection systems and equipment. [Ord. No.
1341, 7-17-2002; amended 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 1691]
(a) Accumulations in stairways, doors, etc. Waste, refuse or other materials
shall not be allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors,
windows, fire escapes or other means of egress.
(b) Explosive or flammable matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter,
such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse,
such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored
on residential premises, except in reasonable quantities consistent with
normal usage.
(c) Prohibited location of residential units. A dwelling unit or rooming unit
shall not be located within a structure containing an establishment
handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of
110° F. (43° C.) or lower, except as provided for in the Construction
Code.
(a) Generally. All fire protection systems and equipment shall be
maintained in proper operating condition at all times.
(b) Fire alarms. Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained and
be suitable for their respective purposes.
(c) Fire suppression systems. Fire suppression systems shall be maintained
in good condition, free from mechanical injury. Sprinkler heads shall be
maintained clean, free of corrosion and paint and not bent or damaged.
Sprinkler systems may be subject to testing as required by the
manufacturer or NFPA 13.
(d) Standpipe systems. Hose stations shall be identified and accessible. The
hose shall be in proper position, ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration. Systems may be subject to testing as required by the
manufacturer or NFPA 14.
(e) Fire extinguishers. All required portable fire extinguishers shall be
visible and accessible, and maintained in an efficient and safe operating
condition. Extinguishers may be subject to testing as required by the
manufacturer or NFPA.
(f) Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors are required and shall be installed
as required by the Michigan Residential Code for one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses; or the Michigan Building Code for all other
structures.
Sec. 14-4.20 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.23
C:354
Sec. 14-4.23. Fire doors. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
All required fire resistance rated doors or smoke barriers shall be
maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for
the proper operation thereof. The use of door stops, wedges and other
unapproved hold-open devices is prohibited.
Sec. 14-4.23 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.23
C:355

DIVISION 8
Electrical Requirements
Sec. 14-4.24. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended
8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589]
(a) Scope. This section covers the basic electrical facilities and fixtures
requirements for properties covered by this division.
(b) Evidence of inadequate wiring. Evidence of inadequate electrical wiring
of a dwelling covered by this article shall be a violation of one or more
of the subsections of this section.
(c) Entrances and exits. Entrances and exits shall be provided with
illumination by exterior lighting fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be
controlled by interior wall switches, located for convenient and readily
accessible use.
(d) Living rooms. Living rooms in dwelling units shall be provided with
convenient duplex electrical receptacle outlets around the room, with
at least one duplex electrical outlet on each wall and a second duplex
electrical outlet on each wall exceeding 14 feet in length.
(e) Kitchens. Kitchens in dwelling units shall be provided with either a wallor
ceiling-mounted light fixture, controlled by a wall switch, located for
convenient and readily accessible use nearest to the entrance to the
room. Kitchens shall be provided with at least two duplex electrical
outlets, one of which shall be adequate for operation of a refrigerator,
and kitchens shall also be provided with two small appliance circuits
with a minimum of two grounding-type duplex electrical outlets, both of
which shall be a minimum of 30 inches above the floor. Kitchens shall be
provided with either gas service or an electrical circuit adequate for
operation of a stove. In lieu of grounding-type duplex electrical outlets,
ground fault interrupter circuits may be used. Any new circuits for
appliances shall be a minimum capacity of 20 amperes.
(f) Bathrooms, washrooms, etc. Bathing rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms
and washrooms within dwelling units shall be provided with a wall- or
ceiling-mounted lighting fixture, controlled by a wall switch.
Bathrooms, toilet rooms that contain a sink, and washrooms shall be
provided with one or more grounding-type duplex electrical outlet(s),
which shall be at least 30 inches above the floor, adjacent to the sink,
and shall have a ground fault circuit interrupter.
(g) Habitable rooms. Habitable rooms within dwelling units shall be
provided with convenient duplex receptacle outlets around the room,
with a minimum of two duplex receptacle outlets on separate walls. Any
wall- or ceiling-mounted lighting fixtures shall be controlled by a wall
switch located for convenient and readily accessible use, nearest the
entrance to the room.
Sec. 14-4.24 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.24
C:357
(h) Basements. Basements shall be provided with a minimum of one
lighting fixture for each 300 square feet of area or major fraction
thereof. Each separate room of the basement shall have a minimum of
one lighting fixture. Basements shall have one or more ground fault
circuit interrupter receptacles.
(i) Laundry areas. Laundry areas within or accessory to a dwelling unit
shall be provided with a minimum of one lighting fixture. Laundry areas
shall be provided with a separate circuit with a grounding-type
receptacle outlet suitable for use of laundry appliances. In lieu of a
grounding-type receptacle outlet, a ground fault interrupter circuit may
be used. If provided, a separate electrical circuit shall be adequate for
the operation of an electrical dryer.
(j) Heating equipment. Heating equipment, furnaces or heating systems
requiring electrical energy for operation or control shall be provided
with a separate grounded circuit. A disconnect switch shall be provided
on or adjacent to the unit. Every furnace room shall be provided with a
minimum of one lighting fixture. Portable, electric heating appliances
are not permitted as a permanent alternative heat source.
(k) Stairways – Generally. Stairways and/or each stair section shall be
provided with lighting outlets controlled by wall switches located for
convenient and readily accessible use. Switches shall not be located
where it is necessary to use a darkened stair or stair section for their
operation. All stairwells with six steps or more shall be provided with
multiple switch control, one at the head and one at the foot of the
stairway.
(l) Same – Common stairways and hallways. Common stairways and
hallways that are shared by four or more units shall be illuminated at all
times with a minimum of 10 footcandles as required by the Michigan
Construction Codes.
(m) Service. A minimum of one electrical service to an existing residential
structure containing three or fewer dwelling units shall be at least
three-wire, one-hundred-ampere capacity. Any additional electrical
services required or installed shall be a minimum of sixty-ampere
capacity. Service equipment shall be dead front. Type "S" fuses shall be
installed where fusible equipment is used. If the existing service does
not comply with the above and it is then necessary to increase service
or change service equipment, the service shall be increased to a
minimum of 100 amperes.
(n) Existing wiring and electrical equipment. Existing wiring and electrical
equipment shall be maintained and used as originally listed and
designed to be used. All new wiring and electrical equipment used to
replace existing inadequate wiring shall comply with the Michigan
Electrical Code (MEC) and all provisions of this article. Illegal or
unapproved extensions to the wiring system in order to provide light,
Sec. 14-4.24 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.24
C:358
heat or power shall be evidence of an inadequate wiring system and
subject to the requirements for new construction.
Sec. 14-4.24 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.24
C:359

DIVISION 9
Maintenance Responsibility
Sec. 14-4.25. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
(a) Scope. The provisions of this division shall identify the person
responsible for the maintenance of structures, and the equipment and
premises thereof.
(b) Determination of person in violation. A person may be determined to be
in violation of this article if deemed to be a person responsible, under
the following subsections of this section, for a property which is in
violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(c) Occupant. When it can be established to the satisfaction of the
enforcing officer that the occupant has caused, or permitted to occur, a
circumstance which results in a property being in violation of one or
more of the provisions of this article, that occupant shall be deemed the
person responsible for the property being in violation of this article. The
code official may use an applicable inventory checklist in making a
determination as to the responsible party.
(d) Owner—generally. In all events where a circumstance exists which
results in the property being in violation of one or more provisions of
this article, the owner shall be deemed the person responsible for the
property being in violation of this article.
(e) Same—Additional responsibility. In any event where an occupant shall
be deemed the person responsible for the property being in violation of
this article, the enforcing officer shall promptly notify the owner of the
property of the determination of responsibility. The owner shall cause
the occupant to cure the violations of this article. In the event the
occupant shall fail to cure the violations of this article, the owner may
take such action as shall be permitted by state law. If, within 30 days
after being notified by the enforcing officer, the owner has neither
caused the occupant to cure the violations nor commenced action to
evict the occupant, the owner shall be deemed the responsible person
for the property being in violation of this article. The fact that an owner
becomes a person responsible for the property being in violation of this
article under this subsection does not release the occupant from
liability as a responsible person pursuant to this article.
(f) Imminent risk. In any event where the occupant is the person
responsible for the property being in violation of this article, but there
is an imminent risk to the health or safety of the public or of an
occupant other than the person responsible for the property being in
violation of this article, the owner shall promptly cure the defect on
behalf of the responsible occupant. Such action on the part of the owner
does not release the occupant of responsibility under this article. The
owner may demand restitution from the responsible occupant for the
cost of curing the violation of this article.
Sec. 14-4.25 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.25
C:361
(g) City not responsible for cost reimbursement to owner. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions of this section, neither the City nor its
enforcing officer and officials shall be responsible to prosecute and
enforce the provisions of this article relating to monetary payments,
restitution or reimbursement by a responsible occupant to an owner.
Sec. 14-4.25 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.25
C:362
DIVISION 10
Registration and Certification of Rental Dwellings
Sec. 14-4.26. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; Ord. No. 1577,
1-18-2012; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733]
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
HOPE NEIGHBORHOOD AREA — This term shall have the same meaning
as in Section 39-2 of this Code.
RENTAL UNIT — Any dwelling, dwelling unit or mobile home which is
leased, made available for rental purposes, including short-term rentals, or
occupied by a person(s) other than the owner (with or without monetary
compensation), except:
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — The person who is responsible for correcting all
major or minor violation(s), or both, pursuant to the provisions of Section
14-4.25.
Sec. 14-4.27. Registration required. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002;
amended Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589;
4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733]
All dwellings and short-term rentals, as defined by this article, that are
leased or otherwise made available for rental purposes shall be registered
by the owner with the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services. In addition to other requirements of this chapter, short-term
rentals must meet all requirements listed in Section 14-4.29.2.
Places of public accommodation licensed by the City under Chapter 26
of this Code.
(a)
Units required to be occupied by an employee or agent of an owner as
a condition of employment (i.e., parsonages).
(b)
Any dwellings, dwelling units or mobile homes which the state has
exclusive authority under state law to inspect and regulate.
(c)
The principal residence of the owner which is temporarily occupied by
a person(s) other than the owner for not more than two years, other
than as a short-term rental.
(d)
(e) Dwellings in a dormitory operated by an institution of higher education.
Dwelling units in which an owner of such unit resides unless the
nonowner-occupant(s) of such dwelling unit pay rent or make other
compensation to the owner for occupancy of the dwelling unit.
(f)
(g) Tulip Time short-term rentals.
Sec. 14-4.26 CHARTER Sec.
14-4.27.1
C:363
Sec. 14-4.27.1. Special requirements: crime-free leases for all
rental properties. [Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; amended 9-17-2014 by
Ord. No. 1638]
All rental units within the City of Holland are required to have the following
terms and conditions in writing and made a part of the rental agreement
between owner and lessee/tenant:
(a) A crime-free rental agreement addendum shall be included in all
residential rental agreements as follows:
CRIME FREE RENTAL AGREEMENT ADDENDUM
Notice: Michigan law establishes right and obligations for parties to
rental agreements. This agreement is required to comply with the
Truth in Renting Act. If you have a question about the interpretation
or legality of a provision of this agreement, you may want to seek
assistance from a lawyer or other qualified person.
In consideration of the rental of a dwelling unit or execution or renewal
of a lease of a dwelling unit identified in the lease, Owner and Resident
agree as follows:
1) Resident, any member of the resident's household, guest or other
person under the resident's control shall not engage in criminal
activity, including drug-related criminal activity, on the said
premises. "Drug-related criminal activity" means the illegal
manufacture, sale, distribution use or possession with intent to
manufacture, sell, distribute, or use of a controlled substance
(other than legal possession or use of medical marihuana) or a
minor in possession of alcohol.
2) Resident, any member of the resident's household, guest or other
person under the resident's control shall not engage in any act
intended to facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related
criminal activity.
3) Resident or member of the household will not permit the dwelling
unit to be used for, or to facilitate criminal activity, including drugrelated
criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual
engaged in such activity is a member of the household, or a guest.
4) Resident, any member of the resident's household or a guest, or
another person under the resident's control shall not engage in the
unlawful manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping or giving
of a controlled substance at any location within the apartment
complex.
Sec.
14-4.27.1
HOLLAND CODE Sec.
14-4.27.1
C:364
Sec. 14-4.27.2. Excessive public safety calls; excessive local
ordinance violations; excessive state tenant law violations; fee.
[Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; amended 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1638;
5-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1691]
5) Resident, any member of the resident's household, guest or
another person under the resident's control shall not engage in any
illegal activity, including prostitution, criminal street gang activity,
threatening or intimidating assault, including but not limited to the
unlawful discharge of firearms, within the apartment complex or
any breach of the lease agreement that otherwise jeopardizes the
health, safety and welfare of the landlord, his agent or other tenant
or involving imminent serious property damage.
VIOLATION OF THE ABOVE PROVISIONS SHALL BE A MATERIAL
AND IRREPARABLE VIOLATION OF THE RENTAL AGREEMENT OR
LEASE AND GOOD CAUSE FOR TERMINATION OF TENANCY. A
single violation of any provision of this addendum shall be deemed a
serious violation and a material and irreparable noncompliance. It is
understood that a single violation shall be good cause for immediate
termination of the lease.
In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any
other provisions of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall
govern. This Addendum is incorporated into the rental agreement or
lease executed or renewed this day between Owner and Resident.
Resident Signature Date
Property Manager Signature Date
(b) The following statement shall be included: Maximum occupancy of the
rental unit is the lesser of: i) the maximum occupancy allowed under
Section 14-4.15, space requirements of the property maintenance code
as calculated by square footage; or ii) a family as defined in Section
39-2.
(c) The following statement shall be included: Tenants shall refrain from all
conduct that unreasonably disturbs other tenants or neighbors of the
building. The Holland Public Safety Department is available 24 hours a
day to serve the community. Tenants may be billed for the fee imposed
on the owner by the City of Holland for an excessive number or
disturbances or calls as prescribed in Section 14-4.27.2.
(a) Should an excessive number of calls be generated by disturbances or
complaints at a residentially used property or residential unit, except
those properties that have a public lodging license, requiring the
involvement of public safety staff or other City staff, the owner of the
property shall be liable for a fee for such public safety or other City staff
service on a per-occurrence basis. Domestic violence and other similar
calls shall be excluded from this section.
Sec.
14-4.27.1
CHARTER Sec.
14-4.27.2
C:365
(b) The fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The fee
shall be billed to the owner by the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the owner from
charging the fee to tenant(s).
(d) For residentially used properties with four or fewer residential units, an
"excessive number of calls" is defined as any of the following activities
as determined by the Department of Public Safety [items (1) and (5)
below] and the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services
[items (2), (3), (4) and (5) below]:
(1) Excess of three public safety visits to a property every 12 months
which result in citations for civil infractions or criminal complaints
against the owner or occupants or their guests or invitees, provided
that notice of the visits was promptly given to the owner;
(2) Excess of four local ordinance violations every 12 months which
result in direct City staff involvement to document the violation and
seek remedy to the violation, provided that notice of the visits was
promptly given to the owner;
(3) Excess of three violations to Section 19-11 every 12 months which
result in direct City staff involvement to document the violation and
seek remedy to the violation, provided that notice of the visits was
promptly given to the owner;
(4) Excess of three violations to the Michigan statutes on landlord and
tenant relationships as set forth in MCLA § 554.601 et seq., as
amended from time to time, which result in direct staff involvement
to document the violation and seek remedy to the violation,
provided that notice of the visits was promptly given to the owner;
or
(5) Excess of four violations to any of the activities listed above in
Subsection (d)(1) through (3).
(e) For residentially used properties with five or more residential units, an
"excessive number of calls" is defined as any of the following activities
as determined by the Department of Public Safety [items (1) and (5)
below] and the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services
[items (2), (3), (4) and (5) below]:
(1) Excess of three public safety visits to a single residential unit every
12 months which result in citations for civil infractions or criminal
complaints against the owner or occupants or their guests or
invitees, provided that notice of the visits was promptly given to the
owner;
(2) Excess of four local ordinance violations at a single residential unit
every 12 months which result in direct City staff involvement to
Sec.
14-4.27.2
HOLLAND CODE Sec.
14-4.27.2
C:366
Sec. 14-4.28. Time periods for registration. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002]
document the violation and seek remedy to the violation, provided
that notice of the visits was promptly given to the owner;
(3) Excess of three violations to Section 19-11 every 12 months which
result in direct City staff involvement to document the violation and
seek remedy to the violation, provided that notice of the visits was
promptly given to the owner;
(4) Excess of three violations to the Michigan statutes on landlord and
tenant relationships as set forth in MCLA 554.601 et seq., as
amended from time to time, which result in direct staff involvement
to document the violation and seek remedy to the violation,
provided that notice of the visits was promptly given to the owner;
or
(5) Excess of four violations at a single residential unit to any of the
activities listed above in Subsection (e)(1) through (3).
(f) Should excessive calls occur at a rental property the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services may suspend the annual basic
housing permit for that property as well as all other annual basic
housing permits in which the owner of the rental property is the same
and shall promptly give notice of suspension to the owner. If the owner
disputes the basis for the suspension, the owner shall appeal to the City
Council within 10 days after notice of the suspension under the same
procedures as set forth in Sections 17-18 through 17-20 of this Code, as
amended from time to time. To have the annual basic housing permit(s)
reinstated, the property owner must apply to the Board of Appeals not
earlier than six months from the notice of suspension. The Board of
Appeals may reinstate the annual rental permit upon determining that
the violations have been addressed and remedied.
(a) All rental dwelling units shall be registered within 30 days of occupancy
by the tenant.
(b) All newly constructed or newly converted rental dwellings shall be
registered within 30 days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
by the City.
(c) A rental dwelling, which is sold, transferred or conveyed, shall be
reregistered by the new owner within 30 days of the date of the deed,
land contract or other instrument of conveyance.
(d) All existing nonrental dwellings, which are converted to rental
dwellings without issuance of a certificate of occupancy, shall be
registered within 30 days from the date on which the property is first
occupied for rental purposes.
Sec.
14-4.27.2
CHARTER Sec. 14-4.29
C:367
Sec. 14-4.29. Required information. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002;
Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589; 4-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 1733]
The owner of a rental dwelling shall submit the following information to the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services on forms prescribed
by the Department:
Sec. 14-4.29.1. Required information for neighbors. [Ord. No. 1577,
1-18-2012]
The owner of a rental unit shall furnish the name and twenty-four-hour
telephone contact information of the owner and the owner's responsible
agent, where applicable, annually to property owners and residents of
properties immediately adjacent (to the side and rear) and across the street
from the rental property.
Sec. 14-4.2. Required information for short-term rentals. [Added
4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733]
In addition to other requirements of this Code, the owner of a short-term
rental shall agree to, and comply with, the following conditions, and shall
provide/maintain the following documents:
(a) The address of the rental dwelling;
(b) The number of rental units within the structure;
(c) The name, residence address, mailing address, business telephone,
home telephone and date of birth of the owner;
(d) The name, residence address, business address and business telephone
of the responsible person designated by the owner;
(e) The date of registration of the rental dwelling;
(f) The name of the person filing the registration;
(g) Any additional information relating to habitable rooms as required by
the rules.
(a) A short-term rental will not be approved at a property that contains an
accessory dwelling unit (ADU).
(b) The contact information for the owner and/or local agent shall be
clearly displayed at the property and provided to all renters.
(c) A crime-free addendum described in Section 14-4.27.1 will be included
in all rental agreements.
(d) Notification will be provided to all surrounding neighbors as required
by Section 14-4.29.1.
Sec. 14-4.29 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.2
C:368
Sec. 14-4.30. Fee; administrative late charge; penalty. [Ord. No.
1341, 7-17-2002]
No registration fee shall be assessed to the owner of a rental dwelling
by the City if registration complies with the provisions of this division. An
(e) Documentation shall be provided from the owner's property insurance
company stating that the property and liability insurance allows for and
covers short-term rental use and claims from short-term rental
occupants.
(f) Written confirmation that the property owner does not have an
ownership interest in more than one short-term rental unit in the City of
Holland.
(g) Written confirmation that the owner of a short-term rental unit shall
include the certificate number in all advertisements.
(h) For an owner-occupied short-term rental the owner shall provide three
documents showing that the dwelling unit is their primary residence,
such as:
(1) 100% principal residence exemption with the City Assessor's
Office.
(2) Driver's license.
(3) Government-issued identification.
(4) Vehicle registration.
(5) Current voter registration card.
(6) Utility bill.
(7) Property tax bill.
(8) Mortgage statement.
(i) For owner-occupied short-term rentals, the owner shall provide written
confirmation that they agree to rent one room of their dwelling unit for
365 days per calendar year, and/or the entire dwelling unit for a
maximum of 60 days per calendar year.
(j) A nonowner-occupied short-term rental may be located as allowed by
Chapter 39.
(k) For nonowner-occupied short-term rentals, the property owner must
designate a local agent. The owner shall provide the name, residence
address, business address and business telephone number of the
designated local agent. This local agent shall live within 35 miles from
the property and be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week to
respond to and mitigate any complaints regarding the short-term
rental.
Sec. 14-4.2 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.30
C:369
administrative late charge as established by a resolution adopted by City
Council per dwelling unit, boardinghouse, dormitory, or rooming house,
shall be paid by the owner if registration of a rental dwelling does not
comply with the provisions of this division. A violation of this subsection
shall be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the
Holland City Code.
Sec. 14-4.31. Incorrect and outdated registration information.
[Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
An owner who fails to provide correct or current registration information
shall be in violation of the provisions of this division.
Sec. 14-4.32. Inspections. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; Ord. No.
1367, 8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1388, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1503,
4-23-2008; 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 1650; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1733]
(a) The enforcing officer may inspect buildings and structures to secure the
health, safety and welfare of the occupants and of the general public
and to obtain and maintain compliance with the standards of this
article. The enforcing officer may inspect residential rental units, and
short-term rentals, once every two years without first receiving a
complaint or without other cause, and, in addition, may inspect
buildings and structures under any of the following circumstances:
(1) Upon receipt of a complaint from an owner or occupant that the
premises are in violation of this article.
(2) Upon receipt of a report or a referral from the Police Department,
other public agency or department, or any individual indicating
that the premises are in violation of this article, which report or
referral is based on the personal knowledge of the person making
the report or referral.
(3) If an exterior survey of the premises gives the enforcing officer
probable cause to believe that the premises are in violation of this
article.
(4) Upon the enforcing officer's receipt of information that a rental unit
is not registered with the City as required by this article.
(5) As part of the rental certification program as required by Section
14-4.34 of this article.
(6) In order to determine compliance with a notice or a housing order
issued by the City.
(7) If an emergency is observed or is reasonably believed to exist.
(8) In accordance with requirements of law where a dwelling is to be
demolished by the City or where ownership is to be transferred to
the City.
Sec. 14-4.30 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.32
C:370
(9) Upon the request of an owner of a rental unit for an advisory
inspection. Such inspections shall be performed in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection (b) of this section.
(9.5) All accessory dwelling units shall be inspected and certified in
accordance with Section 14-4.34 as if they were rental units.
(10) Prior to sale or transfer of any single-family dwelling or single
dwelling unit within a condominium, an inspection shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules as adopted by the City
Council and a certificate of compliance with all smoke detector
requirements shall be obtained.
a. The property owner shall pay an inspection fee as adopted by
resolution of City Council. All fees shall be paid before a
certificate will be issued.
b. A certificate is valid for three years from the date of issuance. A
new inspection and certificate shall not be required prior to a
transfer if a certificate was issued within three years prior to
the transfer of title.
c. A certificate issued under this subsection shall only be
evidence of compliance with smoke detector requirements and
shall not be evidence of compliance with any other code
requirements.
d. For purposes of this subsection only, a sale or transfer does not
include a transfer:
1. After which the transferor retains an ownership interest in
the property;
2. The property is transferred to a trust for the benefit of the
transferor; or
3. The transfer is from a trust or estate to beneficiaries of the
trust or estate without consideration.
e. All major violations cited shall be corrected prior to transfer of
title.
f. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be deemed a
municipal civil infraction by both the seller and buyer.
(11) Prior to operation of a Type 1 or 2 home business (as defined in
Chapter 39) approved under Chapter 39 of this Code, an inspection
shall be conducted of the area of a dwelling to be used for the home
business together with any areas in the dwelling to be used for
ingress to and egress from the area used for the home business.
Should the owner or occupant move the home business to a
different location in the dwelling which has not been inspected
under this subsection, the owner or occupant shall obtain a new
Sec. 14-4.32 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.32
C:371
Sec. 14-4.32.1. Housing inspections — Neighborhood Enterprise
Zone dwelling. [Ord. No. 1407, 3-2-2005; Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012]
inspection. Fees for the inspection shall be paid before the owner
or occupant conducts the home business. All major violations cited
shall be corrected prior to conducting the home business.
(b) During the inspection, which shall be conducted in accordance with
Section 14-4 of this article, the enforcing officer shall note any
violations of this article or other provisions of this Code and shall issue
a housing order notice of all violations to the responsible person in
accordance with Section 14-4.2(a) and (b). The housing order shall
direct the responsible person to correct violations within the time set
forth in the notice. A reasonable time for correcting violations shall be
determined by the enforcing officer in light of the nature of the
violations and all relevant circumstances, but shall not exceed 30 days.
Upon request by the responsible person, the enforcing officer may
extend the time for correcting minor violations, if the enforcing officer
deems such action appropriate under all relevant circumstances.
(c) A responsible person, who receives a housing order notice pursuant to
Section 14-4.2(a) and (b) of major or minor violations, or both, shall not
fail to correct those violations within the time period set forth in the
notice.
(a) Prior to the sale of a dwelling unit in a new or rehabilitated facility for
which a Neighborhood Enterprise Zone certificate is in effect, an
inspection shall be made by the City to determine compliance with the
Housing Property Maintenance Code of the City of Holland and a sale
shall not be finalized until there is compliance with the Housing
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Holland.
(b) The City shall be permitted to inspect the dwelling unit for which a
Neighborhood Enterprise Zone certificate is in effect and shall issue a
certificate of compliance if the Housing Property Maintenance Code of
the City of Holland has been met. The property owner shall pay an
inspection fee in an amount as determined by resolution of the City
Council. All fees shall be paid before a certificate will be issued.
(c) For purposes of this section, a sale or transfer does not include a
transfer:
(1) After which the transferor retains an ownership interest in the
property;
(2) The property is transferred to a trust for the benefit of the
transferor; or
(3) The transfer is from a trust to beneficiaries of a trust or estate
without consideration.
Sec. 14-4.32 HOLLAND CODE Sec.
14-4.32.1
C:372
Sec. 14-4.33. Inspections—fees; administrative late charge. [Ord.
No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012
by Ord. No. 1589]
Sec. 14-4.34. Rental certificate of compliance—generally. [Ord. No.
1341, 7-17-2002; amended Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 1589]
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a sale or transfer shall be deemed
to occur and this section shall apply if the property owner requires
a transfer or assignment of the Neighborhood Enterprise Zone
certificate.
(d) Any dwelling unit which constitutes a rental unit pursuant to Section
14-4.26 of the Ordinance Code of the City of Holland shall be required
to comply with all requirements of [Article II,] Division 10 of Chapter 14
of the Ordinance Code of the City of Holland.
(a) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall
establish a schedule of inspection fees, which shall not exceed the cost
of inspecting rental units. The Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services shall amend the fee schedule from time to time
to reflect changes in the cost of inspections. The initial fee schedule and
all amendments thereto shall not take effect until approved by a
resolution of the City Council.
(b) The inspection fee shall be paid by the owner of the property, unless the
inspection is based on a complaint filed by the owner for a major
violation caused by the occupant, and the enforcing officer determines
that such major violation does, in fact, exist. In such event, the
inspection fee shall be paid by the occupant. A violation of this
subsection shall be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties under
Section 1-10 of the Holland City Code.
(c) If the enforcing officer determines that a complaint was filed without a
factual basis, the inspection fee shall be charged to the complainant.
(d) An administrative late charge shall be paid to the City by the person
obligated to pay an inspection fee if such fee is not paid within 30 days
from the billing date. The amount of the administrative late fees shall be
established by the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services and shall not take effect until approved by resolution of the
City Council. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor
subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the Holland City Code.
(a) A property owner shall not lease, rent or otherwise allow a rental unit to
be occupied unless the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services has issued a rental certificate of compliance or a temporary
rental certificate of compliance for such rental unit. Each rental
certificate of compliance or temporary rental certificate of compliance
shall contain an expiration date. A violation of this subsection shall be a
Sec.
14-4.32.1
CHARTER Sec. 14-4.34
C:373
Sec. 14-4.34.1. Rental certificate of compliance — additional
requirements for short-term rentals. [Added 4-18-2018 by Ord. No.
1733]
misdemeanor subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the Holland
City Code and shall be deemed a nuisance per se.
(b) A property owner shall not lease, rent or otherwise allow a rental unit to
be occupied if the rental certificate of compliance or the temporary
rental certificate of compliance for such unit has been denied,
suspended, or has expired. A violation of this subsection shall be a
misdemeanor subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the Holland
City Code and shall be deemed a nuisance per se.
(c) A person shall not occupy a rental unit if the enforcing officer orders
that it be vacated due to major violations of this article. A violation of
this subsection shall be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties under
Section 1-10 of the Holland City Code and shall be deemed a nuisance
per se.
(d) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall issue a
six-year rental certificate of compliance to the owner of a rental unit
that is determined to be in compliance with this article. Compliance
shall mean the following:
(1) There are no violations existing at the time of the most recent
inspection;
(2) The enforcing officer did not discover any violations at any time
since the prior rental certificate of compliance or temporary rental
certificate of compliance, if any, was issued;
(3) The property owner has paid all inspection fees assessed against
the property.
(e) A newly constructed rental unit may be issued a six-year rental
certificate of compliance from the date of initial certificate of
occupancy.
(f) At least 30 days before the expiration of a rental certificate of
compliance, the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services
shall notify the property owner, in writing, of the expiration date and
advise the owner of the need to arrange for a compliance inspection.
The property owner shall be responsible for arranging for a compliance
inspection prior to the expiration date on the rental certificate of
compliance. When a rental certificate of compliance is reissued in
accordance with Section 14-4.36(b), it shall have a six-year or a threeyear
expiration date with the same month and day as shown on the
previous rental certificate of compliance, regardless of the date that the
new rental certificate of compliance is actually issued.
Sec. 14-4.34 HOLLAND CODE Sec.
14-4.34.1
C:374
Sec. 14-4.35. Same—Temporary certificate. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002; amended Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 1589]
(a) A short-term rental unit shall only be issued a three-year rental
certificate of compliance.
(b) A certificate of compliance for a short-term rental shall only be issued
under the following circumstances:
(1) An inspection of the property shows that it is in compliance with
the provisions of this code as well as Chapters 6, 9, 11, 19, 20, 25,
27 and 39;
(2) There have not been three or more public safety visits in 12
months, as described in Section 14-4.27.2;
(3) There have not been four or more local ordinance violations in 12
months, as described in Section 14-4.27.2;
(4) If it is an owner-occupied short-term rental, the owner agrees to
rent one room of their dwelling unit up to 365 days per year or the
entire dwelling unit for not more than 60 days per year;
(5) The short-term rental unit is a permitted use under the zoning
ordinance;
(6) The short-term rental is not at a property that also has an ADU;
(7) The property owner does not have an ownership interest in more
than one short-term rental unit in the City of Holland.
(8) The property owner maintains compliance with these regulations.
(c) If the property owner wishes to maintain their property with the benefit
of both long-term and short-term occupants, they shall be required to
meet the additional requirements for short-term rentals, as listed
above.
(a) When a rental certificate of compliance is required, the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services may issue a temporary rental
certificate of compliance if all of the following circumstances exist:
(1) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services is
unable to complete an inspection of a rental unit to verify
compliance with this article prior to the expiration date of an
existing rental certificate of compliance.
(2) The enforcing officer is not aware of any current major violations.
(3) The property owner has paid all inspection fees assessed against
the property owner for all prior inspections of the premises.
Sec.
14-4.34.1
CHARTER Sec. 14-4.35
C:375
Sec. 14-4.36. Same—Suspension and expiration. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002; amended Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012; 8-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 1589]
(b) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services may issue a
temporary rental certificate of compliance for a newly registered rental
unit.
(c) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services may issue a
temporary rental certificate of compliance for a rental unit subject to a
housing order notice containing major violations if the property owner
is in the process of correcting such violations and can show proof of
same.
(d) A temporary rental certificate of compliance shall be valid until the
enforcing officer completes an inspection and issues an order granting
or denying a rental certificate of compliance. Said inspection shall be
conducted within 60 days of the expiration date of a rental certificate of
compliance, within 60 days of the registration of a new rental unit, or
within 60 days of the issuance of a temporary rental certificate of
compliance.
(a) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services may
suspend a six-year or a three-year rental certificate of compliance for a
rental unit if the responsible person fails to comply with a housing order
notice issued under Section 14-4.32, or if the responsible person fails to
pay any fee in accordance with Sections 14-4.33 and 14-4.37.
(b) In such event, the enforcing officer may placard the property and order
that it be vacated in accordance with the provisions of Section 14-4.1.
The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall
reinstate a suspended six-year or three-year rental certificate of
compliance upon a determination that all violations are corrected and
upon payment of the reinspection fees. The reinstated rental certificate
of compliance shall be issued for a period of not more than three years
from the date of the original certificate.
(c) A rental certificate of compliance or a temporary rental certificate of
compliance shall expire on the date stated on the certificate. Sixty days
after such expiration date, no person shall occupy a rental unit unless a
new rental certificate of compliance has been issued. A rental unit,
which has not been previously certified, shall be deemed to have an
expiration date on the date the property owner is notified to obtain
certification for the rental unit.
(d) If the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services suspends
a six-year or a three-year rental certificate of compliance, or, if a sixyear
or a three-year rental certificate of compliance has expired, then
the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall notify
the occupant(s) of the suspension or expiration. The notice shall inform
the occupant(s) that he or she may pay rent into a self-established
Sec. 14-4.35 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.36
C:376
Sec. 14-4.37. Annual basic housing permit. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002; Ord. No. 1381, 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 1577, 1-18-2012;
amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1589; 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1638;
10-1-2014 by Ord. No. 1641]
Sec. 14-4.38. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
A violation of the provisions of Divisions 1 through 10 of this Article II
shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction as defined under Chapter 2
of the Holland City Code, except where a violation is designated as a
misdemeanor. A violation of this Article II shall also be a nuisance per se
and subject to abatement as provided in Sections 1-10 through 1-10.2 or
as otherwise provided in the Holland City Code. In addition to the fine and
costs imposed for a violation of Divisions 1 through 10 of this Article II,
escrow account until he or she vacates the unit, the rental certificate of
compliance is reinstated or renewed, or a temporary rental certificate
of compliance has been issued pursuant to Section 14-4.35, whichever
occurs first. This subsection shall not apply if the property owner
establishes that the suspension of the rental certificate of compliance is
due to violations that were caused by the occupant(s) of the rental unit.
Once the rental certificate of compliance is reinstated or a temporary
rental certificate of compliance has been issued, the rent shall again
become due and payable in accordance with the terms of the lease or
other agreement between the property owner and the occupant(s) or as
determined by a court of law.
(e) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall
immediately notify the owner and occupant(s) of any decision affecting
the status of a rental certificate of compliance and advise the owner and
occupant(s) of their right to appeal and the procedures therefor.
(a) No property owner shall lease, rent or otherwise allow a rental unit to
be occupied unless the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services has issued an annual basic housing permit for such rental unit.
(b) The owner of a rental unit shall pay an annual permit fee for the
issuance of an annual basic housing permit by the City of Holland. The
annual permit fee shall be established and the rules adopted by the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services and approved
by resolution of the City Council. The annual permit fee shall be paid on
or before the 10th day of December of each year. The annual permit fee
shall be paid to the City Treasurer. A violation of this subsection shall be
a misdemeanor subject to the penalties under Section 1-10 of the
Holland City Code.
(c) An annual basic housing permit may be suspended by the Department
of Community and Neighborhood Services or revoked by action of the
City Council for violations of this Chapter 14. The procedure shall be
the same as set forth in Sections 17-18 through 17-20 of this Code, as
amended from time to time.
Sec. 14-4.36 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.38
C:377
the owner shall pay the administrative late charge prescribed in Section
14-4.33.
Sec. 14-4.38 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.38
C:378
DIVISION 11
Duty of Landlord to Provide Uninterrupted Utility Service
Sec. 14-4.40. Generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002; amended
2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1685]
(a) Preamble. The City affirms that it is in the best interest of the residents
of the City to regulate and enforce the delivery of utility service to
tenants without interruption when rental dwelling units are serviced by
a single service utility connection. This section shall be used to
interpret and construe the provisions of this article with the stated
purpose and intent of this preamble.
(b) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in
this subsection for the purposes of Subsection (c) and (d) of this section:
(1) BILLED CUSTOMER/TENANT — A tenant or occupant of a
dwelling unit who is the customer of record for utility service for a
rental of dwelling.
(2) NONBILLED CUSTOMER/TENANT — A tenant or occupant who is
not the customer of record but who occupies a dwelling unit which
receives the benefit of utility service provided to a billed customer/
tenant or owner.
(3) UTILITY SERVICE — Gas, electric, water, sewer, solid waste and
such other services provided by a private or municipal utility, which
are necessary for the habitability of a rental dwelling.
(4) OWNER — The person or entity having a legal and/or equitable
interest in a rental dwelling unit.
(c) Duty of owner. The owner of a rental dwelling shall contract, lease or
otherwise make available utility services to nonbilled customer/tenants
to be free from interruption, termination or shutoff caused by either of
the following, or combinations thereof:
(1) A billed customer/tenant's or owner's failure to pay the amounts
due for utility service; or
(2) An order from a billed customer/tenant or owner to voluntarily
disconnect, terminate or shut off utility service.
(d) Limitations. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
regulate or impair the owner's ability to contract with a tenant for the
delivery and payment of utility service. This section shall designate the
owner as the responsible person in the event the delivery of utility
service is interrupted, terminated or shut off for a nonbilled customer/
tenant as a result of the provisions of Subsection (c) of this section.
(e) Duty of tenant or occupant. The tenant or occupant of a rental dwelling
shall not tamper with or shut off a heating system, which is required to
be operating under the provisions of Section 14-4.17(b).
Sec. 14-4.40 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.40
C:379

DIVISION 12
Pilot program for Nonowner-Occupied Short-Term Rental Units
established in Sec. 39-200 in R-TRN, R-1, and R-2 zone districts.
Sec. 14-4.41. Purpose. [Added 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1736]
Sec. 14-4.42. Registration required.
To register a nonowner-occupied short-term rental unit for this pilot
program the property owner shall fill out a registration form and submit it
to the Community and Neighborhood Services Department on or after May
9, 2018. The registration will be evaluated using the criteria established in
Section 14-4.27.
Sec. 14-4.43. Required information.
The owner of a short-term rental dwelling unit shall comply with Section
14-4.29.2. In addition, the owner shall sign a statement that they
understand the following information regarding this pilot program:
(a) The City of Holland is committed to programming that balances all
citizen needs as much as possible. Therefore, the City of Holland has
adopted a two-year pilot program to test nonowner-occupied short-term
rental units in residential zone districts. The pilot program shall
commence on May 9, 2018, and expire June 30, 2020.
(b) The City recognizes that allowing short-term rental units in the R-TRN,
R-1, and R-2 zone districts will provide travelers with safe
accommodation, that these units will contribute to the local economy,
and that they can provide homeowners an opportunity to hold property
in difficult economic circumstances or as an investment.
(c) The City also recognizes the necessity to maintain the character of its
neighborhoods, control the density of short-term rental units, to
maintain affordable housing options, and to address nuisance concerns.
(d) It is for these reasons that the City of Holland shall take a limited
approach to allowing nonowner-occupied short-term rental units in the
R-TRN, R-1, and R-2 zone districts via this two-year pilot program.
(a) The pilot program expires on June 30, 2020.
(b) If the pilot program is not renewed or incorporated into the ordinance,
they shall not continue using the property as a short-term rental;
(c) Specific criteria must be met under the zoning ordinance;
(d) Their short-term rental certificate of compliance will be revoked for
violations of Section 14-4.29.2;
(e) Compliance with this criteria is required prior to allowing a short-term
rental unit to be occupied;
Sec. 14-4.41 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.43
C:381
Sec. 14-4.44. Certificate of compliance - pilot program.
Sec. 14-4.45. Change of use or withdrawal from the pilot program.
If a property owner decides to change the use of a short-term rental, or
withdraw their rental unit from this pilot program, they shall comply with
the following requirements:
Sec. 14-4.46. Expiration of pilot program.
Division 12 shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on June 30, 2020. All rental
certificates of compliance that are issued under this pilot program are no
longer in effect after the pilot program expires. If the pilot program is
not renewed or incorporated into the ordinance, the property owner may
file a written notice with the Department of Community and Neighborhood
(f) The property owner agrees they will not rent out their property as a
short-term rental if they do not meet this criteria, or if their registration
is rejected, or if they are unable to obtain a short-term rental certificate
of compliance.
(a) Inspection required. For this pilot program, a nonowner-occupied shortterm
rental unit shall obtain a new inspection. If the inspector
determines that the property is in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 14 and this division, they shall issue a rental certificate of
compliance. This certificate shall expire one year from the date of the
inspection, or not later than June 30, 2020.
(b) Requirements upon sale or transfer. If a rental certificate of compliance
is issued to a property under this pilot program, and the property is
then sold to a new owner, the rental certificate shall be suspended until
such a time that the new owner provides the information required in
Sections 14-4.42 and 14-4.43 of this division.
(a) The owner shall provide written notification of their intent to withdraw
their property from the pilot program. By doing so, they understand
that this property may not be eligible in the future, based on Sections
14-4.42 and 14-4.43.
(b) The owner shall provide written notification of how they intend to use
the property in the future. Such as a rental unit with occupants that
stay more than 30 consecutive days, vacating the unit, owner
occupancy, etc.
(c) If the property remains a rental unit, all provisions of Chapter 14,
Article II, shall be met.
(d) If a property owner wishes to have a rental unit that is used for a
portion of the year as short-term rental, and a portion of the year as a
standard rental, they shall be required to meet all of the criteria under
this pilot program.
Sec. 14-4.43 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-4.46
C:382
Services requesting a rental certificate of compliance for occupants who
will reside at the property for a minimum of 30 consecutive days.
Sec. 14-4.47. Pilot program evaluation measurements.
(a) Throughout the two-year pilot program staff shall track information
regarding each property that is registered under the pilot program.
Information shall include, but not be limited to, property complaints,
nuisance complaints, police calls, service calls, etc.
(b) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services staff shall
provide performance reports to City Council each April and October of
the two-year pilot program period.
(c) These reports shall include information described in this section as well
as the opinion of staff as to the success of the pilot program.
(d) The final report shall contain a staff recommendation for the
continuation or termination of the pilot program.
Sec. 14-4.46 CHARTER Sec. 14-4.47
C:383

ARTICLE III
Fair Housing
Sec. 14-5. Declaration of policy.57 [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City in the exercise of its police
power for the protection of the public safety, health and general welfare, for
the maintenance of business and good government, and for the promotion
of the City's trade, commerce and manufacture, to assure equal opportunity
to all persons to live in adequate housing facilities, regardless of religion,
race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income and
to that end to prohibit discrimination in housing.
Sec. 14-6. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMISSION — The Human Relations Commission of the City.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Any association or corporation regularly
engaged in the business of lending money, guaranteeing loans or acting as
a broker for the purpose of obtaining money for loans.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Includes any improved or unimproved
real property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of
one or more individuals.
PERSON — An individual, association, corporation, joint apprenticeship,
committee, joint stock company, labor union, legal representative, mutual
company, partnership, receiver, trust, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy,
unincorporated organization, any other legal or commercial entity, the state
or any governmental entity or agency.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN — A person, whether licensed or
not, who for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself out as
engaged in these activities, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a
loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon real
property, or who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a
publication, or a person employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — Includes the sale, exchange, rental or
lease of real property.
REAL PROPERTY — Buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
57.Editor's Note: See also Sec. 39-17.4, Fair housing accommodation policy.
Sec. 14-5 CHARTER Sec. 14-6
C:385
SOURCE OF INCOME — Source of income shall mean any legal source from
which a person obtains money. This section shall not prevent reasonable
inquiry regarding a person's source of income or the ability to meet the
financial obligations of housing. This definition shall not be construed to
prevent a good faith business determination relating to a person's ability to
meet the financial burdens involved.
Sec. 14-7. Unfair housing practices—real estate transactions
generally. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
It shall be an unfair housing practice and unlawful for an owner, real estate
broker or real estate salesman, or any other person as defined in this article:
(a) To refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person
because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status
or source of income.
(b) To refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person because
of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status or source
of income.
(c) To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or privileges
of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in
connection therewith because of religion, race, color, national origin,
age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(d) To refuse to receive from, or to fail to transmit to, a person a bona fide
offer to engage in a real estate transaction because of religion, race,
color, national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(e) To represent to a person that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail
to bring a property listing to his attention, or to refuse to permit him to
inspect real property, under reasonable conditions, because of religion,
race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(f) To publish or advertise, directly or indirectly, an intent to make a
limitation, specification or discrimination based on religion, race, color,
national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(g) To use a form of application for a real estate transaction for the purpose
of making a limitation, specification or discrimination based on religion,
race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(h) To make a record or inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate
transaction which indicates the religion, race, color, national origin,
age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(i) To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain in listing of real property with the
understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real
estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in
Sec. 14-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-7
C:386
Sec. 14-8. Same—Pinching. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
It is an unfair housing practice and unlawful for a person to whom
application is made for financial assistance in connection with a real estate
transaction or for the construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance or
improvement of real property, or a representative of such a person:
Sec. 14-9. Same—Inducing of transactions. [Ord. No. 1341,
7-17-2002]
It is an unfair housing practice and unlawful for a person, for the purpose
of inducing a real estate transaction from which he may benefit financially:
Sec. 14-10. Same—Retaliation; discrimination; coercion;
interference with Commission; preventing compliance. [Ord. No.
1341, 7-17-2002]
It is an unfair housing practice and unlawful:
connection therewith with respect to religion, race, color, national
origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(a) To discriminate against the applicant because of religion, race, color,
national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(b) To use a form of application for financial assistance or to make or keep a
record or inquiry in connection with applications for financial
assistance which indicates, directly or indirectly, the religion, race,
color, national origin, age, sex, marital status or source of income.
(a) To initiate, instigate or participate in a series of representations,
advertisements or contacts within a block, neighborhood or area
designed to promote real estate transactions in the block,
neighborhood or area based on the implication, directly or indirectly,
that changes have occurred or will or may occur in the composition with
respect to religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status
or source of income of the owners or occupants in the block,
neighborhood or area in which the real property is located, or that the
changes will or may result in the lowering of property values, or an
increase in criminal or antisocial behavior or a decline in the quality of
the schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real
property is located.
(b) To solicit the sale or listing for sale of real property, by telephone, mail
or personally, after the property owner has expressly requested the
solicitor or the company he represents to cease such solicitation.
(a) To retaliate or discriminate against a person because he has opposed an
unfair housing practice, or because he has made a charge, filed a
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in an investigation,
proceeding or hearing under this article.
Sec. 14-7 CHARTER Sec. 14-10
C:387
Sec. 14-11. Exemptions from article. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
This article shall not apply:
Sec. 14-12. Enforcement procedure. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
(b) To coerce a person to engage in an unfair housing practice.
(c) To interfere willfully with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a
power by the Commission or one of its members or representatives
under this article.
(d) To obstruct or prevent willfully a person from complying with the
provisions of this article.
(a) To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains
housing accommodations for not more than two families living
independently of each other, if the owner or lessor or a member of his
family resides in one of the housing accommodations.
(b) To the rental of one or more rooms in a single-family dwelling by the
owner or lessor if he or a member of his family resides therein.
(c) To the sale or rental by the owner or lessor of a housing accommodation
in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than
two families living independently of each other which was not in any
manner listed or publicly advertised for sale or rental.
(d) To the rental of a housing accommodation for not to exceed 12 months
by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him and maintained as
his home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by
the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal
residence.
(a) Complaints. The Commission may receive complaints from any person
concerning violations or possible violations of any provision of this
article. Such complaint shall be in writing, under oath, stating that an
unfair housing practice has been committed, setting forth the facts
upon which the complaint is based, and setting forth facts sufficient for
the Commission to identify the person charged. The complaint shall
further state under oath that the complaint is made in good faith and
not for the purpose of harassment or entrapment. Such complaint shall
be filed with the Commission within 90 days after the alleged unfair
housing practice occurred.
(b) Investigation. The Commission shall cause a prompt and full
investigation of each complaint; such investigation to be undertaken by
such agent or committee of the Commission as the Commission shall
from time to time appoint and determine.
(c) Conciliation proceedings. If the Commission determines, after
investigation, that probable cause exists for the complaint, it shall
Sec. 14-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-12
C:388
Sec. 14-13. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1341, 7-17-2002]
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by the
penalties set forth in Section 1-10.
attempt to eliminate the unlawful practice by means of conciliation and
persuasion. The Commission shall not make public the details of any
conciliation proceedings until the conditions have been satisfactorily
adjusted or no further action is deemed advisable.
(d) Public hearing; statement of charges. In any case of failure to eliminate
the unlawful housing practice charged in the complaint by means of
conciliation or persuasion, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
to determine whether or not an unlawful housing practice has been
committed. The Commission shall serve upon the person charged with
having engaged in the unlawful housing practice a statement of the
charges made in the complaint and a notice of the time and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than 10 days after the
service of the statement of charges. The respondent shall have the right
to file an answer to the statement of charges, to appear at the hearing
in person, or to be represented by an attorney or by any other person,
and to participate in the hearing.
(e) Decisions and action by Commission—statement of findings of fact;
dismissal of unjustified complaint. If, upon the evidence presented, the
Commission finds that the respondent has not engaged in any unlawful
housing practice, it shall state its findings of fact and the complaint
shall be considered dismissed. If, upon all the evidence presented, the
Commission finds that the person has engaged or is engaging in an
unlawful housing practice, it shall state its findings of fact.
(f) Same—Action when person fails to cease unfair housing practice. In the
event that the person charged with having engaged in the unlawful
housing practice fails to cease such practice, the Commission shall
either:
(1) Certify the case and the entire record of its proceedings to the City
Attorney, who shall thereupon investigate evidence and shall take
such legal course as the necessities of the case require, or
(2) Shall transfer jurisdiction of such matter to the State Civil Rights
Commission as provided in Act 112 of the Public Acts of 1968.58
58.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 37.2101 et seq.
Sec. 14-12 CHARTER Sec. 14-13
C:389
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 15, Ice, adopted as Sections 4-6.1 through 4-6.4 of the
1955 Code, as amended, was repealed 10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1661.]
Chapter 16
JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS AND USED CAR
DEALERS
Sec. 14-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 14-13
C:390
ARTICLE I
In General
(Reserved)
CHARTER Sec. 14-13
C:391

ARTICLE II
Junk and Secondhand Dealers
Sec. 16-1. Definition. [Code 1955, § 7-6.1; Ord. No. 924, 4-15-1987]
A secondhand dealer or junk dealer is hereby defined as any person whose
principal business is that of purchasing, selling, exchanging, storing or
receiving secondhand articles of any kind or description, except used motor
vehicles and except used clothing.
Sec. 16-2. State law adopted. [Code 1955, § 7-6.2; amended
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1712]
All statutes of the state, and specifically §§ 1 through 7 of Act No. 350 of the
Public Acts of 1917, as amended, being MCLA 445.401 et seq., insofar as
such provisions apply to secondhand dealers and junk dealers, are hereby
expressly incorporated into and made a part of this Code, by reference, and
no person shall violate any such law, rule or regulation.
Sec. 16-3. License—required. [Code 1955, § 7-6.3; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992]
No person shall carry on the business of collecting junk or operate as a junk
or secondhand dealer without first having paid the fee as established by a
resolution adopted by City Council and having obtained from the Mayor a
license in the manner provided in Chapter 17 and in the statutes of the state
pertaining to junk and secondhand dealers.
Sec. 16-4. Same—Application. [Code 1955, § 7-6.4]
Application for a license under this article shall be filed with the City Clerk
on forms provided by him.
Sec. 16-5. Pawning and security transactions prohibited. [Code
1955, § 7-6.5]
No licensee under the provisions of this article shall receive, in the course
of his business, any article by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall he loan or
advance any sum of money on the security of any article or thing.
Sec. 16-6. Loitering by minors under seventeen. [Code 1955,
§ 7-6.6]
No minor under the age of 17 years shall loiter nor be permitted to loiter
about any junkyard.
Sec. 16-1 CHARTER Sec. 16-7
C:393
Sec. 16-7. Night use of premises restricted. [Code 1955, § 7-6.7;
amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1712]
No person, except the licensee under this article or his agents, shall be
permitted within any junkyard during the period from 9:00 p.m. until 7:00
a.m.
Sec. 16-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 16-7
C:394
ARTICLE III
Used Car Dealers
Sec. 16-8. License required. [Code 1955, § 7-14.1]
No person shall engage in the business or occupation of dealing in used or
secondhand automobiles, without first obtaining a license therefor from the
City Clerk, in the manner provided in this article and Chapter 17. No such
license shall be granted by the City Clerk until the application therefor has
been referred to the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief and a report has been
received from them stating that the exercise of the license applied for in the
proposed location will not injure the public, health, safety or welfare and
that the applicant has substantially complied with federal, state and local
law during the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application.
Sec. 16-9. Certain purchases prohibited. [Code 1955, § 7-14.2]
No licensee under the provisions of this article shall purchase or receive
any used or secondhand automobile, or any part of an automobile, from any
person who is under the age of 17 years, without the written consent of his
parent or guardian. No such licensee shall purchase any used automobile
or any part of an automobile which he has reason to believe to have been
stolen.
Sec. 16-10. Business record. [Code 1955, § 7-14.3]
Each licensee under the provisions of this article shall keep a daily record
of all business transactions relating to used automobiles and to parts of
automobiles, which record shall include the names and the addresses of
persons from whom such automobiles or parts are purchased and to whom
the same are sold, the identity of the automobile or part by name and
description, including, whenever applicable, the year of manufacture, serial
number, engine number, body number and any other pertinent identification
number, mark or description. Failure to keep such a record by any such
licensee or by any of his agents or subordinates shall constitute a violation
of this requirement and shall constitute sufficient grounds for the
revocation of the license granted to him. The Chief of Police shall, at all
times, have access to such daily record.
Sec. 16-11. Cleanliness of premises. [Code 1955, § 7-14.4]
No licensee under the provisions of this article shall permit the
accumulation of any junk, rubbish or litter on licensed premises.
Sec. 16-8 CHARTER Sec. 16-11
C:395
Chapter 17
LICENSES GENERALLY
Sec. 17-1. License required. [Code 1955, § 7-1.2; amended 8-7-2002
by Ord. No. 1345; Ord. No. 1390, 6-2-2004; 5-14-2014 by Ord. No.
1628; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1713]
(a) No person shall engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any
trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license or permit
is required by any section of this Code without first obtaining such a
license or permit from the City, in the manner and from the City officer
required by this chapter, or by the provision of this Code requiring such
license or permit. Persons not previously licensed under any provision
of the Code of the City of Holland (1955) or any other ordinance of the
City and who are required by the provisions of this Code to obtain a
license or permit shall apply for the same within 21 days after the
effective date (June 23, 2004) of this ordinance amendment.
(b) The following trades, professions, businesses or privileges are required
to obtain a license or permit pursuant to the chapters of this Code as
referenced below:
(1) Arcades - Chapter 3.
(2) Bowling alleys - Chapter 3.
(3) Building mover - Chapter 6.
(4) Circus or carnival - Chapter 3.
(5) Community Antenna Television System - Chapter 7.
(6) Dance hall - Chapter 3.
(7) Dogs - Chapter 4.
(8) Indoor archery and firearms shooting ranges - Chapter 39.
(9) Peddler - Chapter 24.
(10) Pool table - Chapter 3.
(11) Public lodging - Chapter 26.
(12) Refuse collector - Chapter 27.
(13) Residential care facility - Chapter 26.
(14) Rubbish collector - Chapter 27.
(15) Secondhand dealer - Chapter 16.
(16) Sexually oriented businesses - Chapter 40.
Sec. 16-11 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 17-1
C:396
Sec. 17-2. Licensing authority; application generally. [Code 1955,
§ 7-1.4]
Unless otherwise provided in the provisions of this Code requiring a license,
the City Clerk shall be the licensing authority of the City. Unless so
provided, applications for licenses from the City shall be made to the City
Clerk, upon forms provided by him, and licenses shall be issued by him,
subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter. All statements of fact in
the application shall be made upon oath or affirmation.
Sec. 17-3. Record of applications. [Code 1955, § 7-1.22]
The City Clerk shall keep a record of all applications for licenses filed with
him, indicating thereon whether the license applied for in each case has
been granted or withheld, and, if withheld, the reason therefor.
Sec. 17-4. Conditions of issuance generally. [Code 1955, § 7-1.3]
No license shall be granted or delivered until the applicant therefor has
complied with all the required conditions precedent to its issuance.
Sec. 17-5. Licenses not to be issued to persons rejected, etc. [Code
1955, § 7-1.15]
No applicant to whom a license has been refused or whose license has
been revoked shall make further application for a license for at least six
months after such last previous rejection or revocation, unless he can show,
to the satisfaction of the City Clerk, that the reason for such rejection or
revocation no longer exists.
Sec. 17-6. Investigations and recommendations; fingerprinting of
applicants, etc.; referral to City Treasurer. [Code 1955, § 7-1.5; Ord.
No. 865]
(17) Sidewalk construction - Chapter 32.
(18) Sign erector - Chapter 39.
(19) Solicitation of funds - Chapter 31.
(20) Taxicabs - Chapter 34.
(21) Theater - Chapter 3.
(22) Tulip Time entertaining - Chapter 3.
(23) Tulip Time transient merchants - Chapter 24.
(24) Sale of used automobiles - Chapter 16.
(a) The City Clerk may refer any application for a license to the Chief of
Police, the Fire Chief, the Building Inspector or the Health Officer, or to
any two or more of them, for an investigation and recommendation on
Sec. 17-1 CHARTER Sec. 17-6
C:397
Sec. 17-7. License year; expiration of licenses; when certain
licenses become effective. [Code 1955, § 7-1.6]
Unless otherwise provided in the provision of this Code requiring a license,
the license year of the City shall begin on May 1 in each year and shall
terminate on April 30 of the following calendar year. Each license granted
under the provisions of this Code shall expire on the next succeeding April
30; provided, that any annual license issued between March 30 and April 30
of any year shall expire on April 30 of the calendar year next following the
issuance thereof. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the
issuance of licenses for a period of less than one year, any license so issued
shall become effective on the date of the issuance thereof.
Sec. 17-8. Requirements as to state licenses, etc. [Code 1955,
§ 7-1.7]
No license required by any provision of this Code shall be issued to any
person who is required to have a license or permit from the state until such
person shall submit evidence that he has secured or has made application
for such state license or permit.
Sec. 17-9. Possession and exhibition generally. [Code 1955,
§ 7-1.19]
Except for a reasonable time after the loss or destruction thereof, no person
to whom a license has been granted shall fail to carry such license upon
his person when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on the
trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted;
except, that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated,
conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, or from or in
a vehicle, such license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous
place in such place, establishment or vehicle. No person shall fail, except
within a reasonable time after the loss or destruction thereof, to produce
any license granted by the City when requested to do so by any City police
officer, health officer or City inspector or by any person representing the
issuing authority.
matters pertaining to the public safety, health or welfare which are or
may be involved in the exercise of the license applied for, and the City
Clerk may require the giving of fingerprints and such other information
as may be necessary to establish the identity of the applicant.
(b) The City Clerk shall refer an application for a license to the City
Treasurer for review. The City Treasurer shall report to the City Clerk
whether the applicant owes any personal property taxes to the City
which are due and unpaid for the activity or business establishment to
be licensed.
Sec. 17-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 17-10
C:398
Sec. 17-10. Display of expired, etc., license. [Code 1955, § 7-1.12]
No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a
duplicate has been issued.
Sec. 17-11. Ownership of certificate; altering or defacing
certificate. [Code 1955, § 7-1.8]
Each license certificate and permit issued by the City shall be and shall
remain the property of the City and no person shall alter or deface the same.
Sec. 17-12. Fees—generally. [Code 1955, § 7-1.11; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992]
No license or permit shall be issued under this Code except upon payment
of the fees as established by a resolution adopted by City Council; provided,
that no license or permit fee shall be required from any person who is
exempt from such fee by any provision of state or federal law. Such persons
shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter and of the chapter
requiring the license for which such fee is required. In the event that a
license or permit is denied to any applicant, a portion of the fee paid by him
as established by a resolution adopted by City Council, shall be refunded.
Sec. 17-13. Same—Prorating annual license fees.
Whenever any annual license is applied for and issued between October
31 and March 30, the fee therefor shall be 1/2 of the annual fee for such
license; provided, however, that no annual license fee of $5 or less shall be
so prorated.
Sec. 17-14. Renewals/licenses and permits. [Code 1955, § 7-1.10;
Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 1069, 10-7-1992; Ord. No. 1494, 3-5-2008]
(a) Applications for the renewal of any license or food service permit
("permit") shall be considered to be and shall be treated in the same
manner as an original application for such license or permit.
(b) If a licensee files an application to renew a license or permit issued by
the City on or after May 1, or fails to pay the applicable license or
permit fee on or before May 1, the City Clerk shall not renew the license
or permit until the applicant pays an administrative late fee as
established by a resolution adopted by City Council to the City
Treasurer for each license or permit to be issued. Persons who are not
conducting business within the City for an activity or business
establishment to be licensed shall not be subject to the administrative
late fee upon subsequent timely application for a license or permit.
(c) The City Clerk shall not renew a license or permit if the applicant owes
any personal property taxes, license fees, food service permit fees, or
administrative late charges to the City which are due and unpaid.
Sec. 17-10 CHARTER Sec. 17-15
C:399
Sec. 17-15. Transferability. [Code 1955, § 7-1.13]
A license issued by the City shall not be transferable, unless specifically
authorized by the provisions of this Code requiring it, and then only in
accordance with such provisions.
Sec. 17-16. Permitting another person to use license. [Code 1955,
§ 7-1.14]
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall permit by lease
or otherwise any other person to use or employ any license issued to him by
the City.
Sec. 17-17. Duplicate licenses. [Code 1955, § 7-1.21]
Any person holding a license under any provision of this Code may obtain a
duplicate copy of such license in case the original has been lost, destroyed
or so worn or soiled as to be partially or wholly illegible.
No such duplicate copy shall be issued until the licensee shall return the
original to the City Clerk, or file an affidavit with the City Clerk to the effect
that such license has been destroyed or lost. Any duplicate license issued
shall be plainly marked on its face, "Duplicate."
Sec. 17-18. Suspension, refusal and revocation—generally. [Code
1955, § 7-1.16]
Any license required by this Code may be suspended, or the renewal thereof
refused, by the issuing officer for misrepresentation of any material fact
in the application for such license. Any license may be suspended by the
officer who is responsible for the enforcement thereof for any good cause.
Such officer shall notify the issuing officer of each such suspension and of
the reinstatement of such license upon the termination of such suspension.
Any license may be revoked by the Council for any good cause. No license
fee shall be refunded to any licensee in case of the revocation or suspension
of a license for good cause. The term "good cause," as used in this section,
shall mean any act, omission or the permitting of a condition to exist, with
respect to the license in question, which is:
(a) Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public;
(b) Unlawful or fraudulent in nature;
(c) A violation of the chapter under which the license was granted;
(d) Beyond the scope of the license issued; or
(e) A fact, circumstance or condition which, had it existed or been known to
the issuing authority at the time the license was granted, would have
been sufficient grounds for the refusal thereof.
Sec. 17-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 17-19
C:400
Sec. 17-19. Same–Hearing required for revocation; notice. [Code
1955, § 7-1.17]
No license under this Code shall be revoked except after hearing before
the Council following not less than 10 days' written notice to the licensee
stating the time and place of such hearing and setting forth the reasons for
revocation.
Sec. 17-20. Same—Appeal to Council upon refusal or suspension.
[Code 1955, § 7-1.18; amended 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 1673]
An applicant for any license who has been refused a license or the renewal
of a license for any reason by the authorized issuing officer or whose license
has been suspended, unless an appeal is provided to another agency by this
Code or by state law, may appeal such refusal or suspension to the Council
by setting forth all of the facts in a written petition and filing the same with
the City Clerk within five days after such refusal. The Council shall grant
a hearing to the applicant, upon the same notice as is required by Section
17-19. The decision of the Council on such appeal shall be final.
Sec. 17-21. Authority of City officers to enter and inspect licensed
premises. [Code 1955, § 7-1.9]
Acceptance by any person of a license granted by the City under this Code
shall constitute permission to any officer of the City, within the authority
granted him by the section of this Code under which such license was
granted, to enter upon and inspect the licensed premises at all reasonable
times.
Sec. 17-22. "Licensee" defined. [Code 1955, § 7-1.1]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the term "licensee"
shall mean and include any person to whom a license has been issued under
any provision of this chapter and the employees or agents of such person.
Chapter 18
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Sec. 17-19 CHARTER Sec. 17-22
C:401

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 18-1. Schedule of traffic rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-200459]
The following schedules are hereby established:
Schedule I. Limited Parking Areas.
Schedule II. No Parking Areas.
Schedule III. Miscellaneous Limitations and Parking.
Schedule IV. Through Streets and Intersections.
Schedule V. Yield Right-of-Way Intersections.
Schedule VI. Truck Routes.
Schedule VII. Special Speed Zones.
Schedule VIII. Special No Passing Zones.
All regulations presently in existence which are evidenced by signs and
meters, posted in appropriate places, are hereby continued. Such existing
regulations shall be incorporated in the above listed schedules and placed
on file in the offices of the City Clerk and Holland Police Department prior
to the effective date of this Code. Such schedules may be revised and new
schedule may be added by resolution of Council, and such revision shall be
effective upon publication of the Council proceedings and upon the posting
of the areas affected with appropriate signs or meters.
Sec. 18-2. Required obedience to chapter. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or fail
to perform any act required herein.
Sec. 18-3. Parental responsibility. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Ch. 18, adopted as part of the 1955 Code,
as amended.
Sec. 18-1 CHARTER Sec. 18-3
C:403

ARTICLE II
Michigan Vehicle Code
Sec. 18-4. Code and amendment and revisions adopted. [Ord. No.
1393, 7-21-2004; amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1597]
Pursuant to Public Act 260 of 1999, MCLA § 117.3, the Michigan Vehicle
Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA §§ 257.1 to 257.923, as effective on November
3, 2003, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle
Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted
by reference. Such code, as adopted, shall also be known as the "Holland
Vehicle Code."
Sec. 18-4.1. Operation while intoxicated. [Added 11-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 1597]
Pursuant to Public Act 7 of 2012,60 the City of Holland adopts by reference
Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA
§ 257.625(1)(c), and as subsequently amended, which shall be punishable
by one or more of the following:
Sec. 18-5. References in Code. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code (Holland Vehicle Code), as
adopted, to "within this state" shall mean "within the City of Holland", and
references to "local authorities" shall mean the "City of Holland".
Sec. 18-6. Citation numbers. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Citations to the Holland Vehicle Code shall refer to the Michigan Code
of Law sections, and with such sections being MCLA §§ 257.1 through
257.923, or any amendments thereto, and may be cited by inserting the
letter "H" before such citation section numbers.
Sec. 18-7. Prosecution limitations; penalties. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004; amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1597]
The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference; provided, however, that the City of Holland may not enforce any
provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is greater than 93 days nor for which the offense may be
punished with a fine in excess of $500; except, however, that a violation of
H257.625(1)(c) is punishable by one or more of the following:
(a) Community service for not more than 360 hours;
(b) Imprisonment for not more than 180 days; and
(c) A fine of not less than $200 nor more than $700.
60.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 117.3.
Sec. 18-4 CHARTER Sec. 18-7
C:405
Sec. 18-8. Adoption by reference provisions. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
The purposes of this chapter are to ensure the public safety and to provide
for the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the City of Holland.
Notice is hereby given that printed copies of the Holland Vehicle Code
shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, available for inspection by,
and distribution to, the public at all times. It is hereby acknowledged that
the Holland Vehicle Code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk in
compliance with state law which requires that records of public bodies be
made available to the general public.
Sec. 18-9. Conflict of ordinances. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
For any ordinances or parts thereof within this chapter which conflict with
any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code, the ordinance shall control.
(a) Community service for not more 360 hours;
(b) Imprisonment for not more than 180 days; and
(c) A fine of not less than $200 nor more than $700.
Sec. 18-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-9
C:406
ARTICLE III
Uniform Traffic Code
Sec. 18-10. Uniform Traffic Code and amendment and revisions
adopted. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Pursuant to MCLA § 257.951, the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships, and Villages, as promulgated by the director of the Michigan
Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act
of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCLA §§ 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective
October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform
Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are
incorporated and adopted by reference. Such code as adopted shall also be
known as the "Holland Uniform Traffic Code".
Sec. 18-11. References in Code. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages
(Holland Uniform Traffic Code), as adopted, to "governmental unit" shall
mean the "City of Holland".
Sec. 18-12. Citation numbers. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Citations to the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages
(Holland Uniform Traffic Code) shall refer to the Uniform Traffic Code
sections, and with such sections being Rule 1 through Rule 905, R28.1001
through R28.1905, and may be cited by inserting the letter "H" before such
citation section numbers.
Sec. 18-13. Adoption by reference provisions. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
The purposes of this chapter are to ensure the public safety and to provide
for the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the City of Holland.
Notice is hereby given that printed copies of the Holland Uniform Traffic
Code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, available for inspection by,
and distribution to, the public at all times. It is hereby acknowledged that
the Holland Uniform Traffic Code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk
in compliance with state law which requires that records of public bodies
be made available to the general public.
Sec. 18-14. Conflict of ordinances. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
For any ordinances or parts thereof within this chapter which conflict with
any provision of the Uniform Traffic Code, the ordinance shall control.
Sec. 18-10 CHARTER Sec. 18-14
C:407

ARTICLE IV
Other Motor Vehicle And Traffic Ordinances
Sec. 18-15. Inhalation and consumption of chemical agents while
driving, driving under the influence of a chemical agent prohibited.
[Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Sec. 18-16. Emergency regulations. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The City Manager, or his designated representative, is hereby empowered
to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary regulation shall remain in effect for more
than 90 days.
Sec. 18-17. Authority to install, etc. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The City Manager, or his designated representative, shall, when and as
authorized by the City Council, cause to be placed or removed, trafficcontrol
signs, signals, lane markings and other devices and shall determine
the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in
operation or be in effect, when as required under the traffic regulations of
this City to indicate and carry out the provisions of this article and under
state law, to regulate, warn or guide traffic.
Sec. 18-18. Accidents; duty to report accidents forthwith. [Ord. No.
1393, 7-21-2004]
The driver of every motor vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
or death of any person or damage to property shall forthwith report such
accident to the Police Department if the accident occurs within this City.
The officer receiving such report, or his commanding officer, shall forthwith
forward each individual report to the direct of State on forms prescribed by
him, which shall be completed in full by the investigation officer. A copy of
the accident report required under this section shall be retained by the local
Police Department for at least three years.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person, whether licensed or not, to drive a
vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public,
including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, after
having unlawfully engaged in activities described in Section 20-15(a),
or while under the intentional influence of a "chemical agent" as
defined in Section 20-15(b).
(b) A person who is convicted of a violation of this section may be punished
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $100, or both.
Sec. 18-15 CHARTER Sec. 18-19
C:409
Sec. 18-19. Limitations on turning around. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic. A person who violates this
section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 18-20. Parades and processions—permits required; exceptions.
[Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
No parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, except the forces
of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state, and the
forces of the Police and Fire Departments shall occupy, march or proceed
along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the City
Clerk. Such permit shall be issued only upon approval of the Chief of Police
and after payment of the fee, when required, and shall state the route to
be followed and shall be subject to any conditions which the Chief of Police
deems necessary to protect the safety of persons and property. A person
who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 18-21. Same—Unauthorized entry into. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
No person shall enter or be or become a part of any parade or procession
without express permission of the permittee. A person who violates this
section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 18-22. Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. [Ord. No.
1393, 7-21-2004]
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is
in motion. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
Sec. 18-23. Interference with driver's view or control—position of
passengers. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with
the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over
the driving mechanism of the vehicle. A person who violates this section is
responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 18-24. Operation of trucks on specified routes. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004; Ord. No. 1458, 7-5-2006]
(a) Truck route limitation. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation,
or any other entity to operate or cause to be operated a truck as
hereinafter defined, on any street, road, public right-of-way, or highway
within the City, unless such operation is upon a route designated as a
truck route in the schedule referred to in Section 18-1. The City shall
Sec. 18-19 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-24
C:410
procure and have posted appropriate signs along the designated truck
route as required by the laws of the State of Michigan.
(b) Truck definition. A "truck," as used herein, shall mean any "truck,"
"truck tractor," "semitrailer" or "commercial vehicle" or combination
thereof having an elected gross weight greater than 10,000 pounds.
The word "truck" does not include the following:
(1) Bus, as defined by MCLA § 257.4b;
(2) School bus, as defined by MCLA § 257.57;
(3) Authorized emergency vehicles, as defined by MCLA § 257.2;
(4) Motor home, as defined by MCLA § 257.32a;
(5) Farm tractors and other agricultural equipment, as defined by
MCLA § 257.16;
(6) Utility service vehicles or vehicles used for construction in the City
while the work is in progress;
(7) Road construction and maintenance vehicles while being used for
that purpose inside the City limits;
(8) Refuse trucks while making refuse pick ups within the residential
districts of the City;
(9) All vehicles owned or leased by the City; and
(10) All vehicles used exclusively to transport personal possessions or
family members for nonbusiness purposes.
(c) Additional definitions. The term "City" shall mean the City of Holland.
The terms "elected gross weight," "truck," "truck tractor," "semitrailer"
and "commercial vehicle" shall have the same definitions as provided in
the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300, Public Acts of Michigan, 1949, as
amended.
(d) Information disclosure. Upon the request of a police officer, it shall be
the duty of any person driving or in charge or control of any truck to
stop and answer any questions regarding the weight of the truck, its
destination, and its point of origin; to proceed to any public or private
scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether
the weight thereof is in excess of the weight limit provided in this
section; and such persons shall also present a log book, weight slips,
delivery slips, and other written evidence of destination or points of
origin, for the officer's examination.
(e) Exception: Commercial and home deliveries, pickups and service. A
truck may use or travel upon a street, road, public right-of-way or
highway even though not designated as a truck route by the City, for the
purpose of delivering or picking up goods, wares, or merchandise, raw
materials, or materials which have been processed although the
Sec. 18-24 CHARTER Sec. 18-24
C:411
Sec. 18-24.1. Transportation of hazardous materials on South
Washington Avenue. [Ord. No. 1400, 11-17-2004]
manufacturing process has not been completed or there are other steps
to be completed in the manufacturing process, or for the purpose of
providing services at its destination within the City. In such event,
travel along a prohibited route shall be limited to the minimum distance
necessary to accomplish the delivery, pickup or service call, and said
vehicle shall return to a designated truck route by the shortest route
possible.
(f) Exception: Leaving or returning to place of business. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent a truck from leaving or returning to its
customary storage location at the owner's or operator's business or
commercial location within the City which is not located on a
designated truck route, provided that the most direct route to and from
a designated truck route is used.
(g) Exception: Road repairs. If any designated truck route or portion
thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use,
motor vehicles within the restricted class shall use such other
temporary truck routes as may be designated by the Chief of Police or
his/her designee.
(h) Zoning Ordinance. Nothing contained herein shall authorize the
parking of a truck otherwise prohibited under Chapter 39 of the
Ordinance Code.
(i) Penalty. A person, firm, corporation or any other entity that violates this
section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(a) No semitrailer, tractor-trailer, truck, or other motor vehicle
transporting the quantities of hazardous materials specified in
Subsection (b) shall be operated on South Washington Avenue between
Geurink Boulevard and 64th Street.
(b) The quantities of hazardous materials which are prohibited by
Subsection (a) are:
(1) Any quantity of hazardous material that is required by federal law
to be placarded;
(2) Any quantity of explosives categories 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3, poison gases,
dangerous when wet goods, organic peroxides, poison inhalation
hazards, or radioactive materials; and
(3) Over 1,000 pounds of explosives categories 1.4, 1.5, or 1.6,
flammable gases, nonflammable gases, flammable and combustible
liquids, flammable solids, spontaneously combustible materials,
oxidizers, poisons, corrosives, and certain other materials such as
hazardous wastes.
Sec. 18-24 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-24.1
C:412
Sec. 18-25. Restrictions on trucks and commercial vehicles upon
use of streets generally. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, stop,
stand or park any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess
of the amounts specified thereon at any time upon any of the streets or parts
(c) Tank vehicles which are empty, or which have a residue, or vehicles
transporting empty containers, are prohibited from operating on South
Washington Avenue between Geurink Boulevard and 64th Street if they
previously transported a prohibited quantity of hazardous material as
specified in Subsection (b), with the following exceptions:
(1) Tank vehicles or containers that have been sufficiently cleaned of
residue and purged of vapor to remove any potential hazard; or
(2) Tank vehicles or containers that have been reloaded with a material
not classified as a hazardous material.
(d) Tank vehicles used to transport Class 3 flammable liquids, even if
empty, are prohibited from operating on South Washington Avenue
between Geurink Boulevard and 64th Street.
(e) The U.S. Department of Transportation Regulations, 49 C.F.R. 117-171,
397 and any revisions, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Regulations, 10 C.F.R. 73, and any additional federal regulations
affecting the transportation of hazardous materials by motor carriers
on highways are incorporated by reference into these regulations.
(f) All terms used in this section which are defined in the federal
regulations referenced in Subsection (e) above shall have the same
meaning as given in the federal regulations.
(g) The restriction contained in Subsection (b) shall not apply to fuel
contained in the fuel system of the transporting vehicle, or in the fuel
systems of vehicles and equipment being towed or carried.
(h) Alternative-fuel vehicles powered by liquefied petroleum gas (LPG),
liquefied natural gas (LNG), or compressed natural gas (CNG) shall be
permitted if the:
(1) Vehicle alternative-fuel system conforms to applicable industry
standards and federal regulations;
(2) Fuel capacity of the vehicle does not exceed 300 pounds water
capacity; and
(3) Vehicles displays all markings and symbols required by law or
regulation to identify the alternative fuel system.
(i) A person who violates this section is responsible for a Class III civil
infraction.
Sec. 18-24.1 CHARTER Sec. 18-25
C:413
of streets on which such signs have been posted. A person who violates this
section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 18-26. Speed of bicycles. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing. A person who violates this
section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 18-26.1. Obedience to signs prohibiting bicycle riding,
skateboarding, roller skating and roller-blading. [Ord. No. 1542,
2-17-2010]
When signs are erected or posted on a sidewalk, street, or other designated
areas which prohibit a person from bicycling, skateboarding, roller skating
or roller-blading on the sidewalk, any improvements along the right-ofway
or other designated areas, or prohibit a person from bicycling,
skateboarding, roller skating or roller-blading on the street or other
designated area, a person shall not disobey such signs. The signs shall
be authorized in the manner provided by Section 18-17 of this Code. The
City Council shall designate the sidewalks, streets, and other areas by
resolution. A violation of this section shall be deemed a Class I civil
infraction, and the fine for such violation shall be as set forth in Section
2-118 of the Code.
Sec. 18-25 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-26.1
C:414
ARTICLE V
Stopping, Standing And Parking
DIVISION 1
Generally
Sec. 18-27. Prohibited in specified places or times. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004; amended 11-20-2013 by Ord. No. 1619; 2-4-2015 by Ord.
No. 1645; 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1752]
(a) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or trafficcontrol
device, a person shall not stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of
the following places:
(1) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking.
(2) In any place where the parked vehicle would significantly impede
or obstruct United States mail delivery, street cleaning, plowing,
maintenance, waste removal, or similar municipal functions.
(3) Between the sidewalk lines of any street between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day; except that this prohibition shall not
apply to physicians, ambulance drivers or undertakers on
emergency calls.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(3), currently licensed and operable
one- to twelve-passenger motor vehicles, motorcycles and trucks not
exceeding two tons in carrying capacity may park between the sidewalk
lines of any street between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day from
May 15 through October 15, provided that:
(1) There shall be no parking during such hours of trailers or
nonmotorized recreational vehicles (whether or not attached to a
passenger vehicle or truck) between the sidewalk lines of any
street;
(2) There shall be no parking during such hours between the sidewalk
lines on the following streets:
a. 6th Street from River Avenue to Columbia Avenue;
b. 7th Street and 8th Street from Lincoln Avenue to Maple
Avenue;
c. 10th Street from Pine Avenue to Lincoln Avenue;
d. Pine Avenue and Lincoln Avenue from 7th Street to 10th
Street;
e. River Avenue, Central Avenue, College Avenue and Columbia
Avenue from 6th Street to 10th Street; and
Sec. 18-27 CHARTER Sec. 18-27
C:415
f. Maple Avenue from 7th Street to 8th Street.
(3) There shall be no parking during such hours in a manner that
impedes the flow of traffic or where official signs prohibit stopping,
standing or parking.
(4) There shall be no parking on sidewalks or between sidewalks and
curbs.
(5) Vehicles may remain parked between sidewalk lines of a public
street (other than between a sidewalk and curb), in the same spot,
for up to 48 hours. Any vehicle identified as exceeding this time
limit shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle and may be given
notice and thereafter removed as an abandoned vehicle under the
Michigan Vehicle Code, MCLA §§ 257.252 to 257.252m, as
amended from time to time.
(c) Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(3), year-around overnight parallel
parking in a paved parkway located in the right-of-way is permitted to
the extent allowed under a revocable license agreement approved by
the City Council.
(1) Definition and intent. "Paved parkway" is defined as the area
between a street curbline and the adjacent sidewalk where offstreet
parking has been approved. The intent of the paved parkway
is to provide additional off-street parking for multifamily housing of
four units or more when ample parking is not already provided offstreet.
The purpose is to minimize the need to construct surface
lots as infill dense housing occurs.
(2) Eligibility to apply for revocable license agreement.
a. The licensee owns property abutting the proposed paved
parkway(s);
b. The licensee's abutting property is used for multifamily
residential of four units or more;
c. The licensee demonstrates a need for additional parking
beyond what is available on site;
d. The paved parkway area is at least 10 feet wide between the
edge of the road and the sidewalk;
e. The length of the paved parkway area is at least 40 feet long
along the edge nearest the right-of-way line;
f. The paved parkway is setback at least 10 feet from the right-ofway
line of a street intersecting the street upon which the
paved parkway is being proposed;
g. The City's Traffic Committee recommends approval to City
Council.
Sec. 18-27 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-27
C:416
h. Properties zoned in the ED Education and C3 Central Business
Districts shall not be eligible for paved parkways.
i. Parking spaces created by paved parkways shall not be
counted towards fulfilling minimum parking requirements as
set forth by the Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Construction and maintenance requirements.
a. The licensee will construct and maintain the paved parkway(s),
at their cost, based on specifications approved by the City's
Department of Transportation Services;
b. The paved parkway(s) shall be constructed with a width of
eight feet inclusive of a two-foot-wide gutter pan and shall be
at least 40 feet in length;
c. A six-inch-wide curb head shall be constructed on the inside
(sidewalk side) and ends of the paved parkway;
d. At least two feet of green space shall be located between the
paved parkway curb and the edge of the sidewalk;
e. Additions and modifications to the storm sewer system shall be
made, at the licensee's cost, as determined appropriate by the
City Engineer;
f. The City may allow the paved parkway(s) to be built with
pervious brick pavers where conditions and underlying soils
support this approach;
g. Signs shall be installed and maintained per Street Department
requirements;
h. Tree removals shall be minimized. If trees are relocated or
replaced, the relocated or new trees shall be located and
planted per direction of the Community and Neighborhood
Services Department and the Parks and Recreation
Department. The location may be in a nearby area of the City if
space is limited in the immediate area.
i. The licensee will be solely responsible for the cost to maintain,
repair, replace or remove of all or parts of the paved
parkway(s) (including the costs of such work resulting from
public projects) as needed and as determined by the City.
(4) Revocable license agreement content and requirements.
a. The revocable license agreement shall be recorded with the
County Register of Deeds before it takes effect and shall
include the requirements of Subsection (c)(3) and this
Subsection (c)(4) and shall be in a form approved by the City
Attorney;
Sec. 18-27 CHARTER Sec. 18-27
C:417
b. The City of Holland will not be responsible for parking
enforcement in the paved parkway(s).
c. The City of Holland will not be responsible for snow plowing
the paved parkway(s). The licensee or its residents are
responsible for snow removal (including accumulation of snow
left by City snowplows plowing the travel lanes) keeping the
paved parkway clean, and removal of any accumulation that
might interfere with corner visibility;
d. The City of Holland will not be responsible for street sweeping
the paved parkway(s);
e. Parkway paving shall not block or interfere with vehicular
travel lanes. Vehicles blocking or interfering with bicycle or
vehicular travel lanes may be ticketed or towed by the City;
f. The licensee shall provide a satisfactory certificate of
insurance and endorsements to evidence liability insurance to
cover claims relating to the use and condition of the paved
parkway(s) listing the City and its officials, officers, employees
and agents as additional insureds and include a waiver of
subrogation against the additional insureds;
g. On an interim basis, the City may, at its sole discretion, utilize
or restrict use of a paved parkway for whatever public purpose
as may be necessary, including but not limited to temporary
signage, utility work, and events;
h. The revocable license agreement may be revoked, without
compensation to the licensee, by the City if:
1. The City of Holland determines that it needs to access or
otherwise use the paved parkway(s);
2. The City determines that there are repeated violations or
failure to comply with this Section 18-27(c) or the
revocable license agreement;
3. The City determines that it should revoke the revocable
license agreement to protect or promote the health, safety,
and welfare of persons in the City or for other reasons.
i. If the revocable license agreement is revoked, the applicant
shall be responsible for all costs associated with removal of the
paved parkway and restoration of the area; and
j. If the licensee fails to promptly pay any amounts billed by the
City for which it is responsible under this Subsection (c) or the
revocable license agreement the licensee consents to the
special assessment of such costs against its property.
Sec. 18-27 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-28
C:418
Sec. 18-28. Off-street parking on right-of-way prohibited;
exceptions. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Sec. 18-29. Off-street parking prohibited on front yards of property
used for residential purposes; exception. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
(a) Parking forbidden between curb and sidewalk; exception. Except by
explicit written approval of the City Council, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any portion of the public right-of-way lying between the
sidewalk line and the curb bordering the traveled portion of a street.
(b) Parking between uncurbed street and sidewalk; when permitted. Where
any street is lacking a curb, off-street parking is permissible on the
public right-of-way provided that the parked vehicle:
(1) Is not in violation of any City ordinance; and
(2) Creates no hazard to any member of the public who may be lawfully
using the public right-of-way.
(c) Parking between uncurbed street and edge of public right-of-way where
there is no sidewalk, where permitted. Where any street is lacking a
curb and there is no existing sidewalk on the public right-of-way, offstreet
parking is permissible on the public right-of-way provided that
the parked vehicle:
(1) Is not in violation of any City ordinance; and
(2) Creates no hazard to any member of the public who may be lawfully
using the public right-of-way.
(a) Definitions. [For the purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply:]
(1) FRONT YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building or used for residential purposes, between the line of the
building facing a street (excluding steps and unenclosed porches)
and the street line, extending for the full width of the lot. On a
corner lot, each yard adjoining a street shall be considered a front
yard.
(2) ESTABLISHED DRIVEWAY OR PARKING SPACE — A driveway or
parking space, or both, that existed before 1973 or was installed by
right or by variance after 1973 and was used as a driveway or
parking space until August 18, 1999.
(b) Prohibitions. A person shall not park a vehicle on a front yard of a lot
used for residential purposes, except on a finished surface of asphalt,
concrete, pavers, or similar durable material approved by the City, or on
an established driveway or parking space.
Sec. 18-28 CHARTER Sec. 18-30
C:419
Sec. 18-30. Limited entry upon private property. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
A police officer or other enforcing officer of the City of Holland may enter
upon the front or side yard of any private property used for residential
purposes within the City of Holland for the limited purpose of investigating
and ticketing any vehicle when the officer has reasonable cause to believe
that the vehicle is parked in violation of Section 18-28 or 18-29.
Sec. 18-30 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-30
C:420
DIVISION 2
Downtown Overnight Residential Parking
Sec. 18-31. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
For the purposes of this division, the following terms and words shall mean:
Sec. 18-32. Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
No person shall stand or park a vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. in the designated municipal parking lots in the downtown area
without a permit affixed to the motor vehicle issued in accordance with the
provisions of this division.
Sec. 18-33. Permit. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004; amended 8-15-2018
by Ord. No. 1743]
A person residing within the downtown area may apply for an overnight
residential parking permit for an automobile registered in the name of
the applicant or in the name of a relative of the applicant. The applicant
shall apply to the Downtown Development Authority, and he or she shall
complete the downtown overnight residential parking permit application
provided at the Downtown Development Authority's office. The Downtown
Development Authority shall not issue an overnight parking permit for an
automobile if the applicant may obtain a parking permit for that automobile
from the building owner of applicant's residence or through a condominium
association.
(a) DOWNTOWN AREA — The area bounded by 10th Street on the south,
6th Street on the north, Columbia Avenue on the east, and Pine Avenue
on the west.
(b) MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT — Those lots which are owned, leased,
operated, or maintained by the City of Holland and/or the Downtown
Development Authority for the municipal parking system in the
downtown area. Even if it is not in the downtown area, a lot shall be
deemed a municipal parking lot for purposes of this division if it is
owned, leased, operated, or maintained by the City of Holland and/or
the Downtown Development Authority and it is accessible from any of
the streets which form the boundary around the downtown area.
(c) LONG-TERM OVERNIGHT RESIDENTIAL PARKING — Those municipal
parking lots which are designated for permit holders to park their
motor vehicles for a twenty-four-hour period in designated spaces
within the lots.
(d) SHORT-TERM OVERNIGHT RESIDENTIAL PARKING — Those
municipal parking lots which are designated for permit holders to park
their motor vehicles from the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. only,
Monday through Saturday, and all day on Sunday.
Sec. 18-31 CHARTER Sec. 18-34
C:421
Sec. 18-34. Records. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The Downtown Development Authority shall maintain a permit log
containing all downtown overnight residential parking permit applications
and all temporary applications. The Downtown Development Authority shall
provide any information to the Holland Police Department for the
enforcement of the overnight residential parking regulations pursuant to
this division.
Sec. 18-35. Permit—hours and permissible parking locations.
Any permit issued in accordance with this division shall be valid for parking
during the designated hours of any authorized long-term or short-term
overnight residential parking location. A map of such long-term and shortterm
overnight residential parking locations shall be provided to the permit
holder by the Downtown Development Authority's office upon permit
issuance and renewal.
Sec. 18-36. Same—Fee and validity. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Each permit applicant shall pay a fee as established by a resolution adopted
by City Council for the issuance of the downtown overnight residential
parking permit issued by the Downtown Development Authority in
accordance with this division. The permit shall be valid for a period of 12
months.
Sec. 18-37. Same—Display. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The permit shall be displayed and affixed in the lower left hand corner
(driver's side) of the vehicle's rear window.
Sec. 18-38. Same—Revocation. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
A permit may be revoked by the Downtown Development Authority for
noncompliance with the provisions of this division. Revocation shall be
effective upon 10 days' written notice from the Downtown Development
Authority setting forth a date of revocation and the reason for revocation.
Any permit fees paid prior to revocation of the permit shall be
nonrefundable.
Sec. 18-39. Same—Nonrenewable. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The Downtown Development Authority is authorized to deny renewal of
a permit to an applicant for noncompliance with the provisions of this
division.
Sec. 18-40. Same—Penalties. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
A violation of this division shall be deemed a civil infraction and the fine for
such violation shall be as set forth in Section 18-49 of this chapter.
Sec. 18-34 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-41
C:422
Sec. 18-41. Designated enforcing officers. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
The Downtown Development Authority, or its designated representative,
shall be the enforcing officer relating to the provisions of this division for
permit issuance. The Chief of Police, or its designated representative, shall
be the enforcing officer for violations of parking, vehicle locations, length of
parking, and improper or unauthorized display of a permit.
Sec. 18-42. Downtown Development Authority—designation of
parking location. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
Designated downtown long-term and short-term overnight residential
parking locations shall be determined by the Downtown Development
Authority. The Downtown Development Authority shall be permitted to
change, amend, or modify designated locations, and shall file the
designation of such locations with the City Manager's office. Upon the
change of designated locations, the Downtown Development Authority shall
notify the Downtown Development Authority's office and all permit holders
of such amendments and changes.
Sec. 18-43. Temporary downtown overnight residential parking
permit. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The Downtown Development Authority is hereby authorized to issue
temporary downtown overnight residential parking permits. A temporary
permit shall be valid for the time period designated on the face of the
temporary application. An applicant shall pay a temporary downtown
overnight residential parking permit fee as established by a resolution
adopted by City Council. A temporary downtown overnight residential
parking permit holder is subject to the other applicable sections of this
division except for Section 18-36.
Sec. 18-44. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The Downtown Development Authority shall pay to the City Treasurer all
permit fees it receives.
Sec. 18-41 CHARTER Sec. 18-44
C:423

DIVISION 2A
Downtown Parking Deck
Sec. 18-44.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 1535, 6-3-2009]
For purposes of this division, the term "parking deck" shall mean that
structure for the parking of motor vehicles owned, operated, and
maintained by the City of Holland and located at the northeast corner of
College Avenue and Seventh Street.
Sec. 18-44.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 1535, 6-3-2009]
No person shall cause any vehicle to be parked within the parking deck in
violation of any of the following:
Sec. 18-44.3. Permit. [Ord. No. 1535, 6-3-2009]
A person or entity who has entered into a license agreement with the City
of Holland for a reserved parking space shall be issued a permit and a
hang tag for the designated vehicle(s). A person or entity who has been
issued a permit shall be required to attach the hang tag on the vehicle(s)
rear-view mirror during the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday and shall park the vehicle(s) in the designated parking
space subject to the license agreement. A person or entity shall not allow
any vehicle(s) to park in a reserved parking space except as designated in
the license agreement. The permit issued by the City of Holland shall be
nontransferable.
Sec. 18-44.4. Fee and validity. [Ord. No. 1535, 6-3-2009; Ord. No.
1559, 2-2-2011]
Each person or entity entering into a license agreement and issued a permit
under Section 18-44.3 shall pay a fee as established by a resolution adopted
by the City Council. The permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months or
such term as established by the Downtown Development Authority.
Sec. 18-44.5. Nonrenewable. [Ord. No. 1535, 6-3-2009]
The City is authorized to deny renewal of a permit to a person or entity for
noncompliance with the provisions of this division.
(a) In a parking space subject to a license agreement between the City of
Holland and a person or entity as licensee and designated for reserved
parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday.
(b) Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day unless an
overnight residential parking permit is issued and affixed to the motor
vehicle pursuant to Section 18-31 et seq.
Sec. 18-44.1 CHARTER Sec. 18-44.6
C:425
Sec. 18-44.6. Designated enforcing officers. [Ord. No. 1535,
6-3-2009]
The Downtown Development Authority, or its designated representative,
shall be the enforcing officer relating to the provisions of this division for
permit issuance. The Chief of Police, or its designated representative, shall
be the enforcing officer for violations of parking, vehicle locations, length of
parking, and improper or unauthorized display of a permit.
Sec. 18-44.7. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1535, 6-3-2009]
A violation of this division shall be deemed a civil infraction, and the fine for
such violation shall be as set forth in Section 18-49(e) of this chapter.
Sec. 18-44.6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-44.7
C:426
DIVISION 3
Parking Violations Bureau
Sec. 18-45. Established; supervision and control. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004]
Pursuant to Section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act of the State, as
amended by Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of 1968,61 a Parking Violations
Bureau for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the
City is hereby established. The Parking Violations Bureau shall be under the
supervision and control of the Chief of Police.
Sec. 18-46. Location; administration; rules and regulations for
operation. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The Chief of Police shall, subject to the approval of the City Council,
establish a convenient location for the Parking Violations Bureau, appoint
qualified City employees to administer such Bureau and adopt rules and
regulations for the operation thereof.
Sec. 18-47. Limitations upon disposing of violations. [Ord. No.
1393, 7-21-2004]
No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations Bureau except at the
specific request of the alleged violator. In no case shall the person who is
in charge of such Bureau determine or attempt to determine the truth or
falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person
shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the Parking Violations
Bureau, and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation
processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The
unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the Parking
Violations Bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights,
privileges and protections accorded to him by law.
Sec. 18-48. Construction and contents of notice of parking
violation, etc. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The issuance of a parking summons, ticket or notice of violation by a
police officer shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such
parking summons, ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the nature of
the parking violation, the length of time in which the person to whom the
same was issued must respond before the Parking Violations Bureau and
shall also indicate the address of such Bureau, the hours during which such
Bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for
which the ticket was issued, and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the
person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such person fails to
respond within the time limit.
61.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600-8395.
Sec. 18-45 CHARTER Sec. 18-49
C:427
Sec. 18-49. Schedule of parking offenses and fines. [Ord. No. 1393,
7-21-2004; amended Ord. No. 1536, 6-17-2009; 6-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 1649]
There is hereby established the following schedule of parking offenses and
fines:
(a) Overtime parking violations in off-street public lots:
(1) Ten dollars, if paid within seven days of issuance.
(2) Fifteen dollars, if paid from eight to 30 days of issuance.
(3) Twenty-five dollars, if paid after 30 days of issuance.
(4) Fifty dollars, if paid after 30 days and a civil infraction is issued.
(b) Overnight parking violations:
(1) Fifteen dollars, if paid within seven days of issuance.
(2) Twenty dollars, if paid from eight to 30 days of issuance.
(3) Thirty dollars, if paid after 30 days of issuance.
(4) Fifty dollars, if paid after 30 days and a civil infraction is issued.
(c) Stopping, standing or parking in a handicapped parking spot: $75.
(d) Hazardous parking violations: All parking violations prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the City, other than as
provided in Subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section:
(1) Fifteen dollars, if paid within seven days of issuance.
(2) Twenty dollars, if paid from eight to 30 days of issuance.
(3) Thirty dollars, if paid after 30 days of issuance.
(4) Fifty dollars, if paid after 30 days and a civil infraction is issued.
(e) Violations of the Parking Deck Ordinance (Division 2A.):
(1) Fifteen dollars if paid within seven days of issuance;
(2) Twenty dollars if paid from eight to 30 days of issuance;
(3) Twenty-five dollars if paid after 30 days of issuance;
(4) Twenty-five dollars plus a cost of $25 for issuance of a civil
infraction.
Sec. 18-49 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-50
C:428
Sec. 18-50. Acceptance of guilty pleas and collection, etc., of fines
for parking violations. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The Parking Violations Bureau shall be authorized to accept pleas of guilty
in parking violations cases and to collect and retain fines and costs therefor
as set forth in Sections 18-45 to 18-49. Appearance, plea and payment to
such Bureau shall constitute satisfaction of such parking violations.
Sec. 18-50 CHARTER Sec. 18-50
C:429

ARTICLE VI
Snowmobiles
Sec. 18-51. Accidents. [Ord. No. 1393, 7-21-2004]
The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident shall comply with the
requirements of MCLA § 257.617 through MCLA § 257.622.
Sec. 18-51 CHARTER Sec. 18-51
C:431
Chapter 19
NUISANCES
Sec. 18-51 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 18-51
C:432
ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 19-1. Defined. [Code 1955, § 3-1.1; Ord. No. 1566, § 1,
8-3-2011]
Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose
of the public; offends public decency; interferes with or obstructs or renders
dangerous any street, highway, public sidewalk or navigable stream; or in
any way renders the public insecure in life or property, is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited
to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter.
Sec. 19-2. Prohibited generally. [Code 1955, § 3-1.2]
No person shall create, maintain or permit to be maintained a public
nuisance in the City.
Sec. 19-3. Abatement of dangerous buildings. [Code 1955, § 3-1.3;
Ord. No. 1127, 10-19-1994; Ord. No. 1507, 7-2-2008]
(a) Administrative abatement.
(1) As used in Section 19-3, "dangerous building" means a building or
structure as defined by state statute, MCLA § 125.539.
(2) If a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, then
the building or structure shall be abated in accordance with the
procedures described in MCLA § 125.538 et seq.
(3) A hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous
building shall be held before a hearing officer who shall be
appointed by the Mayor to serve at his or her pleasure in
accordance with the procedures described in MCLA § 125.540 and
MCLA § 125.541.
(4) The City of Holland's Housing Board of Appeals is designated as the
"Board of Appeals" and it shall exercise all authority, hear all of the
cases and carry out all of the duties of the legislative body pursuant
to MCLA § 125.541c.
(5) The Board of Appeals may adopt procedural rules to govern the
hearing before the hearing officer and the hearing before the Board
of Appeals. Said rules shall be effective once they have been
approved by resolution of City Council.
(b) Emergency abatement.
(1) Vacating structures. When, in the opinion of the enforcing officer,
as defined in Section 14-4(a) of the Ordinance Code of the City of
Holland, there is actual and immediate danger of failure of collapse
of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger
Sec. 19-1 CHARTER Sec. 19-3
C:433
Sec. 19-3.1. Vacant or abandoned structures; purpose. [Ord. No.
1566, § 2, 8-3-2011]
life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life
is being endangered by the occupation of the building or structure,
the enforcing officer is hereby authorized and empowered to order
and require the inmates and occupants to vacate the same
forthwith. The enforcing officer shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such building or structure a notice reading as follows:
"This Structure is Unsafe and its Use or Occupancy has been
Prohibited by the Enforcing Officer." It shall be unlawful for any
person to enter such building or structure except for the purpose
of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same.
(2) Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the enforcing
officer, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure
of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger
life, or a condition exists that is immediately dangerous to life, the
enforcing officer shall cause the necessary work to be done to
render such building or structure or part thereof temporarily safe,
whether or not notice has been given as may be required by other
procedures described herein, or by other sections of the Ordinance
Code. Such conditions requiring this action shall be dangerous to
the extent that any delay in taking corrective action will pose, in
the opinion of the enforcing officer, an immediate threat to life and
safety.
(3) Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this subsection, the
enforcing officer shall employ the necessary labor and materials to
perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
(c) Costs of abatement. All costs incurred by the City in the demolition of a
building or structure, in making a building or structure safe, in
maintaining the exterior of a building or structure or grounds adjoining
the building or structure, or in the performance of the emergency
repairs, to bring the property into conformance with this section, shall
be reimbursed to the City by the owner or party in interest in whose
name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment record.
The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears
shall be notified by the Assessor, as soon as practical, in writing, by first
class mail at the address shown on the records, of the action taken on
the subject property and the costs for same. If the owner or party in
interest fails to pay the costs within 30 days after mailing by the
Assessor of the notice, then the costs shall be placed on the tax role and
shall become a lien against the property in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the City Charter.
(d) The enforcing officer of this section shall be the Director of Community
and Neighborhood Services or his designee.
Sec. 19-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-3.1
C:434
(a) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Holland by preventing
blight, protecting property values and neighborhood integrity,
remedying these nuisances and ensuring safe and sanitary maintenance
of vacant or abandoned structures. Vacant or abandoned structures are
hereby declared a nuisance.
(b) [Legislative findings.] The City of Holland makes the following
legislative findings:
(1) Vacant or abandoned structures create a serious and substantial
problem and are public nuisances.
(2) Vacant or abandoned structures that are not maintained constitute
a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare.
(3) Vacant or abandoned structures often become dilapidated because
they are not maintained and repaired by their owners.
(4) Vacant or abandoned structures attract children, harbor vermin,
shelter vagrants and criminals, and are more likely to be damaged
by vandals or arsonists than occupied properties.
(5) Unkempt grounds surrounding vacant or abandoned structures
invite dumping of garbage, trash, and other debris.
(6) Many vacant or abandoned structures are on narrow lots and close
to neighboring structures, increasing the risk of fire and spread of
insect and rodent infestation.
(7) Vacant or abandoned structures contribute to blight; cause a
decrease in property values; and discourage neighbors from
making improvements to structures.
(8) Vacant or abandoned structures that remain boarded up for an
extended period of time also exert a blighting influence and
contribute to a decline of the neighborhood by decreasing property
values, discouraging persons from moving into the neighborhood,
and encouraging persons to move out of the neighborhood.
(9) Vacant or abandoned structures that may otherwise provide safe,
affordable, homeownership, often continue to deteriorate to the
point that demolition of the structure is required, decreasing
available housing in the community and contributing to the
neighborhood decline.
(10) The blighting influence of vacant or abandoned structures
adversely affects the tax revenues of local government.
(11) The City of Holland spends resources and staff time to maintain,
secure, demolish or otherwise respond to problems associated with
vacant or abandoned structures.
Sec. 19-3.1 CHARTER Sec. 19-3.1
C:435
Sec. 19-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1566, § 2, 8-3-2011]
(12) Owners of vacant or abandoned structures should be held
accountable for the physical condition of their structures. At a
minimum, they should prevent such structures from exerting a
negative influence on the well-being of the neighborhoods where
they are located.
(a) VACANT OR ABANDONED STRUCTURE — A parcel of real property
with a structure or building, that has been without occupancy for 30
days or more, and is either:
1) Subject to foreclosure as defined by this section; or
2) Is not maintained in compliance with the Ordinance Code of the
City of Holland, including, without limitation, the Building Code,
Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code in Chapter 6; Housing -
Property Maintenance Code in Chapter 14; nuisances in Chapter
19; and refuse and garbage in Chapter 27; and meets any one or
more of the following criteria:
a. Has one or more broken or boarded windows;
b. Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days;
c. Has utilities disconnected or not in use;
d. Has a structure for which a building permit has expired that is
only partially completed and is not fit for human occupancy;
e. Open to casual entry or trespass;
f. Suffers deterioration from neglect;
g. Has a structure that is damaged by fire, flood, weather, or
vandalism to an extent which prohibits human occupancy;
h. Is under a condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
i. Has a structure that is structurally unsound; or
j. Is a potential hazard or danger to persons.
(b) ENFORCING OFFICER — The Director of the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services or his designee.
(c) FORECLOSURE — The process by which a mortgage, security interest
or lien is enforced against a parcel of real property through sale or
offering for sale the real property to satisfy a debt or claim. For the
purposes of this section a notice of foreclosure and/or a notice of
trustee's sale, a pending tax sale, and/or properties that have been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure, and/or that have
Sec. 19-3.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-3.2
C:436
Sec. 19-3.3. Registration of vacant or abandoned structures. [Ord.
No. 1566, § 2, 8-3-2011]
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale shall all constitute
the foreclosure properties.
(d) OWNER — Any person or entity with legal or equitable ownership or
possessory interest in any real property. The owner shall include, but
not be limited to, a bank, credit union, trustee or financial institution
which is in possession (in whole or in part) of the real property,
foreclosing a lien or mortgage interest in the affected property, but may
or may not have legal or equitable title.
(e) SECURING — Such measures as may be directed by the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services that render the property
inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the
repairing offences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, the repair
of doors, windows, and other openings.
(a) An owner of a vacant or abandoned structure in the City shall register
the structure with the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services within 15 days after: 1) the structure becomes subject to
foreclosure; or 2) the date of notice by the Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services that the structure has been declared a
vacant or abandoned structure, whichever is earlier.
(b) Once a vacant or abandoned structure has been properly registered by
the owner, such registration shall be valid and effective until January 10
of the following year and shall be renewed annually thereafter until the
property has become occupied and a certificate of compliance has been
issued.
(c) Registration information:
(1) For each vacant or abandoned structure required to be registered,
the owner(s) shall register with the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services on a form provided by the Department and
shall provide the following information:
a. Address of the vacant or abandoned structure;
b. Date on which the structure became vacant or abandoned;
c. Legal name of the owner(s) and date(s) of birth;
d. Address(es), telephone number and e-mail address of owner(s);
e. Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of any
agent or representative authorized by the owner to handle the
affairs of the structure, if employed. If such an agent or
representative is utilized, he/she must reside within a threehour
driving radius of the City of Holland.
Sec. 19-3.2 CHARTER Sec. 19-3.3
C:437
f. Telephone number(s) of owner for contact purposes.
g. Such additional information as required by the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services.
h. A statement allowing authorized City staff to enter the
premises for inspection purposes.
(2) Requirement to keep information current. If at any time the
information contained in the registration is no longer valid, the
property owner has 10 days to file a new registration containing
current information. There shall be no fee to update the current
owner's information.
(3) Fee; administrative late charge. An administrative late charge as
established by a resolution adopted by the City Council shall be
paid by the owner if registration of a vacant or abandoned
structure does not comply with the provisions of this division.
(4) Penalty. In addition to any fee or other sanction that may be
imposed, any person who violates a provision in Sections 19-3.1 to
19-3.6 shall be guilty of a Class III municipal civil infraction and
subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in
Section 2-118 of the Holland City Code and shall be subject to any
other relief that may be imposed by a court for such conduct, which
shall also be considered a nuisance per se. The City shall further be
entitled to recover all costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred
as a consequence of having to prosecute any enforcement action
necessitated by a person's violation of such sections.
(d) Fees. All fees applicable to this chapter shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council and shall include at a minimum:
(1) Annual registration fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner at
the time of registration of the vacant or abandoned structure;
(2) Failure to register fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for
failing to register the vacant or abandoned structure as required by
this section;
(3) Monthly monitoring fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for
periodic inspections by the enforcing officer to assure continuing
compliance with the duties set forth in Section 19-3.4. A
nonrefundable payment of the first three months of monitoring fees
shall be prepaid by the owner at the time of registration;
(4) Certificate of compliance fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner
for a certificate of compliance as described in Section 19-3.6;
(5) Inspection fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for any
inspection requested by the owner or necessitated by the owner's
failure to comply with the maintenance and security duties as set
forth in Section 19-3.4;
Sec. 19-3.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-3.3
C:438
Sec. 19-3.4. Duty to maintain and secure. [Ord. No. 1566, § 2,
8-3-2011]
Sec. 19-3.5. Violations, inspections, abatement. [Ord. No. 1566, § 2,
8-3-2011]
(6) [Administrative charges.] Administrative charges shall also be
charged to the owner for search warrant, title search, boarding and
securing, debris/rubbish removal, and prosecution preparation.
(a) An owner of a vacant or abandoned structure shall comply with all of
the following maintenance and security requirements:
(1) The property on which the structure is located shall be in
compliance with Section 19-11 for grass and vegetation
maintenance.
(2) The property shall be kept free of dry brush, dead vegetation,
trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of
newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
federal, state, or local law, discarded items, including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed
material, unapproved signage, containers, equipment, construction
materials, or other inappropriate materials.
(3) The property and structure shall be maintained free of graffiti.
(4) Pools, spas, and other water features shall be covered by a safety
cover approved by the state construction code and shall comply
with the minimum security fencing and barrier requirements of
applicable building and housing and property maintenance codes.
(5) The property and structure shall be maintained in a secure manner
so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner
includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows,
doors, gates and any other openings of such size that may allow a
child or other person to access the interior of the property and/or
structures.
(6) The structure shall be properly winterized so as to prevent bursting
of pipes unless the buildings are served by a heating system that
requires the use of water for heating or fire suppression.
(7) The structure shall be maintained in accordance with applicable
sections of Chapter 14 of this Ordinance Code, including, but not
limited to, Sections 14-4.7, 14-4.8 and 14-4.9.
(a) Inspection—Frequency. Periodic inspections, not less than once every
30 days, shall be conducted by the enforcing officer to assure
continuing compliance with the duties set forth in Section 19-3.4. A fee
determined by resolution of the City Council shall be established to
offset the cost of monitoring the property and vacant or abandoned
Sec. 19-3.3 CHARTER Sec. 19-3.5
C:439
structures. A nonrefundable payment of the first three months of
monitoring fees shall be prepaid by the owner at the time of
registration.
(b) Notice—Service. Notice of any cited violations or demand for
abatement shall be served upon the registered owner of record by first
class mail and by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or on or
about the structure affected by the notice.
(c) Same—Contents. Whenever the enforcing officer determines that there
has been or is a violation of this Section 19-3.4, or that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been or is a violation of
any duties otherwise required by Sections 19-3.1 to 19-3.6, he shall give
notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person responsible
therefor. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required;
and
(4) Indicate the time in which correction is required.
(d) Duty of owner, etc., to secure and maintain. It shall be the duty of the
owner of any premises within the City to inspect, secure and maintain
the premises as often as may be necessary to comply with the
provisions of Section 19-3.4 of this Code.
(e) Abatement by City; charging cost. If the owner fails to secure or
maintain the premises as required under Section 19-3.4 of this Code,
such failure shall constitute a hazardous and nuisance condition. Within
72 hours after the notice to abate has been provided, an enforcing
officer may abate the nuisance without giving further notice. The
enforcing officer may abate the offending condition by arranging for
City employees or private contractors to secure and board the
structure, remove rubbish and debris from the premises, or make
repairs to maintain the building(s) and premises to conform to Section
19-3.4. The cost of abating the nuisance condition(s) may be charged
against the premises and the owner in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 15 of the Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the
standard hourly rate for labor and machinery used by the City of
Holland or the reasonable cost incurred by a private contractor,
whichever is appropriate, plus an administrative fee as provided by the
master fee resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(f) Emergency abatement by City; charging cost. An enforcing officer may
abate a public nuisance under Section 19-3.4 of this Code without
giving notice, if the public health or safety requires immediate
abatement. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against
the premises and the owner in accordance with the provisions of
Sec. 19-3.5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-3.5
C:440
Sec. 19-3.6. Prohibition on transfer or occupancy after registration.
[Ord. No. 1566, § 2, 8-3-2011]
Chapter 15 of the Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the standard
hourly rate for labor and machinery used by the City of Holland or
the reasonable cost incurred by a private contractor, whichever is
appropriate, plus an administrative fee as provided by the master fee
resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(g) Appeal of assessment. An owner assessed for abatement costs may
appeal the assessment to the Director of Community and Neighborhood
Services or his designee. On appeal, the Director shall determine:
(1) Whether the property and/or structure was in violation of Section
19-3.4 of this Code;
(2) Whether the City provided notice as required by Subsection (b) of
this section before the City abated the condition (except for
emergency abatements); and
(3) Whether the costs assessed against the owner were properly
calculated.
An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the City serves notice
on the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the
owner and the premises.
(a) A registered vacant or abandoned structure shall not be occupied by
any person until both of the following conditions have been satisfied:
(1) All outstanding fees required by Section 19-3.3 have been paid; and
(2) A certificate of compliance has been issued by the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services after inspection.
a. A certificate of compliance shall only be issued after a
complete inspection of the property and structure have been
conducted and all violations are corrected in accordance with
the applicable requirements of the state construction code and
Chapter 14 of City Housing Code.
b. A certificate of compliance shall further be valid for no more
than 30 days after its issuance and shall thereafter terminate.
c. Should any structure for which a certificate of occupancy has
been issued remain vacant and unoccupied for a period of
more than 30 days after the issuance of such certificate, no
occupancy of such structure may thereafter occur until the
owner complies with the provisions of Subsection (a)(2)a of
this provision and any additional fees have been paid.
Sec. 19-3.5 CHARTER Sec. 19-3.6
C:441
Sec. 19-4. Obnoxious odors. [Code 1955, § 3-1.4]
No person shall cause or allow obnoxious odors to be emitted into the open
air so as to annoy the public.
Sec. 19-5. Noise—generally. [Code 1955, § 3-1.5; amended 6-2-1993
by Ord. No. 1089; 8-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1178; 2-1-2012 by Ord. No.
1580, § 1; 4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 1604; 6-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1611;
5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1628; 2-20-2019 by Ord. No. 1764]
Except as provided in Section 19-6, no person shall engage in the following
noise-creating activities:
(b) No real property on which a registered vacant or abandoned structure
is located shall be sold or transferred without first being inspected by
the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services.
(1) Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus, train or other vehicle while not in
motion, except as a danger signal or to give warning of intent to get into
motion, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are
being applied and deceleration of the vehicle has begun; the creation by
means of such signal devices of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound;
and the sounding of any signal device for any unreasonable or
unnecessary period of time.
(2) Radio and musical instruments, etc. The playing, using, operating of, or
permitting to be played, used or operated, a radio, boom box, receiving
set, stereo, musical instrument, or other electronic sound device inside
or outside of a building or structure, or in a parked or moving motor
vehicle (including motorcycles and mopeds), so as to produce sound
that is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the source of such
sound device.
(3) Shouting, whistling, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or
the making of any other loud noises on the public streets between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at
any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, hospital or other type of
residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(4) Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud
or boisterous manner.
(5) Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird that by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person.
(6) Whistle or siren. The creation of loud and excessive noise by the
blowing of any whistles or sirens, except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger.
Sec. 19-3.6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-5
C:442
Sec. 19-6. Same—Exceptions to preceding section. [Code 1955,
§ 3-1.6; Ord. No. 1245, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1409, 3-2-2005; Ord. No.
1442, 2-1-2006; amended 4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 1604; 6-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 1611; 2-20-2019 by Ord. No. 1764]
None of the terms or prohibitions of the preceding section shall apply or be
enforced against:
(7) Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents
loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(8) Construction noises. The erection (including excavation therefor),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of
streets and highways on Sundays, and on other days except between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(9) Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in
connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(10) Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loud speaker,
amplifier or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
public attention, except as otherwise permitted in this Code.
(11) Firearms at shooting ranges. The sound from the discharge or firing of
a firearm within a firing range approved under Sections 39-17.1 and
39-17.2 shall not exceed 50 decibels, as measured at the property line.
(a) Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while
engaged upon necessary emergency business.
(b) Highway and utility maintenance and construction. Necessary
excavations in or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, or any public
utility installation by or on behalf of the City, or any public utility, or any
agency of the state during the night or on Sunday, when the public
safety, welfare and convenience necessitates the performance of the
work at such time.
(c) Public addresses. The reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loud
speakers for public addresses which are noncommercial in character.
(d) Sacred music. The use of sound amplifiers or other such devices by
churches, or other organizations approved by the Council, to broadcast
Christmas or Easter music for a period not to exceed 15 days prior to
Christmas Day and seven days prior to Easter Day, and the ringing of
church bells and chimes and the giving of chime concerts between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(e) Charitable community, educational, recreational and religious
broadcasts. The use of public address systems and other sound
Sec. 19-5 CHARTER Sec. 19-6
C:443
Sec. 19-7. Littering—depositing waste materials on streets, etc.;
depositing snow or ice on sidewalks, etc. [Code 1955, § 3-1.7; Ord.
No. 1580, § 2, 2-1-2012]
amplifiers outside of buildings or upon sound trucks between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for charitable, community, educational,
recreational and religious purposes, provided that no such sound
amplifiers shall be used unless a permit therefor is issued by the Chief
of Police upon the following conditions:
(1) The issuance of such a permit shall be approved by the Chief of
Police and the City Manager.
(2) Such permits will be issued only for matters of charitable,
community, educational, recreational and religious purposes.
(3) Such permits will be issued for not more than two hours in any 1/2
day, and use of such equipment will not be permitted after 9:00
p.m. unless approved by the Chief of Police.
(4) Such sound trucks shall not operate within 300 feet of any hospital
or within 300 feet of any school during school hours.
(5) The sound from such equipment shall be so regulated that it may be
heard by people on the streets but will not create a nuisance.
(f) Street performers. Reasonable use of musical instruments or other
devices that are permitted under Article VI of Chapter 32. A street
performer's use of an amplification device under a permit that is issued
pursuant to and complies with Article VI of Chapter 32.
(a) Depositing, etc., on street, etc. No person shall place, deposit, throw,
scatter or leave in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place or
square, or on the private property of another, any grass clippings, bush
trimmings, leaves, refuse, waste or other such materials; provided,
however, that such materials may be deposited on City streets only in
such area as it is directly adjacent to the property from which the
materials are removed and only as directed by the City during
designated City-wide clean-up periods.
(b) Transporting or dumping so as to litter stream, etc. No person shall
transport or dump any refuse or other waste materials in such a manner
as to cause the littering of any stream or public place, or the private
property of another, or to cause the obstruction of any ditch, drain,
culvert or gutter.
(c) Depositing snow or ice on sidewalk, etc. No person, in removing snow
or ice from private property, shall deposit the same on any sidewalk or
on the roadway portion of any street, nor in any area between the
sidewalk and the curbline except such area as is adjacent to the
property from which the snow is removed and then only in such
quantity as will not create a traffic hazard.
Sec. 19-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-8
C:444
Sec. 19-8. Same—Distributing handbills, etc. [Code 1955, § 3-1.8]
Sec. 19-9. Posting. [Code 1955, § 2-1.9; Ord. No. 601]
No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign,
advertisement or any other matter upon any lamp post, electric light,
railway, telegraph or telephone pole, shade-tree or fire hydrant, or box
covering same, or any bridge pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, public
building or any property or thing belonging to the City or any article or
thing within any park; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed
to prevent any public officer from so doing for any purpose authorized by
this Code or by the laws of the state.
Sec. 19-9.1. Graffiti. [Added 4-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1625]
Graffiti results in visual pollution and is hereby declared a public nuisance.
Graffiti must be abated as quickly as possible to avoid detrimental impacts
on the City, its residents, visitors and to prevent the further spread of
graffiti.
(a) Public places or vehicles. No person shall distribute, throw, drop or
scatter in any public place or in or upon any vehicle located in any
public place any poster, handbill, card, sample or other matter used for
the purpose of advertising in such a manner as to result in the littering
of any public place.
(b) Private property. No person shall distribute handbills, cards, samples or
other advertising matter on any private property so as to cause the
littering of any public place or of any private property not his own.
(1) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Holland by preventing blight,
protecting property values, and remedying the nuisance.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any mark or marks on any surface, including, but not
limited to, writing, inscribing, drawing, tagging, sketching, spraypainting,
painting, etching, scratching, carving, engraving, scraping, or
attaching, placed on any building, accessory building, fence or other
structure, or surface by a person other than the owner or someone
authorized by the owner.
(3) Removal of graffiti. No person who owns or otherwise leases or
manages property shall permit or allow any graffiti to be or remain on
any surface or structure on the property for a period longer than five
days. The enforcing officer for this section shall be the Director of
Community and Neighborhood Services or his or her authorized
representative.
(4) Notice to abate — generally.
Sec. 19-8 CHARTER Sec. 19-9.1
C:445
a. Notice to abate. The enforcing officer, upon failure of the owner
and other parties responsible for the property to comply with
Subsection (3), shall notify the owner and other parties responsible
for the property to abate such nuisance within five days.
b. Notice to abate as required by this section shall be given by the
enforcing officer or authorized representative, in writing, clearly
notifying the owner and other parties responsible for the property
of the violation.
c. The notice to abate referred to in Subsection (4)a may be served by
personal service, posting on the property, or first-class mail. If firstclass
mail, it shall be deemed given the next day after mailing and
shall be addressed as follows:
1. In the case of a property owner, to the last known address of
such owner taken from the tax records of the City.
2. In the case of a premises lessee, to the mailing address of such
premises.
3. In the case of a property manager, to the mailing address of
such manager on file with the City.
(5) Removal standard. All removal and cover-up of graffiti must be
accomplished in such a manner that the final condition of the exterior
structure is in good condition and repair, and meets the City of
Holland's workmanlike standards in Chapter 14.
(6) A person who fails to remove graffiti within five days after the notice
required under Subsection (4) is responsible for a Class I municipal civil
infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil
fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief that may be
imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which
such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(7) Abatement by City; charging cost. If the owner or occupant fails to
abate a nuisance under Subsections (3) and (5) of this section within
five days after the notice to abate has been provided, then an enforcing
officer may abate the nuisance without giving further notice. The
enforcing officer may abate the nuisance by arranging for City
employees or private contractors to paint over the nuisance, or by other
appropriate means. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged
against the owner in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.17,
Abatement or removal of hazards and nuisances, of the Holland City
Charter. The cost shall be the standard hourly rate for labor and
machine use for the City of Holland or the reasonable cost incurred by a
private contractor, whichever is appropriate, plus an administrative fee
as provided by the master fee resolution adopted by the City Council
from time to time.
Sec. 19-9.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-9.1
C:446
Sec. 19-10. Accessory structures and fences.62 [Ord. No. 1580, § 3,
2-1-2012; amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1590]
(8) Emergency abatement by City; charging cost. An enforcing officer may
abate a public nuisance under Subsection (5) of this section, without
giving notice, if the public health, safety, or welfare requires immediate
abatement, including but not limited to threats against a specific person
or group of people, incendiary language, profanity or sexually explicit
language. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against the
owner in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.17, Abatement or
removal of hazards and nuisances, of the Holland City Charter. The cost
shall be the standard hourly rate for labor and machine use for the City
of Holland or the reasonable cost incurred by a private contractor,
whichever is appropriate, plus an administrative fee as provided by the
master fee resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(9) Right of entry of enforcing officer, etc. An enforcing officer or his or her
authorized representative is hereby empowered to enter upon any
premises in the City for the purpose of determining compliance with
Subsection (5) of this section.
(10) Appeal of assessment.
a. A property owner assessed for abatement costs may appeal the
assessment to the Director of Community and Neighborhood
Services. On appeal, the Director shall determine whether:
1. The property was in violation of Subsection (5) of this section;
2. Whether the City provided notice as required by Subsection (4)
before the City abated the condition (except for emergency
abatements); and
3. Whether the costs assessed against the property owner were
properly calculated.
b. An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the City mails notice to
the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the
property owner.
(a) Nuisance structure or fence. Any accessory structure or fence where
the condition of the accessory structure or fence poses a threat to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public is declared to be a
nuisance.
(b) Notice to abate. The enforcing officer, upon determining that an
accessory structure or fence is a nuisance as defined under Subsection
(a), shall notify the owner, occupant or agent to abate such nuisance
within seven days in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-6. The
62.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 19-10, regarding radio and television interference, was
repealed 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 1507.
Sec. 19-9.1 CHARTER Sec. 19-10
C:447
owner, occupant or agent shall abate the nuisance as directed by the
notice.
(c) Abatement by City; charging cost. If the owner or occupant fails to
abate a nuisance as defined under Subsection (a) within seven days
after notice has been given, the enforcing officer may abate the
nuisance without giving further notice. The enforcing officer may abate
the nuisance by arranging for City employees or private contractors to
remove the accessory structure or fence by appropriate means. The
cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against the premises and
the owner in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15 of the
Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the standard hourly rate for
labor and machine use for the City of Holland or the reasonable cost
incurred with a private contractor, whichever is appropriate, plus an
administrative fee as provided by the Master Fee Resolution adopted by
the City Council from time to time.
(d) Emergency abatement by City; charging cost. The enforcing officer may
abate any such a nuisance as defined under Subsection (a) without
giving notice, if the public health or safety requires immediate
attention. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against the
premises and the owner thereof, in accordance with the provision of
Chapter 15 of the Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the standard
hourly rate for labor and machine use for the City of Holland or the
reasonable cost incurred with a private contractor, whichever is
appropriate, plus an administrative fee as provided by the Master Fee
Resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(e) Right of entry of enforcing officer, etc. The enforcing officer or his
authorized representative is hereby empowered to enter upon any
premises in the City for the purpose of determining compliance with
Subsection (b).
(f) Appeal of assessment.
(1) A property owner assessed for abatement costs may appeal the
assessment to the Director of the City's Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services. On appeal, the Director shall
determine whether:
a. The property was in violation of Subsection (a);
b. The property owner and occupant were mailed notices of the
violation at least seven days before the City abated the
condition [except for emergency abatements under Subsection
(d)]; and
c. The costs assessed against the property owner were properly
calculated.
Sec. 19-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-10
C:448
Sec. 19-11. Weeds and noxious vegetation. [Code 1955, § 3.1-1; Ord.
No. 540; Ord. No. 831; Ord. No. 1123, 9-21-1924; Ord. No. 1245,
3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1269, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1376, 11-19-2003;
Ord. No. 1507, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1531, 3-4-2009; Ord. No. 1580,
§ 4, 2-1-2012]
(2) An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the City mails notice to
the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the
property owner and the premises.
(a) Weeds and noxious vegetation—Prohibited in certain places.
(1) No owner, occupant or agent in charge of any lot or parcel of land
located within the City shall permit or maintain thereon any:
a. Grasses, weeds, or any other vegetation on any part of a lot or
parcel of land to a height greater than eight inches within 200
feet of the center line of a public street right-of-way or upon
the untraveled portion of the public right-of-way lying between
the road and sidewalk which abuts any such premises.
b. Any bush, shrub, tree or other vegetation or portion thereof
obstructing or interfering with passage on a public sidewalk or
street.
c. Any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush, outside of an
approved compost operation as permitted by Chapter 27.
d. Vegetation that is causing deterioration of a building or that
creates channels for water or moisture to enter a building.
(2) Exceptions:
a. Nonresidential used lands in AG or I Zone Districts will be
exempt if all the following conditions apply:
1. The parcel exceeds five acres of developed land or two
acres of undeveloped land; and
2. The parcel is not adjacent to a residential zone district, or
residentially used premises.
b. Intentional plantings that are maintained as evidenced by
ongoing care such as weeding, watering and trimming and
other affirmative acts which make it clear that the vegetation is
not the result of mere neglect.
c. Parcels that have not been developed and are undisturbed in
all zone districts.
d. Wetlands, wooded areas, slopes that have a vertical drop more
than four feet at more than a forty-five-degree angle.
Sec. 19-10 CHARTER Sec. 19-11
C:449
(3) An owner, occupant or agent shall not cause, suffer or allow Canada
thistle, dodders, mustards, wild carrot, perennial sow thistle, hoary
alyssum, bindweed, ragweed, poison ivy, and poison sumac or other
noxious weeds or plants detrimental to health to grow on any
premises, or allow any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush
thereon.
(b) Duty of owner, etc., to cut and remove. It shall be the duty of the owner
and occupant of any premises within the City to cut and remove or
destroy by lawful means all weeds, grass or vegetation as often as may
be necessary to comply with the provisions of Subsection (a) of this
section. During the process of cutting and removing all weeds, grass, or
vegetation eight inches and higher, the cut weeds, grass or vegetations
shall be promptly removed from the lawn, mulched on the site, or
properly composted.
(c) Notice to abate. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be
published in a newspaper circulating within the City once each month
during the months of April through September of each year, which
notice is deemed and declared to be adequate and sufficient notice to
all persons affected hereby. Alternately, personal notice in accordance
with Section 1-6 of this Code is deemed and declared to be adequate
and sufficient notice to affected property owners. For vacant lots
without a structure, the first notice in any calendar year shall be mailed
by first class mail to the owner's last known address as shown on the tax
rolls at least 10 days before the City abates the nuisance by mowing
vegetation, subsequent notices may be posted pursuant to Section 1-6
of this Code.
(d) Abatement by City; charging cost. If the owner or occupant fails to
abate a nuisance under Subsection (a) and (b) of this section within 48
hours after the notice to abate has been provided as allowed by Section
1-6(a) or (c) of this Code, then an enforcing officer may abate the
nuisance without giving further notice. The enforcing officer may abate
the nuisance by arranging for City employees or private contractors to
cut the vegetation growth spray the vegetation or by other appropriate
means. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against the
premises and the owner in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
15 of the Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the standard hourly
rate for labor and machine use for the City of Holland or the reasonable
cost incurred by a private contractor, whichever is appropriate, plus an
administrative fee as provided by the master fee resolution adopted by
the City Council from time to time.
(e) Emergency abatement by City; charging cost. An enforcing officer may
abate a public nuisance under Subsection (a) or (b) of this section,
without giving notice, if the public health or safety requires immediate
abatement. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against
the premises and the owner in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 15 of the Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the standard
hourly rate for labor and machine use for the City of Holland or the
Sec. 19-11 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-11
C:450
Sec. 19-12. Infested, etc., trees. [Code 1955, § 3-1.11; Ord. No. 431;
Ord. No. 540; Ord. No. 1245, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 1580, § 5,
2-1-2012]
reasonable cost incurred by a private contractor, whichever is
appropriate, plus an administrative fee as provided by the master fee
resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(f) Right of entry of enforcing officer, etc. An enforcing officer or his
authorized representative is hereby empowered to enter upon any
premises in the City for the purpose of determining compliance with
Subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
(g) Appeal of assessment. A property owner assessed for abatement costs
may appeal the assessment to the Director of Environmental Health and
Inspections. On appeal, the Director shall determine whether:
(1) The property was in violation of Subsection (a) or (b) of this section;
(2) Whether the City provided notice as required by Subsection (d)
before the City abated the condition (except for emergency
abatements); and
(3) Whether the costs assessed against the property owner were
properly calculated.
An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the City mails notice
to the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the
property owner and the premises.
(a) Box elders. Every box elder (Ager Negundo) tree, wherever situated in
the City, serving as a breeding, feeding or clustering place for box elder
bugs is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed
unless effectively treated by a licensed pest-control operator.
(b) Elms.
(1) Trees of all species and varieties of elm (Ulmus), Asian elm
(Zelkova) and water elm (Planera), infected with the fungus
organism Ceratocystisulmi, are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and all aboveground portions shall be destroyed by
burning or by burying under a minimum of two feet of earth within
10 days following discovery of such infection or within seven days
of receiving a notice to abate from an enforcing officer.
(2) It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, give away or transport all or
any parts of trees infected with the aforementioned fungus;
provided, that wood, branches and roots of such trees may be
transported to a safe place for burning or burial if first properly
treated.
(3) Trees or parts thereof, with bark attached, of Ulmus, Zelkova or
Planera in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding
Sec. 19-11 CHARTER Sec. 19-12
C:451
places for the smaller European Elm Bark Beetle
(Scolytusmultistriatus) or the native Elm Bark Beetle
(Hylurgopinusrufipes) is hereby declared public nuisances.
Transportation or possession within the City of such trees or parts
thereof, except for immediate burning or burial, shall be unlawful
unless the bark has been completely removed.
(c) Diseased, dying or dead trees. Any diseased, dying or dead tree,
regardless of type which possesses a threat to the public right-of-way or
neighboring property is declared a nuisance.
(d) Notice to abate. The enforcing officer, upon the failure of the owner,
occupant or agent to comply with Subsections (a), (b) or (c), shall notify
the owner, occupant or agent to abate such nuisance within seven days
in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-6 [of this Code.]
(e) Abatement by City; charging cost. If the owner or occupant fails to
abate a nuisance under Subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section within
seven days after notice has been mailed, the enforcing officer may
abate the nuisance without giving further notice. The enforcing officer
may abate the nuisance by arranging for City employees or private
contractors to cut the vegetation growth, spray the vegetation or other
appropriate means. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged
against the premises and the owner in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 15 of the Holland City Charter. The cost shall be the
standard hourly rate for labor and machine use for the City of Holland
or the reasonable cost incurred with a private contractor, whichever is
appropriate, plus an administrative fee as provided by the Master Fee
Resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(f) Emergency abatement by City; charging cost. The enforcing officer may
abate any such public nuisance without giving notice, if the public
health or safety requires immediate attention. The cost of abating the
nuisance may be charged against the premises and the owner thereof,
in accordance with the provision of Chapter 15 of the Holland City
Charter. The cost shall be the standard hourly rate for labor and
machine use for the City of Holland or the reasonable cost incurred
with a private contractor, whichever is appropriate, plus an
administrative fee as provided by the Master Fee Resolution adopted by
the City Council from time to time.
(g) Right of entry of enforcing officer, etc. The enforcing officer or his
authorized representative is hereby empowered to enter upon any
premises in the City for the purpose of determining compliance with
Subsection (a) or (b) of this section.
(h) Appeal of assessment. A property owner assessed for abatement costs
may appeal the assessment to the Director of the Holland Department
of Environmental Health. On appeal, the Director shall determine
whether:
(1) The property was in violation of Subsection (a) or (b);
Sec. 19-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-12
C:452
Sec. 19-13. Dismantled and inoperable vehicles. [Ord. No. 1395,
8-18-2004]
(2) The property owner and occupant were mailed notices of the
violation at least seven days before the City abated the condition
(except for emergency abatements); and
(3) The costs assessed against the property owner were properly
calculated.
An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the City mails notice
to the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the
property owner and the premises.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE —
Any motor vehicle from which one or more parts, which are ordinarily
components of such motor vehicle, have been removed or are missing.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Director of Community and
Neighborhood Services or his or her authorized representative.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which by reason
of dismantling, disrepair or other cause whatsoever is incapable of
being propelled under its own power, or which does not display or have
affixed thereto current license plates or tabs as required by the state
for the purpose of operating such vehicle upon public roads or streets.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled or
intended to be self-propelled.
(b) Parking or storing upon private premises. No person shall park or store,
or permit or suffer to be parked or stored, any dismantled, partially
dismantled or inoperable vehicle or parts thereof upon any private
premises within the City. If a person who receives notice under
Subsection (c)(1) removes the vehicle or parts thereof within 10 days of
the notice, that person shall not be deemed to have violated this
section.
(c) Notice of violation—generally.
(1) A notice of violation as required by this section shall be given by the
enforcing officer, in writing, clearly notifying the vehicle owner,
premises owner or premises occupant of the identity and location
of the dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle
and further notifying such one or more persons that failure to
comply with this section within 10 days of receipt of such notice
shall constitute a civil infraction.
Sec. 19-12 CHARTER Sec. 19-13
C:453
(2) No notice of violation is required if notice was given to the same
person for the same or a different dismantled, partially dismantled
or inoperable vehicle or parts thereof within two years prior to such
parking or storing.
(d) Same—Service.
(1) The notice of violation referred to in Subsection (c)(1) may be
served by personal service, certified mail, return receipt requested,
or first class mail, and if by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or first class mail, it shall be addressed as follows:
a. In the case of a vehicle owner, to the last known address of
such owner as shown by the records of the office of the
secretary of state of the registration of such vehicle.
b. In the case of a property owner, to the last known address of
such owner taken from the tax records of the City.
c. In the case of a premises lessee, to the mailing address of such
premises.
A mailed notice as herein set forth shall be an effective notice
if actually received by the addressee, whether or not such
notice of violation is addressed as set forth above.
(2) If the vehicle owner, premises owner or premises occupant has
failed to comply with the notice referred to in Subsection (c)(1), or
no notice is required under Subsection (c)(2), the enforcing officer
may issue an appearance ticket upon the vehicle owner, property
owner or premises occupant found to be responsible for the
violation. The Class II municipal civil infraction appearance ticket
shall be served personally on the vehicle owner, property owner or
premises occupant. If such a person is not available upon the scene
of the violation, the enforcing officer may post the appearance
ticket on the front door of the premises where the vehicle is
located, and in addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first
class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the
owner's last known address taken from the tax records of the City.
(e) Applicability of section.
(1) This section shall apply to the registered owner of any dismantled,
partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle and to the owner
and lessee of the premises whereon such a vehicle is parked or
stored.
(2) This section shall not apply to any vehicle parked or stored within a
wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure.
(3) This section shall not apply to any premises owner or lessee who is
not the registered owner of such a vehicle, who shall notify the
enforcing officer, in writing, that such a vehicle is on such premises
Sec. 19-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-13
C:454
Sec. 19-13.1. Inappropriate storage of items in unenclosed areas on
residentially used properties. [Added 11-20-2013 by Ord. No. 1620;
amended by Ord. No. 1694]
without the consent of the owner or lessee and shall authorize the
enforcing officer to remove such vehicle pursuant to Act No. 99 of
the Public Acts of 1964, as amended.63
(4) This section shall not apply to vehicles owned or in the possession
of commercial auto sales or other businesses licensed under
Chapter 16 of this Code.
(a) No owner, occupant or agent in charge of any residentially used lot or
parcel of land located within the City shall permit or maintain
inappropriate storage in unenclosed areas on residentially used
properties or the adjoining public right-of-way.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
INAPPROPRIATE STORAGE — The storage of:
STORAGE — Keeping or housing items described in this section for:
UNENCLOSED AREA —
(1) Items designed or intended for interior use;
(2) Inoperable or deteriorated items;
(3) Appliances;
(4) Automobile parts;
Construction material (unless stored for an active project with a
valid permit); and
(5)
The accumulation of items in excess of what is typically found on a
residentially used property.
(6)
(1) More than 24 hours; or
Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Eastern Standard
Time.
(2)
That part of the dwelling or accessory building not fully enclosed
by walls, roofs, doors, windows and/or screens;
(1)
(2) Any part of the exterior premises and/or yard area; and
On or in an unenclosed trailer parked in exterior areas of the
premises or on adjoining right-of-way.
(3)
(c) Enforcing officer: the Director of Community and Neighborhood
Services or his or her authorized representative.
63.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.252.
Sec. 19-13 CHARTER Sec. 19-13.1
C:455
Sec. 19-14. Violations and penalties. [3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1245;
amended 8-18-2004 by Ord. No. 1395; 11-20-2013 by Ord. No. 1620]
A person who violates or fails to comply with Sections 19-4, 19-5, 19-8, 19-9,
19-10, 19-11, 19-12 and 19-13.1 of this chapter or any of the subsections
of those sections is responsible for a Class I municipal civil infraction and
subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section
2-118 of this Code and any other relief that may be imposed by the court.
A person who violates or fails to comply with Section 19-7 or Section 19-13
of this chapter or any of the subsections of that section is responsible for a
Class II municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in
the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief
that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon
which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(d) Notice of violation, civil infractions.
(1) A person found to be in violation of this section shall be given
written warning of the violation by the enforcing officer notifying
the property owner, occupant or agent of the violation, a general
description of the inappropriate storage and that failure to comply
with this section shall constitute a civil infraction. The warning
shall be served in a manner provided in Section 1-6.
(2) A person who fails to correct a violation of Subsection (a) within
seven days after being served with a warning or is found to be in
violation of Subsection (a) within the 12 months after receiving a
warning under Subsection (d)(1) is responsible for a civil infraction.
Sec. 19-13.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-14
C:456
ARTICLE II
False Security Alarms
Sec. 19-15. False security alarms; purpose. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2,
11-5-2008]
Sec. 19-16. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2, 11-5-2008]
(a) The purpose of this article is to encourage security alarm users to
properly install, use, and maintain alarm systems in order to improve
the reliability of such systems and thereby reduce or eliminate false
security alarms and to defray expenses to the City in responding to
repeated false security alarms.
(b) This article governs the use of security alarm systems intended to
summon the City of Holland Police Department; allows for the
assessment of service fees; and provides for civil and criminal penalties.
(a) ALARM USER — Any person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association or any group of persons, whether as owner, occupant, or
tenant, upon whose premises a security alarm system is maintained or
operated within the City of Holland, except for alarm systems on motor
vehicles. If, however, the alarm system or a motor vehicle is connected
with an alarm system at the premises, the person using such a system is
an alarm user.
(b) DEPARTMENT — The City of Holland Police Department.
(c) ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The City of Holland Police Chief or his/
her designated representative.
(d) FALSE SECURITY ALARM — For the purposes of this article, any
activation of any security alarm system not caused by criminal activity,
a health and safety emergency, acts of God or verifiable interruptions of
electrical or telephonic service to an alarm user, unless the alarm is
canceled by the party that originally notified the police of the alarm
before the police arrived on the scene. A false security alarm includes,
but is not limited to, activation of a security alarm system through any
of the following:
(1) Negligent or intentional use or misuse of the system;
(2) Mechanical failure;
(3) Malfunction; or
(4) Improper installation.
(e) SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or equipment designed to
signal visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any
combination of these methods, the presence of a hazard, criminal
activity or other health and safety threat requiring urgent attention,
through a communication to the and to which the is trained to respond.
Sec. 19-15 CHARTER Sec. 19-16
C:457
Sec. 19-17. Responsibility for compliance; requirement of alarm
user to respond to scene. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2, 11-5-2008]
Sec. 19-18. False security alarms. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2, 11-5-2008]
Sec. 19-19. Service fee. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2, 11-5-2008]
Service fee established by this article shall be calculated periodically based
on employee labor rates, equipment costs and the service costs and
established by appropriate resolution adopted by City Council.
Sec. 19-20. Conflict with other City ordinances. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2,
11-5-2008]
If the provisions of this article conflict with any ordinance or resolution
previously adopted by the City, the provisions of this article shall control.
Sec. 19-21. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1520, § 2, 11-5-2008]
In addition to any service fee or other sanction that may be imposed, a
person who violates or fails to comply with this article shall be guilty of a
Class III municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in
the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of the Holland City Code and
The term "security alarm system" does not include an alarm designed
to alert only the inhabitants of a premises or a fire alarm system.
(f) PREMISES — Any building or structure in which a security alarm
system is installed.
(g) SERVICE FEE — The monetary charge payable to the City of Holland to
defray the expenses of implementing the purposes of this article and
the expenses of responding to false security alarms.
(h) AN ACT OF GOD — Is unusual, extraordinary, sudden or unexpected
display of the forces of nature against which the science and the skill of
mankind are of no avail.
(a) Unless otherwise stated herein, the alarm user shall be responsible for
complying with all provisions of this article.
(b) The alarm user or designated agent of the alarm user shall appear at
the premises upon request of the when a security alarm system has
been activated.
(a) A service fee shall be assessed for the fourth and each subsequent false
security alarm at the same premises requiring response by the during
any calendar year.
(b) False security alarms activated by any components connected to the
security alarm system shall be included in computing the total number
of false security alarms for purposes of this article.
Sec. 19-16 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 19-21
C:458
shall be subject to any other relief that may be imposed by a court for such
conduct. Each act of violation of this article and each day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 19-21 CHARTER Sec. 19-21
C:459
Chapter 20
OFFENSES&MDASH;MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 20-1. Assault and battery. [Ord. No. 751]
If a person shall commit an assault or a battery, he shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Section 1-10 of this Code.
Sec. 20-2. Disorderly persons—Prohibited. [Code 1955, § 3-3.1; Ord.
No. 751]
No person shall be a disorderly person in the City.
Sec. 20-3. Same—Acts and practices constituting. [Ord. No. 751;
Ord. No. 803; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 950, 6-1-1988; Ord. No. 1072,
11-4-1992; Ord. No. 1090, 6-2-1993; Ord. No. 1136, 3-1-1995; Ord.
No. 1305, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 1380, 2-18-2004; Ord. No. 1416,
6-1-2005]
For the purposes of this chapter, a disorderly person shall be any person
who shall do any of the following acts or engage in any of the following
practices and any person who shall aid and abet another to do any such act
or engage in any such practice:
(1) Disorderly intoxication. Be intoxicated or under the influence of any
substance regulated by the state Controlled Substance Act of 1971, as
amended, in any public street, park or place, and who is endangering
directly the safety of another person or of property, or is acting in a
manner which causes a public disturbance.
(2) Indecent exposure. Intentionally expose to view all or any portion of the
genitalia, pudendum, or all or subsequently all of the female breasts or
male or female buttock in any public place, or in such a manner that the
same may be viewed by persons lawfully in a public place.
(3) Petting, fondling and sexual relations. Engage in any petting or fondling
of the genitalia, pudendum, breasts or buttock of another in a public
place, or engage in sexual relations or congress in a public place.
(4) Prostitution, solicitation, etc. Engage in prostitution or solicit, accost or
invite another in a public place, or in or from any motor vehicle, boat or
recreational vehicle for the purpose of inducing the commission of an
act of sexual intercourse or any other lewd or immoral act, either
physically or by verbal statements, gestures or electronic media.
(5) Nude entertainment. Solicit, procure by hire, permit or engage in any
form of dancing or other entertainment for profit or otherwise,
involving exhibition of the genitalia, pudendum, female breasts or male
or female buttock of the performer.
Sec. 19-21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-3
C:460
(6) Frequenting a house of ill fame, etc. Attend, frequent, operate, or be an
occupant or patron of a house of ill fame, brothel, or other place,
knowing that prostitution, the illegal sale, transfer, or use of
intoxicating liquor, the illegal sale, transfer, or use of controlled
substances, or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or
conducted on the premises.
(7) Abusive language; harassment of police or peace officers.
(a) Willfully direct language toward another which by its very
utterance inflicts injury upon another, or which tends to incite an
immediate breach of the peace, or which, as a matter of common
knowledge, is personally abusive and inherently likely to provoke a
violent reaction.
(b) Willfully direct language toward a peace or police officer which, as
a matter of common knowledge, is personally abusive and
inherently likely to provoke a violent reaction in the police officer,
with the intent to taunt, heckle or harass.
(c) Willfully direct language toward a peace or police officer which, as
a matter of common knowledge, is personally abusive and
inherently likely to provoke a violent reaction from ordinary
citizens so as to incite or stimulate others to resist, obstruct,
assault or interfere with a peace or police officer in the lawful
pursuit of his duties.
(8) Impending investigation. Willfully act in a belligerent or boisterous
manner so as to disrupt a police investigation.
(9) Resisting, obstructing, etc., police or peace officers. Willfully obstruct,
resist, hinder or oppose any member of the police force or any peace
officer in the discharge of his duties as such.
(10) False alarms, etc.
(a) Knowingly turn in any false alarm of fire, burglary, intrusion,
robbery, hazard or injury to any public authority, licensed
ambulance service or communications network organized to
receive the same.
(b) Knowingly make a false statement or report to a police or peace
officer in the course of a lawful investigation.
(11) Refusal to disperse. Whoever, with intent to cause public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or provoke a breach of the peace,
or under circumstances such that the aforesaid may be occasioned,
thereby congregates with others in a public place and refuses to
disperse and move on when ordered so to do by a police or peace
officer.
(12) Disturbing peace.
Sec. 20-3 CHARTER Sec. 20-3
C:461
(a) Commit any act which is of a nature to corrupt public morals,
outrage the sense of public decency or affect the peace and quiet of
persons who may witness them.
(b) Disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar
conduct.
(c) Disturb or interfere with, by noisy or boisterous conduct, the quiet
or good order of any public or private place of assembly, school,
church, library or hospital.
(d) Disturb the public peace and quiet by permitting, suffering, or
neglecting to prevent any place occupied or controlled by him to be
a resort or place of loud noise, or loud, boisterous or vulgar
persons.
(e) Disturb the public peace and quiet, except as provided in Section
19-6, by playing, using, operating, or permitting to be played, used
or operated, any radio, "boom box", receiving set, stereo, musical
instrument, or other electronic sound device inside or outside of a
building or structure or in a parked or moving motor vehicle. The
operation of any device described herein in a manner which is
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure,
or vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section.
(13) Refuse to identify. A person shall not refuse to identify himself or
herself upon the lawful request of a police or peace officer. A lawful
request shall meet the following requirements:
(a) A peace officer may detain any person whom the officer encounters
under the following circumstances:
1. Reasonable suspicion that the person has committed, is
committing, or is about to commit a crime.
2. Reasonable suspicion that the person has violated or is
violating the conditions of his parole or probation.
(b) An officer may detain the person pursuant to this section only to
ascertain his or her identity and the surrounding suspicious
circumstances. Any person so detained shall identify himself, but
the person may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of any
peace officer.
(c) A person must not be detained longer than is reasonably necessary
to effect the purposes of this section, and in no event longer than 60
minutes. The detention must not extend beyond the place or the
immediate vicinity of the place where the detention was first
effected, unless the person is lawfully arrested.
(14) Accosting, molesting, etc., another. Accost, molest or otherwise annoy
another by sound, gesture or display which by its communication
Sec. 20-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-3
C:462
inflicts injury, is likely to cause a breach of the peace, intimidates or
otherwise causes fear, apprehension or distress.
(15) Fighting, etc. Provoke or engage in any fight, challenge to fight, brawl,
riotous conduct or quarrel in a public place so as to endanger the life,
limb, health or property of another.
(16) Jostling or crowding persons. Intentionally jostle or roughly crowd
persons in any street, alley, park or public building.
(17)Window peeping. Engage in any window peeping, by making
unauthorized observations into a dwelling of any activities of another,
with intent to invade that person's privacy.
(18) Begging. Except as provided in Chapter 31 and Section 32-46 of the
Code of the City of Holland, Michigan, or as otherwise authorized by
law, no person shall beg or solicit for the immediate payment of money
or goods from another person, whether or not in exchange for goods,
services, or other consideration, under any of the following
circumstances: [Amended 9-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1591]
(a) On private property, unless the solicitor has permission from the
owner or occupant thereof;
(b) In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation
facility;
(c) In any public parking structure and within 12 feet of any entrance
or exit to any public parking structure;
(d) In any public alley and within 12 feet of any entrance or exit to any
public alley;
(e) From a person who is in any vehicle on the street;
(f) In any manner which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicle traffic;
(g) Within 12 feet of a bank or automated teller machine;
(h) By moving to within two feet of the person solicited, unless that
person has indicated that he/she wishes to be solicited;
(i) By following and continuing to solicit a person who walks away
from the solicitor;
(j) By knowingly making a false or misleading representation in the
course of a solicitation;
(k) In a manner that appears likely to cause a reasonable person of
ordinary sensibilities to feel intimidated, threatened or harassed;
(l) Within 12 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public building;
or
Sec. 20-3 CHARTER Sec. 20-3
C:463
(m) From a person who is a patron at any outdoor cafe or restaurant.
(19) Fortune-telling, etc. Tell or pretend to tell fortunes for hire, gain,
reward or profit, whether by means of cards, tokens, trances,
inspection of the entrails or bodily parts of animals, inspection of the
hands or skull, mind reading, consulting the movements of the heavenly
bodies or otherwise; or for hire, gain, reward or profit pretend to enable
another to recover lost or stolen property, pretend to give success in
any business, enterprise, speculation or game of chance or induce any
person to dispose of property in favor of another.
(20) Tampering with, defacing, etc., private or public property. Willfully
destroy or damage or in any manner deface, destroy, injure or tamper
with any property not his own, or mark or post handbills on or in any
manner mar the walls of any public building, any fence, tree or pole
within the City; or take or meddle with any property belonging to the
City, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be
kept, placed, standing or stored, without authority from the City
Manager or other official custodian of such property.
(21) Spitting on street, etc. Spit on any street or sidewalk or in any public
carrier, public building or place of public assemblage, except into
receptacles placed there for such purpose.
(22) Unlawful entry, etc., in garden or orchard. Enter any garden or orchard
located within the City without the consent of the owner or tenant or his
agent, and there cut down, damage, destroy, eat or carry away any
portion of such garden, including any growing thing, crop, tree, timber,
grass, seed, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence or any
other protective device or any other thing used for development,
cultivation, maintenance and use of such gardens or orchards.
(23) Registering under assumed name, etc. Register at any hotel, rooming
house, trailer camp, tourist home, motel or other place offering
overnight accommodations to the public under an assumed name or as
the wife or husband of any person to whom he or she is not legally
married.
(24) Selling, etc., liquor or beer to a drunken person, etc. Knowingly sell,
give or furnish liquor or beer to any drunken person, intoxicated or
disorderly or any habitual drunkard.
(25) Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor in a public place. Possess
or consume any alcoholic liquor in any public park, public place of
amusement, or publicly owned area that is owned or administered, or
both, by the City of Holland or the School District of the City of Holland,
except as allowed under Section 22-10.
(26) Attempting to operate a motor vehicle while intoxicated. Attempt to
operate a vehicle upon a highway or any other place open to the public,
including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, when
Sec. 20-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-3
C:464
Sec. 20-4. Firearms, etc.—discharge. [Ord. No. 751; amended
11-19-2003 by Ord. No. 1377; 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1628]
he is under the influence due to consumption of intoxicating liquor,
narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivative of barbital.
(27) Placing, etc., glass or sharp objects. Place or throw glass, cans, bottles
or dangerous pointed or edged substances in or on any beach, or waters
adjacent thereto, highway or walk, or on public property within 50 feet
of a public highway.
(28) Entry upon lands of another after having been forbidden so to do;
refusal to depart therefrom. Willfully enter, upon the lands or premises
of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do
by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the agent or occupant, or
any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being
notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or
servant of either, or a member of the police force acting upon the
request of the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who
without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom.
(29) Urinating in public place. Urinating on any street, sidewalk or public
place, other than public rest rooms.
(30) Entering without authority. Breaking and entering, or entering without
breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop,
warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad
car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private
apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boat house, hunting or
fishing lodge, garage or the outbuildings belonging thereto, or any
other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first
obtaining the permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or
person having immediate control thereof. This section shall not apply to
entering without breaking, any place which at the time of such entry
was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied.
This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or
entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or
someone under his direction in the lawful performance of his duties as
such peace officer.
(a) Unless that person is engaged in a supervised, regulated, and managed
animal control activity under Section 22-9; is a sworn peace officer or
member of a duly authorized military organization when acting in the
discharge of his or her duty; is a citizen acting in self-defense; or is an
individual shooting in an indoor archery and/or firearms shooting range
that is licensed by the City:
(1) No person shall discharge any firearm, air rifle or other dangerous
weapon expelling a projectile within or into the City; or
Sec. 20-3 CHARTER Sec. 20-4
C:465
Sec. 20-5. Larceny under $200. [Ord. No. 751; Ord. No. 949,
6-1-1988; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1714]
No person shall:
Sec. 20-6. Merchandise—altering identification or price indicators.
[Ord. No. 751]
No person shall change, switch, remove, deface, replace, cover or otherwise
alter any label, tag, mark or other identification which is intended to identify
merchandise to be sold or to indicate the price at which any merchandise is
to be sold, without the consent of the owner or vendor of such merchandise.
Sec. 20-7. Purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor
by minor; attempt; violation; fines; sanctions; penalties; furnishing
fraudulent identification to minor; use by minor; prior violation;
screening and assessment; prior judgement; chemical breath
analysis; notice to parent, custodian, or guardian; exceptions;
recruitment of minor for undercover operation prohibited;
affirmative defense; definitions. [Ord. No. 1180, 8-7-1996;64 Ord. No.
(2) No person shall have any such dangerous weapon in his possession
in any public street, park or place, unless the same is licensed as
required by law or securely wrapped or encased.
(b) With respect to privately owned agriculturally zoned areas within the
City, firearms may be carried or discharged to the extent that such
activity is conducted:
(1) With due care, caution and circumspection; and
(2) In a manner that will not endanger or be likely to endanger persons
or property.
(a) Commit the offense of larceny by stealing the property of another, any
money, goods, chattels or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory
note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order, or certificate or
any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to
become due or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a
conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any
receipt, release, or defeasance, or any writ, process, public record or
scrap metal with a value of $200 or less.
(b) Alter, transfer, remove, replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the
price at which property is offered for sale, while a store is open to the
public, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the
price at which the property is offered for sale if the resulting difference
in price is $200 or less.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 20-7, adopted by Ord. No. 751,
as amended by Ord. No. 835; Ord. No. 887; and Ord. No. 1138, adopted 3-1-1995.
Sec. 20-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-7
C:466
1192, 4-2-1997; Ord. No. 1398, 10-20-2004; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No.
1703]
(a) A person less than 21 years of age ("minor") shall not purchase or
attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume
alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have
any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. A minor
who violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty
of a misdemeanor as follows and is not subject to the penalties
prescribed in MCLA § 436.1909:
(1) For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined not more than $100. A court may order a minor
under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder
services as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA
368, MCLA § 333.6230, and designated by the Administrator of the
Office of Substance Abuse Services, and may order the minor to
perform community service and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in Subsection (e). A minor may be found responsible or admit
responsibility only once under this subdivision.
(2) If a violation of this subsection occurs after one prior judgment, the
minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this
subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30
days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine
for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more
than $200, or both. A court may order a minor under this
subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as
defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.6230, and designated by the Administrator of the Office of
Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, and to
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense as described in Subsection (e).
(3) If a violation of this subsection occurs after two or more prior
judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor
under this subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 60 days, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment,
screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine
of not more than $500, or both, as applicable. A court may order a
minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use
disorder services as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code,
1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.6230, and designated by the
Administrator of the Office of Substance Abuse Services, to
perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
Sec. 20-7 CHARTER Sec. 20-7
C:467
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in Subsection (e).
(b) An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or,
notwithstanding Subsection (a), a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not
more than $100, or both.
(c) If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
Subsection (a)(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of Subsection (a)(2), the court,
without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a
determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile
has committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may
defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation. The
terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not limited to,
the sanctions set forth in Subsection (a)(3), payment of the costs
including minimum state cost as provided for in § 18m of Chapter XIIA
of the Probate Code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCLA § 712A. 18m, and § 1j
of Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCLA
§ 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in § 3 of Chapter XI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCLA § 771.3. If a court
finds that an individual violated a term or condition of probation or that
the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may
enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense,
and proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the
terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the
individual and dismiss the proceedings. A discharge and dismissal
under this section is without adjudication of guilt or without a
determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual
has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile
adjudication for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by
law on conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one
discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The court shall maintain
a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and
the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal
under this subsection. The Secretary of State shall retain a nonpublic
record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this
subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following:
(1) To a court, prosecutor, or police agency on request for the purpose
of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection.
(2) To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law
enforcement agency, on the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law
enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following
conditions:
Sec. 20-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-7
C:468
a. At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the
Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the
Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency.
b. The record is used by the Department of Corrections, the
prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine
whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of
employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for
employment.
(d) A misdemeanor violation of Subsection (a) successfully deferred,
discharged, and dismissed under Subsection (c) is considered a prior
judgment for the purposes of Subsection (a)(3).
(e) A court may order an individual found responsible for or convicted of
violating Subsection (a) to undergo screening and assessment by a
person or agency as designated by the Department-designated
community mental health entity as defined in § 100a of the Mental
Health Code, 1974 PA 258, MCLA § 330.1100a, to determine whether
the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including
alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A
court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or
juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of
Subsection (a) to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical
breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor who is
less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293,
MCLA § 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary
chemical breath analysis as part of the probation.
(f) The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's
license of an individual convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
Subsection (a) or of violating Subsection (b) as provided in § 319 of the
Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA § 257.319.
(g) A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may
request that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order,
but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. The results of a
preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol
test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding or criminal
prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content.
(h) A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is less
than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCLA
§ 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased
alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic
Sec. 20-7 CHARTER Sec. 20-7
C:469
liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of Subsection
(a) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the
individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent,
guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law
enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall notify the
parent, guardian, or custodian not later than 48 hours after the law
enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly
violated Subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCLA § 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement
agency may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means
reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not
limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If
an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating
Subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified
immediately as provided in this subsection.
(i) This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor
during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by this act, by the
Commission, or by an agent of the Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is
not possessed for his or her personal consumption.
(j) The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of
Subsection (a):
(1) A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily
presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a
violation of §§ 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA
328, MCLA § 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.
(2) A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the
following criteria:
a. Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
b. Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or
agency for treatment or for observation including, but not
limited to, medical examination and treatment for any
condition arising from a violation of §§ 520b to 520g of the
Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCLA § 750.520b to
750.520g, committed against a minor.
c. A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or
emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of
obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care
concern.
(k) If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCLA § 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents
himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
Sec. 20-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-7
C:470
observation as provided under Subsection (j), the health facility or
agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the
individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name
of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the
health facility or agency.
(l) This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of a vendor or
the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this
act.
(m) The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution
in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a
faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the
consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.
(n) The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by
this act.
(o) Subsection (a) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or
both of the following:
(1) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and
with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an
employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.
(2) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the State Police, the
commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement
action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of
alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the
State Police, the commission, or the local police agency and was
not part of the undercover operation.
(p) The State Police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not
recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover
operation at the scene of a violation of Subsection (a), § 701(1), or
§ 801(2).
(q) In a prosecution for the violation of Subsection (a) concerning a minor
having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the
minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that
consumption is legal.
(r) As used in this section:
ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT — Either of the following:
An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
(1)
Sec. 20-7 CHARTER Sec. 20-7
C:471
Sec. 20-8. Same—Alcohol in a motor vehicle. [Ord. No. 1179,
8-7-199665]
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL — That term as
defined in § 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.20904.
HEALTH FACILITY OR AGENCY — That term as defined in § 20106 of
the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.20106.
PRIOR JUDGMENT — A conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding of
responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the following,
whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States
substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another
state substantially corresponding to a law of this state:
Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from
the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of
alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service
or ceremony.
(2)
(1) This section or § 701 or 707.
Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA
300, MCLA §§ 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625.
(2)
Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCLA §§ 324.80176,
324.81134, and 324.82127.
(3)
Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1939 PA 328,
MCLA §§ 750.167a and 750.237.
(4)
(a) Transport or possess prohibited. A person less than 21 years of age
shall not knowingly transport or possess, in a motor vehicle, alcoholic
liquor. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) Exceptions. Section 20-8(a) does not prohibit a person less than 21
years of age from transporting or possessing, in a motor vehicle,
alcoholic liquor if the person is employed by a person licensed to sell or
transport alcoholic liquor, a common carrier designated by the Liquor
Control Commission, the Liquor Control Commission, or an agent of the
Liquor Control Commission, and the person is transporting or having
the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during
regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment.
(c) Penalties. A person who violates Section 20-8(a) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine and costs not exceeding $500, or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, and sanctions against
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 20-8, adopted by Ord. No. 751.
Sec. 20-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-8
C:472
Sec. 20-9. Notices—interfering with, mutilating, tearing down, etc.,
official notices, etc. [Ord. No. 751]
No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any
official notice or placard posted by any City officer or any aide or employee
of the City under authority of the City officer, unless permission is given by
such officer to remove such notice.
Sec. 20-10. Drug paraphernalia. [Ord. No. 1181, 8-7-199666]
his or her operator's or chauffeur's license as may be required by state
law on a person convicted of violating Section 20-8(a).
(a) Definitions.
(1) CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance or immediate
precursor listed in Article 7 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1978 [MCLA § 333.7101 et seq.; MSA 14.15(7101) et
seq.] as amended.
(2) DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Any equipment, product, material, or
combination of equipment, products or materials, which is used,
intended for use, or specifically designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or
local law; including, but not limited to, all of the following:
a. A kit used, intended for use, or specifically designated for use
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from
which a controlled substance can be derived.
b. A kit used, intended for use, or specifically designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
c. An isomerization device used, intended for use, or specifically
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance.
d. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or specifically
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of a controlled substance.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 20-10, adopted by Ord. No.
751.
Sec. 20-8 CHARTER Sec. 20-10
C:473
e. A weight scale or balance used, intended for use, or specifically
designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
f. A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used,
intended for use, or specifically designed for use in cutting a
controlled substance.
g. A separation gin or sifter used, intended for use or specifically
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in
otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana.
h. A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device used,
intended for use or specifically designed for use in
compounding a controlled substance.
i. A capsule, balloon, envelope or other container used, intended
for use or specifically designed for use in packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
j. A container or other object used, intended for use or
specifically designed for use in storing, carrying or concealing
a controlled substance; including a device, commonly known as
an automotive safe, that is specifically designed to carry and
conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including but
not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil or carburetor
cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and
concealing controlled substances.
k. A hypodermic syringe, needle or other object used, intended
for use or specifically designed for use in parentally injecting a
controlled substance into the human body.
l. An object used, intended for use or specifically designed for
use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise delivering, carrying or
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil to, or
into, the human body, such as:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish
heads, or punctured metal bowls;
2. Water pipes;
3. Carburetion tubes and devices;
4. Smoking and carburetion mask;
5. Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning
materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become
too small or too short to be held in the hand;
Sec. 20-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-10
C:474
6. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
7. Chamber pipes;
8. Carburetor pipes;
9. Electric pipes;
10. Air-driven pipes;
11. Chillums;
12. Bongs;
13. Ice pipes or chillers;
14. A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, which consists
of at least a razor blade and a mirror.
15. A device commonly known as a snorter;
16. A device commonly known as a bullet.
(3) In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the
following should be considered in addition to all other logically
relevant factors:
a. Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control of the object,
concerning its use.
b. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of state law or local ordinance.
c. The proximity of the object to a controlled substance.
d. The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
object.
e. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to a person
whom he or she knows intends to use the object to facilitate a
violation of state or local law; the innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state
or local law shall not prevent a finding that the object is used,
intended for use, or specifically designed for use as drug
paraphernalia.
f. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
g. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain
or depict its use.
h. National and local advertising concerning its use.
i. The manner in which the object is displayed for sales.
Sec. 20-10 CHARTER Sec. 20-10
C:475
j. Whether an owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
k. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object to the total sales of the business enterprise.
l. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
m. Expert testimony concerning its use.
(b) Possession of drug paraphernalia. A person shall not use, or possesses
with the intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of state or local law.
(c) Manufacture, delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia.
(1) Subject to Subsection (c)(2), a person shall not deliver, sell, offer
for sale, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with
the intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will
be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of state or local law.
(2) Before a person is arrested for a violation of Subsection (c)(1), the
City Attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than two
business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person is
in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined
by the City Attorney to be drug paraphernalia. The notice shall also
request that the person refrain from delivering, selling, offering for
sale, possessing with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacturing
with the intent to deliver or sell the material and shall state if the
person complies with the notice, then no arrest will be made for a
violation of Subsection (c)(1).
(3) If a person complies with a notice sent under Subsection (c)(2),
then the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a
prosecution of this subsection as long as the compliance continues.
(4) A person who receives a notice under Subsection (c)(2) may
commence an action for a declaratory judgment to obtain an
adjudication of the legality of the intended sale or offer to sell. The
City Attorney who sent the notice shall be made the defendant to
such an action.
Sec. 20-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-10
C:476
Sec. 20-11. Telephones, etc.—using to terrorize, threaten, harass,
etc., other persons. [Ord. No. 751]
No person shall maliciously use any telephone service or radio
communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten,
intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person.
Sec. 20-12. Weapons. [Ord. No. 751; Ord. No. 1135, 3-1-1995; Ord.
No. 1377, 11-19-2003]
(5) If a declaratory judgment has been issued stating that the delivery,
sale, offer to sell, possession with intent to deliver to sell, or
manufacturing with intent to deliver or sell specified material does
not violate Subsection (c)(1), then the declaratory judgment is a
complete defense for the person obtaining such a judgment against
a prosecution under Subsection (c).
(d) Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. A person shall not place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended
for use as drug paraphernalia.
(e) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a manufacturer, wholesaler,
jobber, dealer in medical, dental, surgical or pharmaceutical supplies,
licensed medical technician, technologist, medical doctor, nurse,
osteopathic physician, dentist, chiropodist, veterinarian, pharmacist,
embalmer, or other person licensed under MCLA §§ 339.101 to
339.2721, or an intern, trainee, apprentice or assistant in a profession
licensed under same, in the normal, legal course of his or her respective
business or profession, nor to a hospital, sanitarium, research teaching
institution, clinical laboratory, or other health care institution, including
a penal, correctional or juvenile detention facility for use in that
institution, nor to a person suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any
other medical condition requiring self-injection.
(f) Civil forfeiture. Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with
intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to use or sell in
violation of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the City
pursuant to the forfeiture proceedings set forth in MCLA § 333.7522
through MCLA § 333.7524a.
(g) Delivery or sale to a minor. A person 18 years of age or older who
violates Subsection (c) of this section by delivering, selling, or offering
to sell drug paraphernalia to a person less than 18 years of age, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $500, and by imprisonment of not less than three
days nor more than 90 days, in the discretion of the court.
(a) No person shall, with the intent to use the same unlawfully against the
person of another, go armed with a pistol or other firearm, dagger, dirk,
Sec. 20-10 CHARTER Sec. 20-12
C:477
Sec. 20-13. Curfew for minors; definitions; adults responsible. [Ord.
No. 1073, 11-18-1992]
razor, stiletto, or knife having a blade over three inches in length, or
any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument.
(b) No person shall carry a dagger, dirk, stiletto, metallic knuckles, slungshot,
a double-edged nonfolding stabbing instrument of any length, or
any other dangerous weapon, except a hunting knife adapted and
carried as such, concealed on or about his or her person, or whether
concealed or otherwise in any vehicle operated or occupied by the
person, except in his or her dwelling house, place of business or on
other land possessed by the person.
(c) This section shall not apply to a person lawfully engaged in an
authorized, supervised, regulated, and managed animal control activity
under Section 22-9 of the Ordinance Code.
(a) Purpose. The people of the City of Holland enact this section to:
(1) Protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after
the curfew hour;
(2) Protect minors from improper influences that prevail after the
curfew hours;
(3) Protect minors from criminal activity that occurs after the curfew
hour; and
(4) Require parents to exercise control of their minor children.
(b) Definitions. In the interpretation of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
(1) MINOR — Any person under the age of 17 years.
(2) PARENT — Includes mother, father, legal guardian, and any other
person having the care or custody of a minor or such other adult
with whom a minor may be found residing.
(3) RESIDENCE — A home, apartment, condominium, or other
dwelling unit and includes the curtilage of such dwelling.
(c) Curfew for minors.
(1) Minors 12 years and under. No minor the age of 12 or under shall
be upon, in, or on any public street, highway, alley, park, vacant lot,
or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day, unless subject to the exceptions set forth in
Subsection (c)(3).
(2) Minors 13 years to 16 years. No minor the age of or between the
age of 16 and 13 years shall be upon, in, or on any public street,
highway, alley, park, vacant lot, or other public place between the
Sec. 20-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-13
C:478
Sec. 20-14. Regulating the consumption or possession of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance at a social gathering.
[Ord. No. 1137, 3-1-1995; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1714]
hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, unless
subject to the exceptions set forth in Subsection (c)(3).
(3) Exceptions to the operation of the curfew. A minor shall not violate
the provisions of this section if any of the following exceptions are
found to exist:
a. Where the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or
some adult over 21 years of age delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany the minor child for a designated period
of time and for a specific purpose within a specified area;
b. Where the minor is a resident of another City or a resident of
the City of Holland and is in a motor vehicle with parental
consent and is travelling through the City of Holland or the
City of Holland is the origin destination of interstate travel.
This exception shall not apply to minors sitting in parked
vehicles without parental consent.
c. Where the minor is employed in the course of lawful
employment or for a period of 1/2 hour before to 1/2 hour after
work, while travelling a direct route between such place of
employment and his or her residence, and carried on his
person a written statement signed by his employer showing the
time when the minor left work on that day.
(d) Parental responsibility for minors violating curfew. No parent shall
knowingly fail, permit, or neglect to supervise a minor from violating
the provisions of Section 20-13(c). A rebuttable presumption of a
violation shall occur if the following is found to exist:
(1) The parent of such minor is immediately notified by the Police
Department, advising the parent of the arrest or detention of the
minor; the reason for such detention; and the parent's
responsibility under this section. A record of such notification(s)
shall be maintained by the Police Department.
(2) Any parent who fails to pick up a minor detained by the Police
Department upon notification by the Police Department or any
parent who has received two prior notifications regarding curfew
violations of any minor within their control shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(e) Aiding or abetting violations; misdemeanor. Any person of the age of 17
years or over assisting, aiding, abetting, allowing, permitting, or
encouraging any minor under the age of 17 years to violate the
provisions of Section 20-13(c)(1) or (2) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Sec. 20-13 CHARTER Sec. 20-14
C:479
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — An alcoholic liquor as defined in § 105 of
the Michigan Liquor Control Act of 1998, Act No. 58 of the Public Acts
of 1998, being MCLA § 436.1105.
ALLOW — To give permission for, or approval of, possession or
consumption of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, by any
of the following means:
CONTROL OVER ANY PREMISES, RESIDENCE, OR OTHER REAL
PROPERTY — The authority to regulate, direct, restrain, superintend,
control, or govern the conduct of other individuals on or within that
premises, residence, or other real property, and includes, but is not
limited to, a possessory right.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — That term as defined in § 7104 of the
Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being
§ 333.7104 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
CORRECTIVE ACTION — Any of the following:
MINOR — An individual less than 21 years of age.
PREMISES — A permanent or temporary place of assembly, other than
a residence, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
(1) In writing.
(2) By one or more oral statements.
By any form of conduct, including a failure to take corrective action
that would cause a reasonable person to believe that permission or
approval has been given.
(3)
Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual depart
from the premises, residence, or other real property, or refrain
from the unlawful possession or consumption of the alcoholic
beverage or controlled substance on or within that premises,
residence, or other real property, and taking additional action
described in Subsections (2) and (3) if the minor or other individual
does not comply with the request.
(1)
Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption
of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a law enforcement
agency having jurisdiction over the violation.
(2)
Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption
of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to another person
having a greater degree of authority or control over the conduct
of persons on or within the premises, residence, or other real
property.
(3)
(1) A meeting hall, meeting room, or conference room.
(2) A public or private park.
Sec. 20-14 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-14
C:480
Sec. 20-15. Inhalation and consumption of chemical agents
prohibited. [Ord. No. 1312, 8-15-2001]
RESIDENCE — A permanent or temporary place of dwelling, including,
but not limited to, any of the following:
SOCIAL GATHERING — An assembly of two or more individuals for
any purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are
members of the same household or immediate family.
(1) A house, apartment, condominium, or mobile home.
(2) A cottage, cabin, trailer, or tent.
(3) A motel unit, hotel unit, or bed-and-breakfast unit.
(b) Prohibitions. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), an owner,
tenant, or other person having control over any premises, residence, or
other real property shall not do either of the following:
(1) Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic
beverage at a social gathering on or within that premises,
residence, or other real property.
(2) Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a controlled
substance at a social gathering on or within that premises,
residence, or other real property.
(c) Exceptions. This section does not apply to the use, consumption, or
possession of a controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a
lawful prescription, or to the use, consumption, or possession of an
alcoholic beverage by a minor for religious purposes.
(d) Penalties. A person who violates Subsection (b) is guilty of a
misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-10.
(e) Presumptions. Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable
presumption that the defendant allowed the consumption or possession
of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance on or within a
premises, residence, or other real property, in violation of this section:
(1) The defendant had control over the premises, residence, or other
real property.
(2) The defendant knew, or reasonably should have known, that a
minor was consuming or in possession of an alcoholic beverage or
knew, or reasonably should have known, that an individual was
consuming or in possession of a controlled substance at a social
gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real
property.
(3) The defendant failed to take corrective action.
Sec. 20-14 CHARTER Sec. 20-15
C:481
Sec. 20-16. Prohibitions against certain marihuana activities.
[Added 12-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1755]
(a) No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any
chemical agent or intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any
chemical agent into his respiratory or circulatory system. This shall not
prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
(MCLA § 752.272)
(b) As used in this section, "chemical agent" means any substance
containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the
property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited
to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and
hydrocarbon derivatives. (MCLA § 752.271)
(c) A person who is convicted of a violation of this section may be punished
by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than
$100, or both.
(a) In conformance with §§ 4.1 and 6.2 of the of the Michigan Regulation
and Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), Initiated Law 1 of 2018
(MCLA §§ 333.27951 to § 333.27967):
(1) No person shall transfer marihuana or marihuana accessories to a
person under the age of 21;
(2) No person shall engage in the separation of plant resin by butane
extraction or another method that utilizes a substance with a
flashpoint below 100° F. in any public place, motor vehicle, or
within the curtilage of any residential structure;
(3) No person shall consume marihuana or smoke marihuana in a
public place or smoke marihuana where prohibited by the person
who owns, occupies, or manages the property;
(4) No person shall cultivate marihuana plants if the plants are visible
from a public place without the use of binoculars, aircraft, or other
optical aids or outside of an enclosed area equipped with locks or
other functioning security devices that restrict access to the area;
(5) No person shall consume marihuana while operating, navigating,
or being in the physical control of any motor vehicle, aircraft,
snowmobile, off-road recreational vehicle, or motorboat, or smoke
marihuana within the passenger area of a vehicle upon a public
way;
(6) No person shall possess marihuana accessories or possess or
consume marihuana on the grounds of a public or private school
where children attend classes in preschool programs, kindergarten
Sec. 20-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 20-16
C:482
Sec. 20-17. Prohibition of marihuana establishments. [Added
12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1757]
Chapter 21
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Sec. 21-1. Declaration of policy; construction of chapter. [Ord. No.
455]
programs, or Grades 1 through 12, in a school bus, or on the
grounds of any correctional facility.
(b) Violations and penalties. A person who violates or fails to comply with
this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a
fine of $100 and forfeiture of the marihuana.
(c) This section does not prohibit any activity that is authorized by the Act
or other state or federal law.
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of § 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), Initiated Law 1 of 2018 (MCLA
§§ 333.27951 to 333.27967), marihuana establishments, as defined by
the Act, are completely prohibited within the boundaries of the City.
(b) Any applicant for a state or local license to establish a marihuana
establishment, as defined by the Act, within the boundaries of the City
shall be deemed to be not in compliance with this section or with the
Code of Ordinances amended by this ordinance.
(c) Except as set forth above, this section does not prohibit any activity that
is authorized by the Act or other state or federal law.
(a) The business and occupation of drilling and exploring for, producing,
obtaining, transporting, gathering and storing of oil, gas, petroleum
and hydrocarbons within the City is a potentially hazardous and
dangerous business and occupation. It is necessary that such business
and occupation be regulated, controlled and limited for the purpose of
providing protection for the lives, health, welfare and safety of the
citizens of the City and of the public generally and for the protection of
property from the danger of fire, explosion, gas leaks, nuisances and
other hazards injurious to the public peace, health, welfare and safety.
(b) The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and welfare, and compliance with all terms thereof shall not be deemed
to relieve any person from any duty imposed by law to use all necessary
care and take all necessary precautions for the safeguarding of the
public peace, health and safety and the rights of any individual or group
of individuals, and it shall be the duty of any person drilling, operating
or maintaining any well to use all necessary care and take all
Sec. 20-16 CHARTER Sec. 21-1
C:483
Sec. 21-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 455]
Words used in this chapter unless otherwise defined shall have the common
meaning of such words as generally understood in the oil and gas industry,
unless the content herein clearly implies otherwise.
Sec. 21-3. Permit—required. [Ord. No. 455]
No person shall drill or deepen a well, or reopen a plugged well, for the
production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the injection of any fluid
into any oil or gas-producing formation, until such person shall obtain a
permit therefor as required in this chapter.
Sec. 21-4. Same—Application generally and accompanying data;
filing fee generally. [Ord. No. 455; Ord. No. 788; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992]
Any person desiring to drill, deepen or reopen any well regulated by this
chapter shall fill out, sign and file an application in writing therefor upon
forms provided by the City Clerk, accompanied by a filing fee as established
by a resolution adopted by City Council to apply on the cost and expenses of
the administration of this chapter. The application shall contain information
as to the location of the proposed well and attached thereto shall be a map,
plat or survey of the area to be drilled showing the location of the well on
such unit together with the proposed location of tanks, flow lines, fences
and details incident to the proposed drilling operation. The location of such
well shall be stated in relation to established street or plat lines or, in lieu
thereof, quarter section lines. Such application shall show the names of the
owners of the oil and gas in the drilling unit and all leases thereon, insofar
as such names and leases are known to the applicant or are a matter of
public record. Such application shall also be accompanied by the consent
in writing of the owner of the drill site, consenting to the drilling of the
well on his property. Attached to such application shall be duly certified or
photostatic copies of all leases for the discovery and removal of oil and gas,
together with ratifications thereof, executed by the owners of all oil and
gas in the drilling unit, owned or controlled by the applicant, together with
a statement of all other leases insofar as known to the applicant setting
forth the names of the lessors and lessees of each such respective lease.
In the event that such leases shall by their terms provide for and consent
to such drilling, the consent therein provided shall be deemed sufficientcompliance
with the requirements for the consent of the lessor as herein
provided. Bond, as set forth in this chapter, shall also accompany and be
filed with such application.
precautions of whatsoever nature which shall be reasonably necessary
under the circumstances to protect the public or the rights of any part
thereof.
Sec. 21-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21-5
C:484
Sec. 21-5. Same—Investigations, etc.; issuance generally; notice
and hearing required in certain cases; when permit not to be
issued. [Ord. No. 455]
The City Clerk may refer any application for a permit under the provisions
of this chapter to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Building Inspector, City
Engineer, City Assessor, City Attorney, Superintendent of Utilities or City
Sanitarian, or any two or more of them, for an investigation and
recommendation on matters pertaining to the public safety, health or
welfare which are or may be involved in the exercise of the permit applied
for, and the City Clerk may require the giving of adequate proof to establish
the identity of the applicant.
If it shall be made to appear, either upon the face of such application or by
other satisfactory proof, that the applicant is the owner or has under his
control, either as owner or lessee, or both, all interests in the area to be
drilled, and such applicant showing compliance with all the requirements
set forth in this chapter, the statutes of the state and the regulations
promulgated by the Supervisor of Wells of the state, the City Clerk shall
grant the permit without further notice.
If such application shows that the applicant for a permit to drill a well for
oil or gas is not the owner, or does not have under his control for drilling
purposes all the interests in all the oil or gas in the drilling unit, or if for any
other valid reason the City Clerk determines not to issue a permit forthwith,
then the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Board of Appeals of the
City and shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon.
The City Clerk shall thereupon cause notice of such hearing to be given
by certified mail to all known owners of the lands containing oil and gas
within the drilling unit and the lessees thereof under all leases of record,
addressed to their last known place of residence, nor less than seven days
prior to the date of such hearing. The City Clerk shall also publish a notice
in the public newspaper published and printed in the City at least five days
prior to the hearing thereon. Such notices shall be dated and contain a
description of the property affected, and shall state the time, date, place
and purpose of the hearing. An affidavit by the City Clerk showing such
publication and mailing of notices shall be attached to the application by the
City Clerk and shall constitute prima facie evidence that such notice was
actually given.
The Board of Appeals of the City shall at the time and place designated for
such hearing, or at some later date to which the hearing may be adjourned,
conduct the hearing upon the application for a permit to drill such well.
At such hearing all persons interested shall be heard. Upon the completion
of the public hearing, if the Board of Appeals finds that the applicant's
proposed drilling operation is in conformity with the provisions of this code
and other ordinances of the City, the statutes of the state an all regulations
promulgated by the Supervisor of Wells of the state, such Board shall enter
such findings in its minutes and shall direct the City Clerk to issue the
permit.
Sec. 21-5 CHARTER Sec. 21-5
C:485
No permit shall be granted where the Board of Appeals finds as a matter
of fact that the granting of such permit would create or materially increase
the hazard of fire in the particular area involved. No permit shall be issued
in any instance where the applicant's proposed drilling operations or any
activity in connection therewith would be in violation of the Zoning
Ordinances of the City.
Sec. 21-6. Same—Bond or insurance required. [Ord. No. 455; Ord.
No. 788]
The application for a permit under this chapter shall also be accompanied
by, and no permit for the drilling of any well shall be issued without, a
duly executed bond given by the applicant as principal and executed by
some bonding or indemnity company authorized to do business in the state
as surety, running to the City, for the benefit of the City and all persons
concerned, conditioned that if the permit be granted the applicant will
comply with the terms and conditioned that if the permit be granted the
applicant will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the
drilling and operation of the proposed well, and that the applicant will
pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages on account
of injury to property, either public or private, or bodily injury or death,
received or suffered by any person and resulting from the drilling operation
or maintenance of any well or any structures, equipment, machinery, lines
or appurtenances thereto used or allowed in the drilling or producing
operation, and for clearing from the area to be drilled all litter, machinery,
derricks, trenches, pits, debris, oil, waste and other substances used thereto
or produced in connection therewith in the drilling, producing or pumping
operations, whenever the well shall be abandoned or the operation thereof
discontinued. The maximum total liability under such bond for loss or
damage, either to person or property, shall be in the amount of $50,000.
Such bond shall be made for a term of not less than one year, and a new
bond shall be furnished at the expiration of any existing one if the operation
of such well covered thereby is continued. If at the time of such renewal all
drilling on such well has been completed, the amount of total liability under
such bond may be reduced to $25,000.
In lieu of filing a separate bond for each well, any applicant may file a
blanket bond in the amount of $100,000 covering all wells drilled and
operated by such applicant; provided, however, that an appropriate rider,
executed by the principal and surety thereof, stating the location of any
additional wells which shall be covered by such bond, shall be attached to
and made a part of such bond prior to the filing of an application for a
permit for a subsequent well to be covered by such bond.
In lieu of filing a bond in the above designated amounts, any applicant may
file a bond as described above in the amount of $5,000, conditioned upon
the applicant's compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter,
together with evidence that such applicant is covered by one or more
public liability and property damage policies of insurance through one or
more companies approved by the Commissioner of insurance of the state in
Sec. 21-5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21-6
C:486
the amounts of $250,000 — $500,000 for public liability and $200,000 for
property damage.
In the case that any bond or policy of insurance required herein shall lapse
or become void for any reason whatsoever, the permit issued under the
terms of this chapter shall immediately become inoperative and void until
a new bond or policy of insurance shall have been provided and filed with
the City Clerk, or the existing bond or policy of insurance reinstated in full
force, and such well and the drilling operations and production thereunder
shall be shut down, suspended and discontinued until the filing of such
new bond or policy of insurance, or proof of reinstatement thereof. Each
bond and memorandum of insurance, both original and renewal, shall be
approved by the City Attorney as to form and shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
Sec. 21-7. Same—Refund of portion of filing fee if permit not
issued. [Ord. No. 455; Ord. No. 1069, 10-7-1992]
If no permit under this chapter is granted to an applicant therefor, $150
of the applicant's filing fee as established by a resolution adopted by City
Council shall be refunded and the balance thereof shall be retained by the
City.
Sec. 21-8. Same—Void upon failure to commence operations within
60 days. [Ord. No. 455]
When a permit shall have been issued as provided by this chapter, the same
shall terminate and become void and inoperative without any action on the
part of the City, unless within 60 days from the date of the issuance thereof
actual operations under such permit shall have been commenced.
Sec. 21-9. Same—Copy to be forwarded to State Supervisor of Wells;
copy to be posted. [Ord. No. 455]
A copy of each permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
forwarded by the City Clerk by certified mail to the Supervisor of Wells of
the state, and a duplicate copy thereof shall be posted in the location of such
well by the permittee.
Sec. 21-10. Same—Transfer. [Ord. No. 455]
Should any permittee under the provisions of this chapter dispose of his
interest to a new owner before drilling is commenced, while the well is
being drilled, or after it has been completed, a request for transfer of such
permit shall be submitted to the City Clerk. The request for transfer of a
permit may be approved by the City Clerk and the transfer completed only
if the request has been properly prepared including signatures by both the
operator and the acquiring operator and when the acquiring operator has
filed suitable surety bond as required for an original permit.
Sec. 21-6 CHARTER Sec. 21-11
C:487
Sec. 21-11. Same—Suspension and revocation. [Ord. No. 455]
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for the operation of
any well may be suspended by the City Clerk where any of the provisions
of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, any statute of the state or any
regulation promulgated by the Supervisor of Wells of the state is violated,
which suspension shall be effective until such violations are corrected.
No such permit shall be revoked except after hearing before the Board of
Appeals of the City following not less than 10 days' written notice to the
permittee by the City Clerk, advising such permittee that such hearing will
be held at a time and place fixed in such notice to determine whether the
permit shall be revoked, and setting forth the reasons for revocation.
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate any well during
any period in which the permit covering the operation of such well is so
suspended or revoked.
The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or interfere with the
enforcement of the penalties for the violation of any provisions of this code
or ordinances generally, but shall be cumulative and in addition to such
penalties.
Sec. 21-12. Minimum drilling unit and location of wells. [Ord. No.
455]
Sec. 21-13. Production and operation requirements. [Ord. No. 455]
(a) Minimum drilling unit. The minimum drilling unit for any permittee to
drill any well for the discovery of oil or gas within the City shall be
established by the Supervisor of Wells of the state.
(b) Distance from adjoining property line or well. No permit shall be
granted and no well shall be located unless the location be at least 330
feet from the nearest adjoining property line, unless such adjoining
property shall be communitized with the property constituting the drill
site, and unless the location be at least 660 feet from each adjacent or
adjoining well.
(c) Distance from street line, railroad, building, etc. The drilling location of
any well shall in each instance be at least 330 feet from any street line,
alleys or right-of-way line or the location of any building existent at the
time of commencement of drilling.
(d) Location in street, alley, etc. No well shall be located within any of the
streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the City, or so located as to block or
hinder or obstruct the use of any street, alley or public right-of-way.
(e) Variances. In the event that it shall appear from the application on file,
and after notice and hearing thereon is given as provided by this
chapter, the Board of Appeals of the City may grant a variance from the
limitations and restrictions set forth in Subsections (b) and (c) above.
Sec. 21-11 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21-13
C:488
(a) Generally. In the drilling for oil and gas or other hydrocarbons and the
production thereof, the permittee under the provisions of this chapter
shall use every precaution, equipment and material in accordance with
approved methods of operation, drilling and production to stop and
prevent waste of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons and to protect residents
and properties of the City, and shall equip and operate the well and all
allied equipment therewith with equipment of standard design and
quality as are in general use in the petroleum industry, and all such
equipment shall be installed, maintained and inspected in accordance
with standard drilling, producing and operating practices.
(b) Enclosure. From the time of placing any equipment, derricks, riggings
or other drilling or pumping equipment or supplies on the drill site,
each location of the well shall be completely surrounded by fencing in
order to completely surround and enclose the drilling and pumping
operation. Such fence shall be of woven wire of not less than 14 gauge
with mesh of not more than four inches, shall be supported by steel
posts and shall be at least six feet high. No person shall enter within
such an enclosed well location unless authorized by the permittee or an
agent of such permittee.
(c) Flares. All flares erected within the City shall be at least 300 feet from
any building or structure, shall extend at least 20 feet above the surface
of the ground, and shall be secured by guy wires.
(d) Slush pits, etc. In all cases where an oil and gas well is being drilled in a
residentially zoned area, the drilling operator shall use a portable slush
pit, and all slush and waste shall be deposited therein and from time to
time removed beyond the corporate limits of the City for disposal. No
open pits for the disposal of slush, brine or salt water shall be permitted
at any time after the completion of the drilling operation in any area in
the City.
(e) Water pollution control. All brine or salt water produced in the drilling
for or production of oil shall, under the supervision of the Supervisor of
Wells of the state, be returned to some underground formation or
otherwise disposed of in order that such brine, salt water or refuse shall
not do damage to any fresh water, wells, lakes, ponds or rivers.
(f) Cleanliness of drill site; storing machinery, etc., at site; oil tanks to be
painted or galvanized. The persons in charge of the producing
operations of a well shall keep the area within the fenced enclosure
around such well free of all trash and inflammable substances not
necessary in the operation of such well and shall keep the weeds cut
and otherwise keep the location in a clean and orderly condition.
Machinery and equipment not used in the operation of such well shall
not be stored or left in such enclosure. The exterior surface of all oil
tanks shall be either painted or galvanized.
(g) Commencing drill stem flow or swab testing restricted; tests required
before bringing in well. It shall be unlawful to commence drill stem flow
Sec. 21-13 CHARTER Sec. 21-13
C:489
Sec. 21-14. Equipment and materials. [Ord. No. 455]
or swab testing of any well from sundown until sunrise or during
any period when atmospheric conditions will not allow the ordinary
dissipation of gas. Before bringing in a well, all of the control devices,
including master gates and safety valves, shall be tested and shall be in
good working order.
(a) Generally. All equipment and materials used in the drilling of wells for
the discovery of oil, gas and hydrocarbons shall be modern and shall be
kept in good working condition at all times. All drilling rigs shall be of
the rotary type only to the production stage of such well, and thereafter
cable-tool equipment may be used for swabbing, cleaning and
completion of such well. All drilling rigs shall be anchored or secured in
accordance with good drilling practices.
(b) Blow-out preventers. All drilling rigs or derricks shall be equipped with
a blow-out preventer properly installed and tested before drilling into
any formation likely to contain oil or gas. Such blow-out preventers
shall be pressure tested prior to drilling operations and shall be tested
periodically every eight hour working shift thereafter.
(c) When master-gate and lubricators required. When cable-tool
equipment shall be used for completion of the well, it shall be equipped
with master-gate, and the rig shall be equipped with lubricators while
the well is being tested, swabbed or bailed. Such master-gate shall have
a remote control located at least 20 feet from the well bore.
(d) Separators for wells producing both oil and gas; shutting down in event
of accumulation of explosive gas mixture. Every well producing both oil
and gas shall be equipped with or connected to a separator with a
capacity sufficient to prevent the escape of oil through the vent line.
Whenever an explosive mixture of gas shall accumulate around the
well, the chief of the Fire Department of the City may require that the
well be shut in until such mixture is dissipated.
(e) Oil storage tanks. All tanks for the storage of oil shall be placed in a pit
and encircled by an embankment and fire wall of such size that the
space between the tank and the embankment and fire wall shall have a
volumetric capacity 1 1/2 times that of the tank. No such tank shall be
located less than 330 feet from any building.
(f) Depth of pipe lines; permits for excavations under streets, etc.;
construction of private pipe line for unmetered natural gas. All pipes or
pipe lines leading to or from a well location shall be buried
underground a minimum depth of 24 inches below the normal surface
of the ground. No excavation or opening in or under any street, alley or
public place shall be made without first obtaining a permit as required
by Section 32-5. No private pipe line for the transmission of unmetered
natural gas shall be constructed without first obtaining the approval of
such installation by the Superintendent of Utilities of the City.
Sec. 21-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21-14
C:490
Sec. 21-15. Abandonment of wells. [Ord. No. 455]
Sec. 21-16. Violations declared nuisances. [Ord. No. 455]
Each violation of this chapter, whether or not denominated as unlawful or
an offense, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se and may be
abated by appropriate proceedings as provided by law.
Chapter 21A
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES
(g) Well head connections for producing wells. All producing wells shall be
properly equipped with well head connections designed for a minimum
working pressure in excess of the pressure encountered in the
producing formation and shall be designed for a minimum testing
pressure of double the minimum working pressure.
(h) Pumping units and electrical switches and outlets. All pumping units
installed shall be electrically operated and so enclosed as to exclude the
public therefrom. All electrical switches and electrical outlets shall be
enclosed and be explosion-proof.
(a) Supervision of plugging, etc. Upon the discontinuance of the drilling
operations or the production of any oil or gas from any working well,
such well shall be abandoned and plugged under the supervision of the
Supervisor of Wells of the state.
(b) When plugging to commence, etc. All plugging operations on all dry or
abandoned wells shall commence within 30 days after drilling
production operations shall have ceased and shall be carried through
forthwith to completion.
(c) Filling pits and cellars, restoration of surface, removal of equipment,
etc. Within 30 days after the plugging of any well, the permittee shall
fill all pits and cellars with dirt and level off the surface and restore the
same as nearly as possible to its condition prior to the commencement
of drilling operations. All equipment shall be removed from the location
promptly and all machinery, tanks, pipes and tools shall be transported
from the well site and the embankments shall be leveled and the
surface of the land restored to its former condition.
(d) Accumulation of slush, removal of debris, etc. The permittee shall not
permit any undue accumulation of slush, salt water, oil or any other
offensive or dangerous substances and upon the completion of the well
shall remove and eliminate all debris and conditions contributing to the
hazard of fire or water pollution.
Sec. 21-14 CHARTER Sec. 21A-1
C:491
Sec. 21A-1. Findings of City Council. [Ord. No. 585]
The City Council hereby finds and declares that the interests of the public
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City require the regulation,
licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess
of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police,
transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in the
City.
Sec. 21A-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 585]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ATTENDANT — Any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly
by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the
payment of money for admission.
LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this
chapter.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY — Any event attended by more than 500 attendants,
all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display,
entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to,
musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings, but
does not mean:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
organization.
SPONSOR — Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to
be conducted an outdoor assembly.
Sec. 21A-3. License—required. [Ord. No. 585]
A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an
outdoor assembly in the City unless he shall have first made application for,
and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each such assembly.
Sec. 21A-4. Same—Application; fee. [Ord. No. 585; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992]
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made
in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the City
Clerk and shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of the proposed
assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or
agency on publicly owned land or property, or an event sponsored by a
bona fide educational institution.
(1)
An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed
structure.
(2)
Sec. 21A-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21A-4
C:492
established by a resolution adopted by City Council. Such application shall
set forth the following:
Sec. 21A-5. Same—Explanations and drawings of provisions for
services. [Ord. No. 585]
Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including
drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's
plans to provide for the following:
(a) The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the
application. (Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for
all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a
corporation, a copy of the Articles of Incorporation shall be filed, and
the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having
financial interest greater than $500.)
(b) A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed assembly.
(c) The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at
which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is
not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from
the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed
assembly.
(d) The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to
be conducted.
(e) An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the
evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential
numbering or other method which will be used for accounting
purposes.
(a) Police and fire protection.
(b) Food and water supply and facilities.
(c) Health and sanitation facilities.
(d) Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and
equipment.
(e) Vehicle access and parking facilities.
(f) Camping and trailer facilities.
(g) Illumination facilities.
(h) Communications facilities.
(i) Noise control and abatement.
Sec. 21A-4 CHARTER Sec. 21A-5
C:493
Sec. 21A-6. Same—Review of application by administrative officials;
report to City Council. [Ord. No. 585]
On receipt by the City Clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded
to the Police Chief of the City, the Department of Environmental Health of
the City, the Fire Chief of the City and such other public officials as the
City Clerk deems necessary to fulfill the conditions and requirements of this
chapter. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate all matters
relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report
their findings and recommendations to the City Council.
Sec. 21A-7. Same—Issuance or denial. [Ord. No. 585]
Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the City Council shall issue
set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a license. Such
conditions prerequisite shall be based only upon the express terms of this
chapter. In any case where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the
issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, notice of such action
must be mailed to the applicant, by certified mail, at least five days prior to
such action, and in the event of a denial the reasons therefor shall be stated
in the notice. The applicant shall have the right to appeal such action to the
City Council and to be heard by the City Council at the next regular meeting
of the City Council.
A license may be denied if the applicant fails to comply with any or all
requirements of this chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant
hereto, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law; or if the
applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement
in the application or in any supporting document.
Sec. 21A-8. Same—Contents; posting; nontransferable. [Ord. No.
585]
A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and
location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible,
the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to
this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of
the assembly, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location.
Sec. 21A-9. Same—Revocation. [Ord. No. 585]
The City Council may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his employee
or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions
and requirements set forth in this chapter or with any and all provisions,
(j) Facilities for clean up and waste disposal.
(k) Insurance and bonding arrangements.
(l) Map or maps of the overall site of the proposed assembly.
Sec. 21A-5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21A-9
C:494
regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated herein by
reference.
Sec. 21A-10. Requirements and standards. [Ord. No, 585; amended
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1710]
In issuing a license pursuant to this chapter, the City Council shall require
the following:
(a) Based upon the maximum number of persons proposed to be admitted
to the public assembly per day, as disclosed by the application, if such
number exceeds 499 persons and if the City Council, in its discretion,
determines that the public safety and welfare make it desirable that
police personnel be assigned to the vicinity of licensee's assembly, the
licensee shall be obligated to reimburse the City for the actual expense
in providing such police service to the extent of two officers for the first
500 persons and one additional officer for each additional 200 persons
thereafter.
(b) The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and
pressure to assure proper operation of all water-using facilities under
conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public
water system, if available, and if not available, then from a source
constructed, located and approved in accordance with MCLA
§ 333.12701, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a
source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the Director
of the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services of the
City.
(c) The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as
defined in Act 266, Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other applicable
state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available, the
Director of the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services
of the City may permit the use of other facilities which are in
compliance with MCLA § 333.12771, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable
state or local law. The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking
water facilities constructed, installed and maintained in accordance
with Act 266 of the Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable
state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold
water, soap, and paper towels. The number and type of facilities
required shall be determined, on the basis of the number of attendants,
in the following manner:
Facilities Male Female All Persons
Toilets 1:300 1:200
Urinals 1:100
Sec. 21A-9 CHARTER Sec. 21A-10
C:495
Facilities Male Female All Persons
Lavatories 1:200 1:200
Drinking
fountains
1:500
Taps or faucets 1:500
Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the licensee
shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number of
attendants, in the following manner:
Facilities Male Female
Shower heads 1:100 1:100
All facilities shall be installed, connected, and maintained free from
obstructions, leaks, and defects and shall at all times be in operable
condition as determined by the Director of the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services.
(d) If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered
only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the
provisions of Act 269, Public Acts of 1968, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable
state or local law. If the assembly is distant from food service
establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food
services available on the premises as will adequately feed the
attendants.
(e) If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate
existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such
facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind, location, staff
strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities
shall be as prescribed by the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services of the City.
(f) The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with
all rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services of the City. If
such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate,
then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States
Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled "Manual of Septic
Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon
pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with Act
243, Public Acts of 1951, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or
local law, and, prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall
provide the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services of
the City with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect
with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will assure proper,
Sec. 21A-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21A-10
C:496
effective, and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as
to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.
(g) The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from,
the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, fly-tight and
rodent-proof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to
accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any
license, the licensee shall provide the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services of the City with a true copy of an executed
agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which
agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid
waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or
menace to the public health. The licensee shall implement effective
control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches
and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as
insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to
contaminate food, equipment, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the
public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to
be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition
as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin.
(h) The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public
bathing beaches only in accordance with Act 218, Public Acts of 1967,
and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law.
(i) The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools
only in accordance with Act 230, Public Acts of 1966, and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other
applicable provision of state or local law.
(j) The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises
so as to insure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off the premises.
Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part
of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by
the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated
and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and
other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the City
Police Chief must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic
control.
(k) The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all
motor vehicles, but in no case shall be provide less than one automobile
space for every four attendants.
(l) A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and
trailer parking and facilities in accordance with Act 171, Public Acts of
1970, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable provision by state or local law.
Sec. 21A-10 CHARTER Sec. 21A-10
C:497
Sec. 21A-11. Prohibited acts; penalty for violations. [Ord. No. 585;
amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1710]
(m) The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas
sufficient to insure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The
licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the City Manager.
(n) Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability
insurance with limits of not less than $100,000 and property damage
insurance with a limit of not less than $25,000 from a company or
companies approved by the Commissioner of Insurance of the state,
which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or
damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly
or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full
force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license.
The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect
that the insurance company shall notify the City Clerk in writing at least
10 days before the expiration or cancellation of such insurance.
(o) Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain, from a
corporate bonding company authorized to do business in Michigan, a
corporate surety bond in the amount of $10,000 in a form to be
approved by the City Attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful
compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all
applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the
City, its agents, officers and employees and the City Council against any
and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way
connected with the assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of
property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to
cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or other waste resulting from
the assembly.
(p) The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps, as
determined by the City Fire Chief, to insure fire protection.
(q) The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of
sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the
maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will
have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe
ingress and egress.
(r) The licensee shall so conduct his activity that it shall not give rise to a
nuisance by reasons of noise, vibrations, smoke, odor or dust.
(s) The licensee shall limit his activities to the hours specified in his
license.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee or agent to knowingly:
(1) Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or operate an
assembly without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
Sec. 21A-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 21A-11
C:498
Chapter 22
PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sec. 22-1. Permission required for use of City parks. [Code 1955,
§ 5-2.2; Ord. No. 1394, 7-21-2004]
The use of any public park for the expression of speech or other expressive
conduct shall be subject to a facilities use policy ("policy") duly adopted and
approved by the Holland City Council. The policy adopted by the Holland
City Council shall not limit speech or other expressive conduct based upon
its content.
Sec. 22-2. When parks are closed to public; signs; exception. [Ord.
No. 432; amended 8-7-2013 by Ord. No. 1613; 11-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 1680]
(2) Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a
public or private nuisance.
(3) Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display,
exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement.
(4) Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance
in, around or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct.
(5) Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess
intoxicating liquor while on the premises.
(6) Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics,
narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances, as defined in Act 368,
Public Acts of 1978, MCLA § 333.7101 et seq.
(b) Any of the above-enumerated violations is a separate offense, is a
nuisance per se immediately enjoinable in the circuit courts, and, is
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days
or by a fine of not more than $100, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(c) It is further provided that any of the above violations is a sufficient basis
for revocation of the license and for the immediate enjoining in the
circuit court of the assembly.
(a) All City parks and road ends shall be closed to the public between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The City Council may alter the hours
that parks, specially designated recreation areas within parks or road
ends are closed by resolution.
(b) No person shall enter or stay in any park, specially designated area of a
park or road end when closed; provided, however, that the foregoing
prohibition shall not apply to any person who enters any park or road
end for the sole purpose of passing through such park and who
Sec. 21A-11 CHARTER Sec. 22-2
C:499
Sec. 22-3. Animals in public places; animals running at large; leash
required. [Code 1955, § 5-2.3; amended Ord. No. 682; Ord. No.
1490, 1-23-2008; 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1681; 5-1-2019 by Ord. No.
1768]
proceeds through the same without loitering or undue delay.
Appropriate signs stating this prohibition shall be erected at each park
paved pedestrian or vehicle entrance and each road end prior to the
effective date of this section or a resolution adopted pursuant to this
section.
(c) Persons shall be allowed to be in parks or road ends when closed if they
receive special prior written permission, typically provided through the
use of facilities application process.
(d) For purposes of this section only, a "road end" is defined as i) a dead-end
block of a public right-of-way; or ii) an out-lot owned by the City.
(a) Eighth Street Market. No person shall permit or lead any animal, fowl,
or reptile in the Eighth Street Market Place area during the hours that
the Holland Farmers' Market is in operation. For purposes of this
section, the Eighth Street Market Place area is that portion of the 8th
Street right-of-way located between Pine Avenue on the east and Maple
Avenue on the west in the City of Holland together with the area 100
feet north to 100 feet south of the 8th Street right-of-way. The City
Manager shall issue a written order designating the hours of this
prohibition, and signs shall be erected and maintained posting notice of
this prohibition.
(b) Leashed animals in public parks. Persons shall be permitted to lead any
animal, fowl, or reptile, if leashed, in public parks owned and
maintained by the City except in the following designated parks:
(1) Matt Urban Sports and Recreation Complex.
(2) Maplewood Youth Complex.
(3) DeGraaf Nature Center.
(c) Areas animals are prohibited. No person shall permit or lead any
animal, fowl, or reptile, whether leashed or not, on or in any area or
facility open to the public where the City Manager has issued a written
order designating the terms and hours of this prohibition and signs
have been erected posting notice of this prohibition.
(d) Exception. The prohibitions imposed by this section shall not, however,
apply to the use of service animals by persons with a disability, as
defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act and regulations adopted
thereunder.
Sec. 22-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 22-3.1
C:500
Sec. 22-3.1. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1496, 3-5-2008]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of Section
22-3 or any of the subsections of this section is responsible for a Class
I municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the
schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief that
may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which
such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 22-4. Firearms, etc. [Code 1955, § 5-2.4; Ord. No. 1378,
11-19-2003]
Unless that person is authorized to engage in an animal control activity
authorized under Section 22-9 of the Ordinance Code of the City of Holland,
no person shall carry in any public park any gun, BB gun, air rifle, rifle,
shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm of any kind or description or any
device which is capable of throwing or discharging an object with sufficient
force to injure or kill humans or animals.
Sec. 22-5. Mutilating, etc., public property; molesting etc., birds,
animals, fish, etc. [Code 1955, § 5-2.1]
No person shall destroy, mutilate or molest in any way any tree, shrub,
flower, plant, equipment, structure or other public property located in, or
remove any such items from, any public park, or any street or avenue
adjacent to any public park; nor shall any person kill, destroy or molest any
bird, animal or fish, or destroy or molest any bird's nest, within any public
park; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit fishing in the
waters of Lake Macatawa or Black River.
Sec. 22-6. Enumeration of certain prohibited acts and conduct.
[Code 1955, § 5-2-5]
No person shall use any threatening, obscene, profane or indecent language
in any of the public parks of the City, or be guilty of any disorderly or
indecent conduct therein; nor shall any person indulge in any game, act or
demeanor tending to mar or disturb the enjoyment of any visitor in such
parks; nor shall any person deposit any rubbish, refuse, papers or rags in
such parks; except, that the same may be deposited in such wastebaskets
or boxes as may be provided therefor; nor shall any person distribute,
peddle or scatter any advertisement, circular, poster or handbill therein;
nor, except under a licensed concession therein, shall any person peddle,
sell or dispose of or offer for sale any of his wares in such parks or in or
upon the sidewalks or streets adjacent thereto; nor shall any person use or
dispose of any intoxicating liquors in any way whatsoever in such parks or
upon the sidewalks and streets adjacent thereto.
Sec. 22-7. Restricting smoking and the use of tobacco products in
City parks. [Ord. No. 1258, 8-4-1999]
(a) Definitions. As used in this section:
Sec. 22-3.1 CHARTER Sec. 22-7
C:501
Sec. 22-8. Obedience to signs prohibiting bicycle riding,
skateboarding, roller skating and/or roller blading. [Ord. No. 1363,
5-28-2003; amended 1-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1716]
When signs are erected or posted in any public park which prohibit a person
from bicycling, skateboarding, roller skating, and/or roller blading or which
limit any of these activities in a signed area, a person shall not disobey
such signs. The signs shall be authorized in the manner provided by Section
18-17 of the Code. A person who violates or fails to comply with this section
is responsible for a Class I municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and
(1) SMOKING OR SMOKE — The carrying by a person of a lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device.
(2) TOBACCO PRODUCT — A preparation of tobacco to be inhaled,
chewed, sucked or placed in a person's mouth.
(b) Smoking and use of tobacco products limited to designated areas in
public parks. A person shall not smoke or use tobacco products in the
following public parks which are owned or operated by the City of
Holland, except in such designated smoking areas as shall be
determined by the City Manager, or his or her designee:
DeGraaf Nature Center
Holland Municipal Stadium
Lincoln Park
Maplewood Youth Complex
Matt Urban Sports and Recreation Complex
Moran Park
Paw Paw Park
Van Raalte Farm Park
(c) Signs. Signs shall be posted in the public parks listed in Subsection (b)
of this section which state where smoking and the use of tobacco
products in such parks is prohibited and where the designated smoking
areas are located.
(d) Violations and penalties. A person who violates or fails to comply with
this section shall be subject to any one or more of the following:
(1) Being asked to stop smoking or using the tobacco product;
(2) Being asked to leave the premises;
(3) Being responsible for a Class I municipal civil infraction and
subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in
Section 2-118 of this Code and any other relief that may be imposed
by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 22-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 22-8
C:502
any other relief that may be imposed by the court. Each act or violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 22-9. Supervised, regulated, and managed animal control
activity. [Ord. No. 1379, 11-19-2003]
To protect and enhance City property and welfare, the Department of
Leisure and Cultural Services is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations for supervised, regulated, and managed animal control activity.
Said rules and regulations shall be promulgated pursuant to Section 1-7 of
this Code.
Sec. 22-10. Alcohol and liquor served in certain public facilities.
[2-18-2004 by Ord. No. 1380; amended 3-2-2005 by Ord. No. 1408;
10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1483; 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 1511;
10-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1569; 7-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1631; 8-13-2014
by Ord. No. 1633; 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1648; 12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 1663; 4-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1666; 11-16-2016 by Ord. No.
1679; 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 1740]
(a) Permit required.
(1) The sale, possession, and consumption of beer and wine is allowed
at special events held at the following public facilities: the Holland
Museum; the Cappon House; West Michigan Regional Airport;
exterior and interior areas of the Civic Center Place; 8th Street
Market Area; Windmill Island Gardens; DeGraaf Nature Center;
Window-on-the-Waterfront; Matt Urban Sports Complex; and Van
Raalte Farm, provided that the person conducting the event obtains
a permit from the City Manager prior to serving beer and wine for
the event and complies with any licensing requirements (or
qualifies for an exception to such requirements) imposed by the
State of Michigan.
(2) The sale, possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor is allowed
at restaurants located on property owned by the City at Windmill
Island and West Michigan Regional Airport, at sidewalk cafes, and
at the Civic Center Place provided that the facility or event sponsor
has a valid permit from the City Manager to serve alcoholic liquor
and complies with any licensing requirements (or qualifies for an
exception to such requirements) imposed by the State of Michigan.
(3) The sale, possession, and consumption of beer and wine may be
allowed at such other locations owned by the City of Holland as
may be approved on an events basis by the City Council of the City
of Holland by a duly adopted resolution. The City Council shall not
allow the sale, possession, and consumption of beer and wine at
Kollen Park, Van Bragt Park, Smallenburg Park, Prospect Park, or
Centennial Park.
Sec. 22-8 CHARTER Sec. 22-10
C:503
(4) The City of Holland shall not act in the capacity of a sponsor or a
server of beer, wine, and alcoholic liquor at any of the locations set
forth in Section 22-10(a)(1) through (3) unless specifically
authorized by the City Council for the event or location specified;
provided that City Council approval is not required for events at the
Civic Center Place. Any entity or licensee serving beer, wine, or
alcoholic liquor on City property shall be required to provide
evidence of financial responsibility insurance (Dram Shop)
coverage naming the City of Holland, its officers, agents, and
employees as additional insureds, and any employees serving on
behalf of such entity shall be TIPS trained and shall provide
evidence to the City of such training of its employees. All events
must comply with the requirements of the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission which may be applicable to the authorized event and
location.
(b) Application for permit. In order to obtain a permit for the sale,
possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor at the public facilities
described in Subsection (a) of this section, the person conducting the
event or operating the restaurant at the public facility shall pay the
nonrefundable permit application fee established by resolution adopted
by the City Council and shall submit an application to the City Clerk's
office [except for private events on Windmill Island are governed by
Subsection (l) and Private events at the Civic Center Place are governed
by Subsection (m)], which shall include the following:
(1) The location, dates and times of the event;
(2) A certificate of insurance coverage (for amounts required under
rules and regulations adopted by resolution of the City Council)
listing the City and its officers, employees and agents and the
facility operator as additional insureds and requiring notice to the
City of any cancellation;
(3) Whether there will be a charge for the alcoholic liquor, whether it
will be provided free of charge and whether there will be an
admission charge;
(4) If the alcoholic liquor will be provided by a person that is licensed
by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, a copy of the license;
(5) If the alcoholic liquor will be provided by a person that is not
licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, a complete
description of the basis for exemption from the state licensing
requirements;
(6) Written documentation from the facility manager for the public
facility indicating that the facility has been reserved by the
applicant for the event;
Sec. 22-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 22-10
C:504
(7) If alcoholic liquor will be served or consumed outside, a description
of the area where alcoholic liquor may be consumed at the event
and how the applicant will restrict consumption to that area;
(8) Such additional information as may be required by the City
Manager; and
(9) If the applicant must obtain a special license from the Liquor
Control Commission or obtain special insurance to satisfy the
requirements of this § 22-10, the application may be approved
before the applicant obtains the license, but the City Manager shall
not issue a permit until the applicant submits a copy of the license
and certificate of insurance as required by this Subsection (b).
(c) Application forms. The City Clerk may adopt a form for the application.
In such case, the applicant shall submit the application on the form as
adopted by the City Clerk.
(d) Decision on application. The application shall be submitted at least 60
days in advance of when the permit is desired. The City Clerk shall
promptly submit a copy of the application to the Chief of the
Department of Public Safety and the Director of the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services for review and comments and
to the City Manager for approval or denial. The City Manager may deny
the requested permit if, based on information acquired by or submitted
to the City Manager, the issuance of the permit is contrary to the public
health, welfare and safety. An applicant may appeal the City Manager's
decision to not issue a permit to the City Council by filing with the City
Clerk a written request for a hearing before the City Council.
(e) General event requirements. Persons conducting an event or operating
a restaurant permitted under this Section 22-10 shall comply with all
requirements set forth in the rules then in effect as adopted by
resolution of the City Council for serving alcohol at public facilities.
(f) Outside consumption. Alcoholic liquor shall not be consumed outside of
the buildings at the public facilities described in Subsection (a) of this
Section 22-10, and alcoholic liquor shall not be possessed in open
containers or glasses outside of the buildings at these public facilities
except a) if the permit provides for serving and consuming alcoholic
liquor outside and b) only in compliance with rules then in effect as
adopted by the City Council. The permit may contain additional
conditions for serving and consuming alcoholic liquor outside. The
applicant shall comply with all such conditions.
(g) Alcohol not provided by event sponsor. No alcoholic liquor shall be sold,
possessed or consumed that is not provided by the event sponsor, the
caterer engaged by the event sponsor or restaurant permitted under
this section.
(h) Applicant's responsibility. The applicant shall not allow persons to
consume or possess alcoholic liquor except as allowed in this section
Sec. 22-10 CHARTER Sec. 22-10
C:505
and shall at all times comply with any applicable Michigan statutes
restricting the serving of alcoholic liquor. An applicant shall at all times
comply with any statutory requirement to obtain a license from the
Liquor Control Commission and shall not serve alcoholic liquor without
complying with such licensing requirements. The issuance of a permit
shall not be construed as authorization to serve alcoholic liquor without
complying with such licensing requirements.
(i) Possession or consumption without permit prohibited. No person shall
provide alcoholic liquor and no person shall possess or consume
alcoholic liquor in or at the public facilities described in Subsection (a)
except as allowed under this section.
(j) Duration of permit. A permit issued under this section for an event shall
only be valid for the event and the dates described in the application.
The permit issued under this section for a restaurant operated on
property owned by the City at Windmill Island or the West Michigan
Regional Airport shall be valid from the issuance date through the
following April 30, unless renewed. A permit issued under this section
to the Holland Historical Trust for private events to be held at the
Holland Museum or the Cappon House shall be valid from the date of
issuance through the following April 30, unless renewed. A renewal
permit shall be valid from May 1 through the following April 30. The
permit issued under this section for a sidewalk cafe shall be valid from
the issuance date through the expiration date for the sidewalk cafe
permit.
(k) Sidewalk cafes. A restaurant that is authorized to operate as a sidewalk
cafe under Chapter 32 and which has a license issued by the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission may sell and serve alcoholic liquor to its
customers at the sidewalk cafe but only a) for consumption at the
sidewalk cafe, b) to the extent allowed by its license from the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission and c) if the person operating the sidewalk
cafe has a permit issued under this section. Alcoholic liquor shall not be
served at a sidewalk cafe on public property between 12:00 midnight
and 11:00 a.m.
(l) Special events on Windmill Island. Notwithstanding Subsection (b), an
application for a permit under this section and the required fee for
private events to be held on Windmill Island shall be submitted to the
Windmill Island Manager. The City Manager may delegate to the
Windmill Island Manager the authority to approve and issue permits
and to deny permits under this section for private events to be held on
Windmill Island. The application shall be on forms adopted by the
Windmill Island Manager. The applicant shall comply with all of the
requirements of this section and the rules adopted by resolution of the
City Council.
(m) Events at the Civic Center Place. Notwithstanding Subsection (b),
events at the Civic Center Place shall not require a permit to sell or
serve alcoholic liquor.
Sec. 22-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 22-10
C:506
Sec. 22-11. City event signs. [Ord. No. 1428, 10-19-2005]
The City, including all of its departments, the Main Street/Downtown
Development Authority (the "DDA"), and the Downtown Principal Shopping
District (the "PSD") are authorized to place a sign in a park or on public
property for advertising or identifying an event of the City, the DDA, or the
PSD upon administrative approval of the City Manager. The request shall
include all information that is required by the City Manager. A request for
approval of the sign shall be made to the City Manager at least 10 days
before the event.
Chapter 23
PAWNBROKERS
Sec. 23-1. License—required. [Code 1955, § 7-12.1]
No person shall hereafter carry on the business of pawnbroker in the
City without having first obtained a license from the Mayor in the manner
(1) Requests to serve alcoholic liquor at private events to be held at the
Civic Center Place shall be submitted to the Civic Center Place
Manager on forms adopted by the Civic Center Place Manager. The
Civic Center Place Manager will determine whether to approve a
request.
(2) So long as the City holds a license to sell and serve alcoholic liquor
at the Civic Center Place, all such sales and serving shall be by the
City or its authorized agents in accordance with local ordinances
and rules and state law and regulations.
(3) No requests to serve alcoholic liquor shall be approved for events
at the Civic Center Place that involve youth, high school or NCAA
sporting, recreational or leisure time events or rentals.
(n) Rules. The City Council may, by resolution, adopt rules that regulate the
serving and consumption of alcoholic liquor at public facilities pursuant
to permits issued under this section.
(o) Number of permits per year. The City Manager shall not issue more
than 24 permits during a calendar year and not more than one
organization per special event, as defined in the rules and resolution
adopted by regulation of the City Council. The City Manager shall not
issue more than one permit per day. Permits issued for private events
on Windmill Island, permits issued to the Holland Historical Trust for
private events and permits issued to restaurants or sidewalk cafes shall
not be counted for purposes of this subsection.
(p) Violations. Violations of this section shall be deemed misdemeanors
punishable as provided in Section 1-10.
Sec. 22-10 CHARTER Sec. 23-1
C:507
provided in Chapter 17 and in the statutes of the state pertaining to
pawnbrokers.
Sec. 23-2. Same—Application. [Code 1955, § 7-12.2]
Application for a license under this chapter shall be filed with the City Clerk
on forms provided by him.
Sec. 23-3. State law adopted. [Code 1955, § 7-12.3]
All statutes of the state, and specifically Act 273 of the Public Acts of 1917,67
relating to pawnbrokers, are hereby expressly incorporated into and made
a part of this Code by reference, and no person shall violate any such law.
Chapter 24
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
67.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 446.201 et seq.
Sec. 23-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 23-3
C:508
ARTICLE I
Peddlers and Drummers
Sec. 24-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 883]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DRUMMER — Any person engaged in the business of taking orders or
making contracts for the purchase of goods, wares or merchandise for
future delivery or any person who shall employ a representative, agent
or crew or representatives or agents to engage in such activity. The term
"drummer" shall not include any person engaged in the business of selling
at retail if done by prior appointment.
PEDDLER — A person over the age of 17 years engaged in the business of
selling at retail any goods, wares, merchandise or services, or taking orders
or making contracts for the purchase and immediate delivery thereof,
except when such activity is conducted from a fixed place on private
property within the City. Peddling shall also include any person engaged in
selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of
property or thing from any cart, vehicle or other device upon the streets or
public places of the City. The term "peddler" shall also include any person
who shall employ a representative, agent or crew of representatives or
agents to engage in such activity. The term "peddler" shall not include
any person engaged in the business of selling at retail if done by prior
appointment.
Sec. 24-2. License for peddlers—required; registration of
drummers; exceptions. [Code 1955, § 7-5.1; Ord. No. 883]
(a) No person shall engage in peddling unless he has first secured a license
to peddle from the City Clerk, in the manner provided in this article and
in Chapter 17 of this Code. Any license issued to an agent or
representative shall be valid and in effect only so long as the license of
the employer remains in full force and effect.
(b) No person shall engage in drumming without first providing the City
Clerk with the following information:
(1) The full name of the person taking orders or making contracts.
(2) Such person's permanent address, business address and local
address.
(3) The full name and address of the person's employer and a general
list of the types of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered.
(4) The full name and address of the person who will supply the goods,
wares or merchandise.
(c) Any physically handicapped peddler, any person offering for sale any
products of his own farm or any person peddling for a religious
Sec. 24-1 CHARTER Sec. 24-2
C:509
Sec. 24-3. Same—Application. [Code 1955, § 7-5.2; Ord. No. 883]
The application for a license under this article shall contain, in addition to
the information required by Chapter 17 of this Code, the following items,
and any others that the City Clerk may require:
Sec. 24-4. Same—License specifications. [Code 1955, § 7-5.5]
The regulations set forth in Sections 24-6 to 24-12 shall be either printed
in full on the back of, or attached to, each license issued under this article,
and each licensee shall comply with such regulations.
Sec. 24-5. Medical certificate for food vendors. [Code 1955, § 7-5.4;
Ord. No. 883]
The Department of Environmental Health may require an applicant who
proposes to peddle anything to be used as food to submit to the Department
of Environmental Health for examination a medical certificate obtained
from a physician who is licensed to practice medicine in the state, to the
effect that the holder is free from all communicable disease and infectious
disease in communicable form and is not a carrier of any such disease.
organization, educational institution or nonprofit community service
organization which receives the entire proceeds of sales made shall
be exempted from the payment of fees for licenses issued under this
article if he can establish the fact upon which he bases his claim of such
exemption to the satisfaction of the City Clerk. Each such person shall
submit an application for a license hereunder and shall be subject to all
other provisions of this article as if such person had obtained a license
and paid the fee required for the same.
(d) A peddler or drummer need not obtain a license or register with the
City if the peddling or drumming is accessory or incidental to a business
conducted at a fixed place within the City.
(a) The full name, permanent address, business address, local address and
age and occupation of the applicant at the time of filing the application;
(b) If an agent's or representative's application, the name of the person,
firm or corporation represented, together with the address of the
central or district office;
(c) A list or general description of the articles or services to be sold or
offered for sale;
(d) The length of time for which a license is desired;
(e) The proposed measure of sale, whether by weight, measure, package or
otherwise;
(f) The proposed method of peddling or vending, whether on foot or by
handcart, pushcart or other vehicle.
Sec. 24-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 24-5
C:510
If the Department of Environmental Health requests such a certificate, no
license shall be issued until the medical certificate has been submitted and
is approved by the Department of Environmental Health.
Sec. 24-6. Interfering with, etc., traffic; restrictions upon stopping
vehicle; peddling for more than 10 minutes at one location;
peddling at retail on certain streets prohibited. [Code 1955, § 7-5.5;
Ord. No. 798; Ord. No. 883; 1-3-2018 by Ord. No. 1701]
(a) No licensee or drummer under this article using any cart, wagon, truck,
automobile or other vehicle in peddling or drumming under the
provisions of this article shall occupy the street or sidewalk in such
manner as to interfere with or interrupt travel, or when stopping his
vehicle upon the streets or public places in the City for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, shall stop
otherwise than parallel with and within one foot of the curbline. No
peddler or drummer shall conduct his business in front of or next to any
premises for a longer period of time than 10 minutes.
(b) No person shall engage in peddling or drumming at any time on the
following streets:
(1) Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Streets between Van Raalte and
Fairbanks Avenues, and the avenues or streets between those
streets.
(2) Tenth and Twelfth Streets between Central and River Avenues.
(3) River and Central Avenues between Ninth and Twelfth Streets.
(c) In addition, no person shall engage in peddling or drumming during the
week of Tulip Time on Van Raalte Avenue from Lake Macatawa to 28th
Street.
(d) Notwithstanding the above, a licensed peddler who is contracted by the
Holland Tulip Time Festival, Inc., may engage in peddling bottled water
and pre-packaged snacks in the bleachers along Eighth Street and
along Van Raalte Avenue during any event organized, coordinated, or
administered by Tulip Time, and during the one hour before or after
such event.
(e) For the purposes of this section, peddling and drumming shall not
include the sale or distribution of newspapers or periodicals for
immediate delivery by individual carriers or at established distribution
sites or informational brochures or publications distributed by Holland
Tulip Time Festival, Inc., as long as such publication predominately
relates to the informational activities of Tulip Time.
Sec. 24-5 CHARTER Sec. 24-7
C:511
Sec. 24-7. Continuing to peddle or drum after being requested to
refrain by police officer. [Code 1955, § 7-5.5; Ord. No. 883]
No person shall continue to engage in peddling or drumming on any street,
alley or public place in the City when requested by a police officer to refrain
therefrom because of congested traffic conditions, evacuation, fire, police
investigation, storm damage or other similar reason, when it is necessary to
protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons of the City.
Sec. 24-8. Loud, etc., noises prohibited. [Code 1955, § 7-5.5; Ord.
No. 883]
No person shall shout or call his wares in a loud, boisterous or indecent
manner, or in such a manner as to disturb the public, nor shall any licensee
or drummer under this article use any loud or harsh horn or bell or other
noisemaking device to call attention to his wares or to his presence for
the purpose of conducting the business or acts for which his license was
granted.
Sec. 24-9. Weights and measures—examination and approval of
devices. [Code 1955, § 7-5.5; Ord. No. 1246, 3-24-1999]
No person shall use any weighing or measuring device in the conduct of
his business, or have in his possession any weighing or measuring device,
unless such device shall have been examined and approved by the sealer of
weights and measures.
Sec. 24-10. Same—Inaccurate weights or measures. [Code 1955,
§ 7-5.5; Ord. No. 1246, 3-24-1999]
No person shall sell or offer for sale any article or commodity purporting to
be in quantities of standard weight or measure, whether or not in original or
other packages, unless the same shall be actually of the weight or measure
purported.
Sec. 24-11. Sale of unsound, etc., food or defective merchandise.
[Code 1955, § 7-5.5; Ord. No. 1246, 3-24-1999]
No person shall sell or offer for sale any unsound, unripe or unwholesome
food, or defective, faulty, incomplete or deteriorated article or merchandise,
unless the goods are so represented to prospective customers.
Sec. 24-12. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1246, 3-24-1999]
A person who violates or fails to comply with Section 24-8 of this article is
responsible for a Class I municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code and
any other relief that may be imposed by the court. A person who violates
or fails to comply with Sections 24-6, 24-9, 24-10 or 24-11 of this article is
responsible for a Class II municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-118 of this Code
Sec. 24-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 24-12
C:512
and any other relief that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation
and each day upon which said violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.
Sec. 24-12 CHARTER Sec. 24-12
C:513

ARTICLE II
Tulip Time Transient Merchants
Sec. 24-13. Definitions. [Code 1955, § 7-10.1; Ord. No. 687; Ord. No.
828; Ord. No. 1209, 3-18-1998]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, association, corporation, limited
liability company, partnership or two or more persons having a joint or
common interest.
TULIP TIME — Not only the official, designated days of the Tulip Time
festival each year, but also the three days immediately before the
commencement of the festival and the one day immediately after the
conclusion of the festival.
TULIP TIME TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person engaging temporarily
in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or services from or at
a fixed place of business in the City during Tulip Time in any year. A person
so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
article by temporarily associating with a local dealer, trader or merchant, or
by temporarily conducting business in connection with, as part of, or in the
name of a local dealer, trader or merchant.
Sec. 24-14. License—required; exceptions. [Code 1955, § 7-10.2;
Ord. No. 428; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 1209, 3-18-1998; Ord. No.
1581, 3-7-2012]
(a) A person shall not engage in business as a Tulip Time transient
merchant in the City of Holland during Tulip Time of any year without
having first obtained a Tulip Time transient merchant license for each
location where business is to be conducted. A Tulip Time transient
merchant license shall be obtained under the provisions of this article
and Chapter 17. A person, being a Tulip Time transient merchant, shall
not peddle or engage in business in any manner in which a license is
required by Article I of this chapter, unless the person is also licensed in
accordance with the requirements of that article.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person who has a
regularly established place of business within the City of Holland and
who is on the City tax rolls.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply for any event organized,
coordinated, or administered by Holland Tulip Time Festival, Inc., d/b/a
Tulip Time, for which such organization is responsible for contracting
with individual merchants involving the sale of nonfood items.
Sec. 24-13 CHARTER Sec. 24-15
C:515
Sec. 24-15. Same—Application. [Code 1955, § 7-10.4; Ord. No. 828;
Ord. No. 1209, 3-18-1998]
Applications for a Tulip Time transient merchant license under the
provisions of this article shall include, in addition to the information
required by Chapter 17 and other information that the City Clerk may
require, the following information:
Sec. 24-16. Same—Fee. [Code 1955, § 7-10.4; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No.
1069, 10-7-1992; Ord. No. 1209, 3-18-1998]
For each Tulip Time transient merchant license issued under the provisions
of this article, the licensee shall pay the fee as established by a resolution
adopted by City Council. A licensee who sells goods, wares, merchandise
or services for a religious organization, educational institution or other
nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the payment of a Tulip Time
transient merchant license fee.
Sec. 24-17. Same—Term. [Code 1955, § 7-10.6; Ord. No. 687; Ord.
No. 828; Ord. No. 1209, 3-18-1998]
Each Tulip Time transient merchant license issued under this article shall
be for all or a part of Tulip Time as requested in the application for the
license.
(a) The full name and mailing address of the applicant at the time of the
filing of the application.
(b) The full name and mailing address of the business or organization, if
any, that will be engaged in business as a Tulip Time transient
merchant.
(c) The period of time or the number of days during Tulip Time for which
the license is requested.
(d) If the business of the applicant shall require the use of weighing or
measuring devices, then the application shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the sealer of weights and measures stating that such
devices have been examined and approved.
(e) The full name of the owner of the property or the owner's agent and the
property address of the location where the Tulip Time transient
merchant shall conduct business.
(f) The application shall also be accompanied with the written permission
of the owner or the owner's agent of the property where the Tulip Time
transient merchant's business is to be located.
Sec. 24-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 24-18
C:516
Sec. 24-18. Conditions of doing business. [Code 1955, § 7-10.5; Ord.
No. 828]
No licensee under the provisions of this article shall do or perform any of
the following things or acts:
Sec. 24-19. Enforcing officer. [Ord. No. 828]
The City Manager shall be the enforcing officer of this article or any City
employee or officer designated by him.
Sec. 24-20. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1209, 3-18-1998]
A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable under Section 1-10 of this Code.
(a) Posting license. Fail to post the license issued under the terms of this
article in a conspicuous location at the place where his business is
conducted, where it shall remain in plain sight during the entire time
during which such business is carried on.
(b) Zoning; public areas. Conduct his business in any zone district
prohibited by Chapter 39 of this Code nor on any street right-of-way,
including sidewalks, streets or curb areas.
(c) Building entrance or exit. Place or operate his business in the entrance
or exit areas of any building so as to hinder ingress or egress.
(d) Compliance with Code, etc. Violate any provision of this Code or any
state or federal law relating to the business in which he is engaged, or
any regulation which is promulgated and operative under any such law.
Sec. 24-18 CHARTER Sec. 24-20
C:517
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 26
PUBLIC LODGING HOUSES AND RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITIES
Sec. 24-20 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 24-20
C:518
ARTICLE I
Public Lodging Houses
Sec. 26-1. Definition. [Code 1955, § 7-13.1; Ord. No. 1008,
10-17-1990; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1737]
For the purposes of this chapter, every building or structure which is kept,
used or maintained as an inn, hotel, bed-and-breakfast establishment, or
motel where one or more rooms are made available to transients, shall
be deemed to be a public lodging house. Regulations for short-term rental
dwelling units can be found in Chapter 14.
Sec. 26-2. License required. [Code 1955, § 7-13.2; Ord. No. 1008,
10-17-1990]
No person shall keep, operate or maintain any public lodging house in the
City without having first obtained a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, Chapter 17 and Chapter 39.
Sec. 26-3. Inspections and approvals required. [Code 1955,
§ 7-13.4; Ord. No. 1008, 10-17-1990; amended 7-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 1673]
No license shall be issued under this article until the premises to be licensed
have been inspected and approved in writing by the Fire Chief as being
in compliance with the then current code as adopted pursuant to Chapter
11, Fire Protection, of the Holland City Code and inspected and approved
in writing by the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services.
The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall determine
that compliance with the provisions of Chapter 6, Buildings, Chapter 9,
Electricity, Chapter 14, Housing, Chapter 19, Nuisances, Chapter 20,
Offenses — Misc., Chapter 25, Plumbing, Chapter 26, Public Lodging,
Chapter 27, Refuse and Garbage, and Chapter 39, Zoning, of this Code.
Sec. 26-3.1. Suspended, revoked or expired licenses. [Added
7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 1673]
If a license is suspended, revoked or expires without renewal, the licensee
shall accept no new occupants, shall immediately notify all occupants of
the suspension, revocation or expiration and shall arrange for all occupied
hotel or motel rooms to be vacated as soon as possible (but in not more
than 30 days) and remain vacated until the suspension ends or the license
is reinstated or renewed. A suspension is effective when notice of the
suspension is given to the licensee as provided in Section 1-6(a) through
(c) of Chapter 1 of the Holland City Code. A revocation is effective when
approved by Council.
Sec. 26-4. Standards of maintenance. [Code 1955, § 7-13.3; Ord. No.
1008, 10-17-1990; amended 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 1673]
Sec. 26-1 CHARTER Sec. 26-4
C:519
(a) No person shall keep or maintain any public lodging house in the City
which does not comply with state law and the standards of safety and
morals established by Chapter 6, Buildings, Chapter 9, Electricity,
Chapter 11, Fire Protection, Chapter 14, Housing, Chapter 19,
Nuisances, Chapter 20, Offenses — Misc., Chapter 25, Plumbing,
Chapter 26, Public Lodging, Chapter 27, Refuse and Garbage, and
Chapter 39, Zoning, of this Code.
(b) Following issuance of a license under this chapter, the licensed
premises may be inspected by an enforcing officer at any time during
the licensee's business hours without prior notice to the licensee;
provided, however, that such inspections will not be conducted on more
than an annual basis unless based on request by the licensee, a
complaint or one of the provisions set forth below in this section.
(c) In the event that an inspection finds a violation of Chapter 6 Buildings,
Chapter 9, Electricity, Chapter 11, Fire Protection; Chapter 14,
Housing, Chapter 19, Nuisances, Chapter 20, Offenses — Misc.,
Chapter 25, Plumbing, Chapter 26, Public Lodging, Chapter 27, Refuse
and Garbage, or Chapter 39, Zoning, of this Code the following action
will be immediately taken:
(1) If one or more major violations are found, the enforcing officer shall
immediately suspend the license by giving written notice to the
license holder. The license shall remain suspended until each major
violation is cured.
(2) If one or more minor violations are found, the enforcing officer will
issue a written notice of violation. If the violation(s) is not cured
within 30 days of the notice of violation(s), the enforcing officer
may suspend the license. The license will remain suspended until
each of the violations are cured.
(3) If three separate notices of violations (either major or minor) are
issued to a licensee within a six-month period, the enforcing officer
shall immediately suspend the license and notify the City Clerk of
the notices of violation. The Clerk shall then arrange for a
revocation hearing before the City Council.
(4) For the purposes of Subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3), the following
definitions shall be used:
MAJOR VIOLATION — Any violation of the provisions of this article
or any code adopted by the City, which poses a hazard or risk to the
health and safety of the occupants of a lodging unit, including any
violation that substantially affects the habitability of the lodging
unit, such as lack of plumbing or mechanical or electrical systems,
insect infestation, structural defect, conditions conducive to decay
or deterioration, illegal cooking appliances, fire hazards and minor
violations found in 20% or more of the sleeping rooms.
Sec. 26-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 26-4
C:520
MINOR VIOLATION — Any violation of the provisions of this article
or any code adopted by the City that is not deemed a major
violation.
(d) In the event that there are three or more instances of prohibited
conduct at a licensed premises during any six consecutive months, then
the license shall be immediately suspended until the licensee adopts
and submits to the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services and the Holland Department of Public Safety a written plan to
reduce the prohibited conduct.
(1) For purposes of this Subsection (d), prohibited conduct shall mean:
a. Conduct that is a nuisance as defined in MCLA § 600.3801;
b. Unlawful possession of a controlled substance or drug
paraphernalia; or
c. Unlawful possession or use of a weapon.
(2) The plan shall include, but not be limited to, maintaining a
minimum of two on-site on-duty employees (not including
housekeeping staff) with training on preventing prohibited
conduct.
(3) The licensee's plan shall remain in effect until there are two or
fewer instances of prohibited conduct during six consecutive
months.
(4) If a plan is not received within 30 days, then the enforcing officer
shall notify the City Clerk of the notices of the violation(s). The
Clerk shall then arrange for a revocation hearing before the City
Council.
(5) If a license is suspended on two separate occasions during any
twelve-month period due to the amount of prohibited conduct, then
the enforcing officer shall immediately suspend the license and
notify the City Clerk of the violation. The Clerk shall then arrange
for a revocation hearing before the City Council.
(e) A license may be suspended, revoked or not renewed for any reason
authorized by Chapter 17, Licenses Generally.
(f) If a license remains suspended for 90 days or more, the enforcing
officer shall notify the Clerk's office and the Clerk's office shall initiate
proceedings before the City Council to revoke the license.
(g) Once a license is revoked under this section, the license will not be
reinstated or renewed unless the licensee adopts and maintains a plan
acceptable to the City Council to avoid future violations. At a minimum,
the plan shall include engaging new management that has acceptable
experience in operating a hotel or motel and compliance with
Sec. 26-4 CHARTER Sec. 26-4
C:521
Subsection (d) of this Section 26-4. If a license is revoked a second time,
the license will not be reinstated or renewed.
(h) The enforcing officer shall be as defined in Section 1-10.1 of this
Holland City Code.
(i) Except as otherwise stated in this section, the procedure for issuing,
renewing, suspending and revoking licenses shall be as set forth in
Chapter 17, Licenses Generally.
Sec. 26-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 26-4
C:522
ARTICLE II
Residential Care Facilities
Sec. 26-5. Procedure for establishment. [Ord. No. 636]
Any individual or organization desiring to establish an adult foster care
facility or residential facility for the care, treatment or rehabilitation of
persons with physical, mental or social-emotional disorders, as permitted
by various sections of Chapter 39 of this Code, shall make application to
the City Clerk for a license to establish and operate such residential facility.
Such license shall be subject to the review of Council, which may seek
the recommendation of City departments in its evaluation. Such license,
if approved, shall authorize an individual or organization to establish
residential care facilities as provided in Chapter 39, and in conformance
with other chapters of this Code regulating residential occupancies.
Sec. 26-6. Licensing. [Ord. No. 636]
Prior to the establishment of a residential care facility, and annually
thereafter concurrent with the licensing period of the City, any individual or
organization seeking to establish and operate such a facility shall submit for
Council's review a statement of goals and objectives. In its review, Council
may seek letters of endorsement or certifications from governmental or
social agencies having expertise in particular fields of human need to
determine that methods, program, supervision and resources are adequate
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of such facility and
the community at large. Upon satisfaction that such protection is or will be
provided, a license shall be granted.
Sec. 26-7. Fee; conditions of approval. [Ord. No. 636; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992]
There shall be a fee as established by a resolution adopted by City Council
required for application for a residential care facility. Approval of such
license shall allow an organization or individual to establish and operate
such a facility, but shall not be construed as approval of a particular
location. Criteria for the actual location for such facility shall comply with
the provisions of Chapters 6, 14 and 39 applicable thereto, being the
Building Code, Housing Codes, and Zoning Ordinance of the City.
Sec. 26-5 CHARTER Sec. 26-7
C:523
Chapter 27
REFUSE AND GARBAGE
Sec. 26-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 26-7
C:524
ARTICLE I
Refuse And Rubbish
Sec. 27-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992;68 amended Ord.
No. 1122, 9-21-1994; Ord. No. 1142, 3-15-1995;10-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1593; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1718]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall,
except as otherwise expressly provided, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or
other combustible material.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE HAULER — A hauler who is licensed by this
chapter to pick up and dispose of refuse from all persons or entities except
residential service users.
COMPOST — Includes, irrespective of any other provisions in this Code,
typical residential yard clippings of leaves, grass, garden plants and waste,
shrubbery, and similar natural plant materials; it may also include kitchen
wastes, such as lettuce, cabbage, carrots, potatoes, apples, orange rinds,
and other vegetable and fruit wastes that are normally considered refuse
or garbage and that may be incorporated into a composting operation.
Compost may include commercial decomposition additives.
COMPOSTER — A commercial or homemade container designed for
decomposition of yard clippings and other compost.
COMPOSTING OPERATION — The process of decomposing compost and
other yard clippings for the purpose of recycling compost into reusable soil
additives.
DAY OF COLLECTION — The designated day established by this chapter
for the collection of refuse, garbage, recyclable materials, or rubbish by
the designated contract hauler(s) of the City in the designated residential
collection zones of the City. Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter,
the day of collection of yard clippings is the same day designated for the
collection of refuse, garbage, and recyclable material.
DESIGNATED CONTRACT HAULER(S) — The person(s) or entity(ies) who
contract with the City for the pickup and disposal of refuse, garbage,
recyclable materials and yard clippings from all residential service users of
the City in accordance with the terms of the contract.
DISPOSAL — In addition to its regular meaning, the term "disposal" shall
include the storage, collection, and handling of refuse and recyclable
materials and yard clippings.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended Ch. 27 in its entirety. Former Ch. 27 was
adopted as part of the 1955 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 474; Ord. No. 487; Ord. No.
743; Ord. No. 744, Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 851; Ord. No. 860; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 912,
adopted 10-15-1986; Ord. No. 916, adopted 2-4-1987; Ord. No. 929, adopted 7-15-1987;
Ord. No. 995, adopted 1-3-1990 and Ord. No. 1018, adopted 7-10-1991.
Sec. 27-1 CHARTER Sec. 27-1
C:525
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Director of the Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services or his or her authorized representative.
FRONT YARD — The open, unoccupied space between the front line of the
building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches, and the street line, and
extending for the full width of the lot. On a corner lot, the narrowest lot
dimension along a street line shall be deemed to be the front lot line.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of foods, or other putrescible wastes,
but shall not include yard clippings as defined in this chapter.
MRF — A material recovery facility.
REAR YARD — A space unoccupied, except by an accessory building or use
as permitted by Chapter 39 of this Code, extending for the full width of the
lot, between any building other than a building or accessory use and the
rear lot line.
REAR YARD COMPOSTING — A composting operation established in the
rear yard of a residential lot within the City.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material that is commingled and/or presorted
and designated to be separated from refuse prior to the collection of refuse
and delivered to MRF which shall include but not be limited to:
ALUMINUM MATERIALS — Cans and foil and such other aluminum
products as shall be determined by the City.
(a)
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paper in which a portion has been
made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is
placed between two flat surfaces for the sake of strength, and that is
commonly used to form cartons.
(b)
GLASS — Bottles and jars, made of silica, sand, soda ash, and limestone
being transparent or translucent, and used for packaging or bottling
of various materials. This definition does not include plastics or glass
products, such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate
glass, safety glass, light bulbs, ceramics, or pieces of broken glass.
(c)
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — Computer paper, tab cards, white letterhead,
ledgers, and nonglossy copier paper.
(d)
NEWSPAPERS — Newspaper-grade paper, the common, inexpensive,
machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed
and distributed. This definition does not include magazines, slick paper,
and telephone books.
(e)
PLASTICS — Colorless or colored plastic that is high-density
polyethylene ("HDPE"), including plastic milk jugs and other plastic
containers of HDPE material.
(f)
(g) TIN CANS — Steel and tin-coated cans.
Sec. 27-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-1
C:526
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except bodily waste and recyclable materials,
and such words shall include garbage, ashes, and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICE — The service for collection and
disposal of refuse, recyclable material and yard clippings provided by the
schedule of the designated contract hauler(s) as administered through its
(their) contract with the City.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE USER — The owner, tenant, and/or occupant of a
building or structure of four or fewer residential units. For each tenantoccupied
residential unit, both owner and tenant shall be deemed to be
residential service users.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — That portion of a building or structure constructed,
designed, or used for residential occupancy, including but not limited to
portions of buildings or structures created for residential occupancy by the
conversion of single- or multifamily residences.
RUBBISH — Includes, but is not limited to, glass, metal, paper, plant
growth, wood or nonputrescible solid wastes, except to the extent that
such material constitutes recyclable material as defined herein and further
excepting yard clippings as defined in this chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Waste which may be disposed of in a Type II sanitary
landfill pursuant to MCLA § 324.11501 or any future amendment to the
State Solid Waste Code as amended, and any regulations, rules, or policies
promulgated hereunder.
YARD CLIPPINGS — Leaves, grass clippings, vegetable or other garden
debris, shrubbery, or brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length
and two inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus.
This term does not include stumps, agricultural waste, animal waste, roots,
sewage sludge, or garbage.
Sec. 27-2. Preparation of rubbish for disposal. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-8-1992]
Rubbish shall be prepared for disposal in the following manner:
Sec. 27-3. Requirements for containers. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
Containers for refuse shall comply with the following requirements:
Such other recyclable materials that are designated for recycling,
collection, and disposal by the City but which shall not include yard
clippings as defined in this chapter.
(h)
(1) It shall be placed in a container suitable to prevent the creation of or
existence of a nuisance; or
(2) It shall be cut and baled, tied, bundled, stacked or packaged so as not to
exceed 36 inches in length and 50 pounds in weight if such rubbish is
collected by a licensed rubbish collector, and stored or placed at least
12 inches off the ground.
Sec. 27-1 CHARTER Sec. 27-3
C:527
Sec. 27-4. Requirements for garbage disposal bags.
Garbage disposal bags shall comply with the following requirements:
Sec. 27-5. Storage of refuse. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
(1) Refuse containers shall be made of durable, watertight, rust-resistant,
rodent-resistant material having a close-fitting lid and handles to
facilitate collection.
(2) Refuse containers for residential service users shall not be less than 10
gallons nor more than 32 gallons in capacity; provided, that larger
refuse containers, not to exceed 90 gallons, shall be permitted if
specifically designed to be mechanically unloaded into a refuse
collection vehicle; provided, further, that all other requirements of this
chapter are met.
(3) It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation of a residue of liquids,
solids, or a combination of such material on the bottom or sides of
containers, it being the intention of this provision that the interior of
containers shall be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining as often
as necessary.
(4) Refuse containers for multifamily residential, commercial, and
industrial establishments and institutions shall comply with all
provisions of this section except as related to size of containers.
(5) Containers shall be stored in the manner set forth in Subsection (b) of
Section 27-5.
(1) Bags must be made of high quality watertight material for the purpose
of refuse collection.
(2) Bags shall be tied, fastened, or sealed in a secure manner for disposal
on the day of collection.
(3) Bags utilized for disposal on the day of collection shall be free of holes
or tears, and refuse shall be deposited in such a manner as not to
exceed the holding and strength capacity of the bag.
(a) Each person having refuse shall provide himself with approved refuse
containers and shall place and keep all refuse therein, except as
provided in Section 27-2 relating to rubbish. Storage of refuse in
garbage disposal bags is expressly prohibited.
(b) Except on the designated day of collection, it shall be unlawful to store
or place garbage, refuse, rubbish, or the containers or bags for its
storage in the front yard of a residence, street, right-of-way, alley,
stream, body of water, or any other public place, except on an approved
landfill or disposal site. It shall further be unlawful to store or place
refuse upon private property unless such refuse is placed in an
Sec. 27-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-5
C:528
Sec. 27-6. Disposal of refuse generally—Residential collection only.
[Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992; amended Ord. No. 1093, 6-2-1993; Ord.
No. 1142, 3-15-1995; Ord. No. 1276, 3-1-2000]
approved container; except that rubbish may be stored as provided in
Section 27-2.
(c) It shall be unlawful to store refuse or animal wastes on any premise if
such refuse or animal wastes, by reason of odor, putrefaction, or
attraction for insects or rodents, constitutes a nuisance.
(d) It shall be unlawful to store or place an appliance, including but not
limited to, a refrigerator or freezer, on the exterior portion of any
premises without removing the doors of the appliance.
(a) Commencing at 6:00 p.m. prior to the designated day of collection
applicable to a designated residential collection zone, a residential
service user shall place garbage, refuse, or rubbish in the front yard or
nontraveled portion of the right-of-way in approved containers or
approved garbage disposal bags for pickup and collection; provided,
however, that each residential service user who has contracted for rear
yard pickup service shall place such garbage, refuse, and recyclable
material within 75 feet of and plainly visible to the street or curb; and
further provided, however, that rubbish, as defined herein, which is
reasonably incapable of containerization because of its size or
dimension may be placed in the front yard or untraveled portion of the
right-of-way for collection.
(b) The owner, tenant, or occupant of a building or structure of four or
fewer residential units located in an area of the City of Holland annexed
to the City on or after December 31, 1999, shall be considered a
residential service user as defined in Section 27-1 and shall comply with
the requirements of this section and Section 27-7 by no later than six
months following the date of annexation.
(c) The designated contract hauler(s) may enter upon the lands or
premises of each residential service user as is reasonably necessary to
collect and dispose of garbage, refuse, recyclable material, or rubbish
as required by this chapter. Further, the designated contract hauler(s)
shall, upon the disposal of garbage, refuse, recyclable material, or
rubbish, secure the refuse/recyclable container and lid to prevent
removal of the container or lid by the wind or the elements.
(d) Each person having refuse or recyclable material shall cause its final
disposal as frequently as is necessary to prevent the creation of a
nuisance. Such final disposal shall be in an approved landfill and shall
be made only by a designated contract hauler(s) or by the person
creating such refuse/recyclable material. Further, every residential
service user shall provide a separate residential collection service for
each residential unit which he/she owns, rents, or occupies, thereby
Sec. 27-5 CHARTER Sec. 27-6
C:529
Sec. 27-7. Designated residential collection zones. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-8-1992; amended Ord. No. 1093, 6-2-1993; Ord. No. 1142,
3-15-1995; Ord. No. 1426, 10-5-2005; 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1593]
providing a minimum of one residential collection service for each
residential unit.
(e) No person shall set fire to or burn any refuse out-of-doors for disposal
purposes; provided, however, that the Fire Department may sanction
the burning or accumulations of brush, vegetation, construction
materials, or similar waste in accordance with Chapter 11.
(f) No person shall set fire to or burn any refuse indoors unless such refuse
is burned in an approved incinerator and in a manner which does not
create a nuisance.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, resist, hinder, or
oppose, or to aid or abet another to willfully obstruct, resist, hinder, or
oppose, any employee of the City or of the City's designated contract
hauler(s) when such employee is lawfully engaged in the collection and/
or disposal of refuse or recyclable material pursuant to this section. A
violation of this Subsection (g) shall be a misdemeanor.
(a) In order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City and to provide for the orderly collection and
disposal of refuse, recyclable material and yard clippings, the
designated contract hauler(s) shall provide for the collection,
transportation and delivery of refuse, recyclable material and yard
clippings, if yard clipping service is elected, from all residential services
users, who shall have properly prepared for the pickup of said refuse,
recyclable material and yard clippings, if yard clipping service is
elected, on the day of collection in accordance with the terms of this
chapter. The days of collection and the corresponding designated
residential collection zones are as follows:
(1) Zone A - Monday: The boundaries of this zone shall be (running
clockwise): the north side of 18th Street from Columbia Avenue to
Ottawa Avenue; the east side of Ottawa Avenue (extended) to Lake
Macatawa; the south sides of Lake Macatawa and Black Lake to the
west side of Fairbanks Avenue (extended); the west side of
Fairbanks Avenue to 20th Street, both sides of 20th Street, west to
Columbia Avenue, the east side of Columbia Avenue north to 18th
Street.
(2) Zone B - Tuesday: The boundaries of this zone shall be (running
clockwise): the north side of 28th Street from Lincoln Avenue to
Michigan Avenue; the west side of Michigan Avenue to 32nd Street;
the north side of 32nd Street to Ottawa Avenue; the east side of
Ottawa Avenue to 18th Street; the south side of 18th Street to
Columbia Avenue; the west side of Columbia Avenue to 22nd
Sec. 27-6 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-7
C:530
Sec. 27-8. Scavenging, etc. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
No person, other than the owner, tenant, or occupant of the premises on
which refuse containers are stored, or his agent or employee, or a licensed
refuse or rubbish collector, shall disturb any refuse container or remove its
cover or any contents thereof or pick over any rubbish or remove any item
therefrom; and no person shall cause any rubbish or refuse to be strewn or
scattered on any public or private property.
Sec. 27-9. Location of rubbish disposal site. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-8-1992]
The enforcing officer shall designate where rubbish shall be dumped.
Sec. 27-10. Rules and regulations—commercial refuse collection.
[Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992; amended 6-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1773]
Street; the south side of 22nd Street to Lincoln Avenue; the west
side of Lincoln Avenue to the north side of 28th Street.
(3) Zone C - Wednesday: The boundaries of this zone shall be (running
clockwise): both sides of 32nd Street from the east City limits to
Lincoln Avenue; neither side of Lincoln Avenue to 28th Street; the
east side of Lincoln Avenue to 22nd Street; the south side of 22nd
Street (extended) to Fairbanks Avenue (extended); the east side of
Fairbanks Avenue to the northern and east boundaries of the east
City limits south to both sides of 32nd Street.
(4) Zone D - Thursday: The boundaries of this zone shall be (running
clockwise): the west side of Ottawa Avenue to the south City limits;
the south and west City limits and the east side of Old Orchard
Road (extended) to Lake Macatawa; the south edge of Lake
Macatawa to Ottawa Avenue (extended).
(5) Zone E - Friday: The boundaries of this zone shall be (running
clockwise): the east and south City limits from 32nd Street to
Ottawa Avenue; the east side of Ottawa Avenue to 32nd Street; the
south side of 32nd Street to Michigan Avenue; the east side of
Michigan Avenue to 28th Street; the south side of 28th Street to
Lincoln Avenue; both sides of Lincoln Avenue to 32nd Street;
neither side of 32nd Street to the east City limits.
(b) In the event a holiday or other event occurs preventing collection in the
designated residential collection zone on the applicable day of
collection, the collection of refuse and recyclable material and yard
clippings shall occur on the next succeeding day.
(c) A violation of this section shall constitute a violation of the licensing
provisions of this chapter permitting suspension or termination of a
license pursuant to Chapter 17.
Sec. 27-7 CHARTER Sec. 27-10
C:531
Sec. 27-11. Same—Rubbish collection. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992;
amended 6-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1773]
(a) Trucks generally. Every commercial refuse collector shall provide such
enclosed trucks as shall be necessary for the efficient collection of
refuse in the City. Such trucks shall be so constructed and maintained
so that they cannot leak or spill, and shall be approved by the enforcing
officer.
(b) Cleanliness, sanitation, and parking of trucks. Every commercial refuse
collector shall maintain all collection vehicles in a clean and sanitary
condition, as free from offensive odors as possible. No commercial
refuse collector shall park any such trucks upon any street, alley, or
public place in the City, or upon any private premises longer than is
reasonably necessary to collect the refuse from the premises within the
close vicinity.
(c) Disposal of refuse. No refuse shall be disposed of by any commercial
refuse collector except in the manner set forth in his license.
(d) Hours of collection.
(1) Commercial collection. No refuse shall be collected from
commercial and industrial establishments except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in those areas where residential
structures are located within 700 feet of the commercial or
industrial service user, except that refuse may be collected from
commercial and industrial establishments between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in those areas zoned C-3 Central Business
District.
(2) Residential collection. Refuse collection shall be permitted by the
City and conducted by the designated contract hauler(s) in
accordance with the contract agreement with the City. Refuse may
be collected from residential establishments between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in areas zoned C-3 Central Business
District.
(e) Improperly stored refuse. No refuse collector shall be required to
collect any refuse unless the same is stored for collection in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(f) User of private drives. No refuse collector shall use a private residential
driveway for purposes of refuse collection unless permission is obtained
from the owner thereof.
(a) Disposal location. No licensed rubbish collector shall dispose of any
rubbish except in the manner and at the place designated by the
enforcing officer.
Sec. 27-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-11
C:532
Sec. 27-12. Violation of chapter. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992; Ord. No.
1122, 9-21-1994]
(b) Collection without license. No rubbish collector shall collect any refuse
or garbage in the City unless he has a refuse collector's license as
required by this chapter.
(c) Improperly stored rubbish. Rubbish collectors shall not be required to
collect rubbish unless it is stored for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(d) Hauling requirement; littering. No person shall haul rubbish on the
streets of the City except in a covered truck, or in covered cans or
containers, or in such manner that such rubbish cannot fall or be blown
upon the streets.
(e) Hours of collection.
(1) Commercial collection. No rubbish shall be collected from
commercial and industrial establishments except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in those areas where residential
structures are located within 700 feet of the commercial or
industrial service user, except that rubbish may be collected from
commercial and industrial establishments between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in those areas zoned C-3 Central Business
District.
(2) Residential collection. No rubbish shall be collected from
residential customers except on the day of collection between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except that rubbish may be
collected from residential establishments between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in areas zoned C-3 Central Business
District.
(f) Use of private drives. No licensee shall use a private residential
driveway for purposes of rubbish collection unless permission is
obtained from the owner thereof.
(a) For purposes of this chapter, the occupant(s) of a residence shall be
rebuttably presumed to be the owner of the refuse, garbage or rubbish
for any enforcement activities or violations of this chapter.
(b) For purposes of this section, the owner of a multifamily residence shall
be defined as the holder in fee of the premises or lesser estate thereof, a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, personal representative, trustee, lessee or other person in
control of a multifamily residence.
(c) Except at otherwise set forth in this chapter, each violation of any
provision of this chapter is declared to be a civil infraction and is
further declared to be a nuisance per se and subject to abatement as
provided in this code and by state law.
Sec. 27-11 CHARTER Sec. 27-12
C:533
(d) Upon failure of any person to store or dispose of garbage or refuse in
the manner set forth in this chapter and when such improper storage or
disposal creates or is likely to create nuisance by virtue of littering,
odor, putrefaction, rodent or insect attraction, or broken or hazardous
substances, the enforcing officer may take immediate steps to abate
such nuisance. All costs thereof shall be recoverable in the manner set
forth in Section 15.17 of the Charter of the City.
Sec. 27-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-12
C:534
ARTICLE II
Recyclable Materials
Sec. 27-13. Mandatory recycling. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992; Ord. No.
1276, 3-1-2000]
Commencing on May 1, 1992, all residential service users shall separate
recyclable materials from solid waste and dispose of the recyclable material
for pick up in the designated residential collection zone in which the
residential service users reside pursuant to Section 27-7 by a designated
contract hauler(s). The owner, tenant, or occupant of a building or structure
of four or fewer residential units located in an area of the City of Holland
annexed to the City on or after December 31, 1999, shall be considered a
residential service user as defined in Section 27-1 and shall comply with the
requirements of this section and the other sections of Article II of Chapter
27 by no later than six months following the date of annexation.
Sec. 27-14. Storage of recyclable material. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-8-1992; Ord. No. 1093, 6-2-1993]
Sec. 27-15. Disposal of recyclable material—generally. [Ord. No.
1034, 1-8-1992; Ord. No. 1075, 12-16-1992]
(a) Recyclable material shall be placed and stored in containers or garbage
disposal bags provided by the City or a designated contract hauler(s).
(b) Storage of recyclable material in garbage disposal bags is prohibited if
the method of storage results in rodent infestation or otherwise affects
the general health, safety, and welfare of individuals and adjoining
property.
(c) Except on the designated day of collection, it shall be unlawful to store
or place recyclable material for its storage in the front yard of a
residence, street, right-of-way, stream, body of water, or any other
public place.
(a) Commencing at 6:00 p.m. prior to the designated day of collection
applicable to a designated residential collection zone, a residential
service user may place recyclable material in the front yard or
nontraveled portion of the right-of-way in approved containers or
disposable bags.
(b) Paper recyclables shall be bundled separately and secured in such a
manner as to prevent the recyclable material from being blown or
scattered, and shall be maintained in a dry condition, free of any other
substance.
(c) All other recyclable materials shall be rinsed and cleaned of all contents
and shall be disposed of in one or more approved containers or disposal
bags.
Sec. 27-13 CHARTER Sec. 27-16
C:535
Sec. 27-16. Anti-scavenging. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
Recyclable material shall become the property of the designated contract
hauler(s) of the City at the time the recyclable material is placed in the front
yard for disposal. It shall be a violation of this article for any person other
than a designated contract hauler(s) of the City to collect, remove, pick
up, or cause to be collected, removed, or picked up, any such recyclable
material.
Sec. 27-17. Disposal location of recyclable materials. [Ord. No.
1034, 1-8-1992]
All recyclable materials shall be disposed of in an MRF or such disposal
facility as approved by the enforcing officer.
Sec. 27-18. Residential service collection charge; refuse and
recyclable materials; resolution; failure to pay; lien upon property.
[Ord. No. 1113, 6-1-1994; amended 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1593;
6-5-2013 by Ord. No. 1607]
(a) The City shall levy and collect a monthly charge for the collection of
refuse and recyclable materials (including costs for containers and any
other costs related to collection) from all residential service users of the
City.
(b) The charge levied pursuant to this section shall be adopted pursuant to
a duly adopted resolution of the City Council and published in the same
manner as an ordinance pursuant to this Code prior to the effective date
of adoption. The charge shall be billed at least quarterly and may be
billed in advance.
(c) It shall be a violation of this Code for a residential service user to fail to
pay the charges for the collection and disposal of refuse and recyclable
materials levied and collected by the City.
(d) Except as otherwise provided or limited by state law, the charges levied
pursuant to this section (including charges incurred on or since April 1,
1993) shall at once become a debt due to the City from the person(s)
upon whom they are levied and from the owner(s) of the premises to
which the services are provided. The amounts charged, together with
all interest and collection costs, shall immediately become a lien upon
the premises to which the services are provided, and the lien for such
charges, interest, and costs shall continue until payment thereof.
(1) In a case when a tenant is responsible for the payment of the
charges and the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services is so notified in writing, the notice to include a copy of the
lease of the affected premises, if there is one, then the charges
shall not become a lien against the premises after the date of the
notice.
Sec. 27-16 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-18
C:536
(2) All unpaid charges for refuse/recyclable services furnished to any
such premises, which, on the 30th day of June of each year, have
remained unpaid for a period of six months, or more, shall be
reported by the City Auditor to the Council at the first meeting
thereof in the month of July. Except for property exempt from a lien
under Subsection (d)(1) of this Section 27-18, the Council
thereupon shall order the publication in a newspaper published in
the City, of notice to all owners of property within the City that all
unpaid refuse/recyclable charges which have remained unpaid for
a period of six months or more prior to the 30th day of June, and
which have not been paid by the 31st day of July, shall be assessed
upon the City's tax roll against the premises to which the refuse/
recyclable services, for which the unpaid charges accrued were
supplied or furnished; and that such charges shall be collected in
the same manner as the City taxes on said tax roll.
(3) Except for property exempt from a lien under Subsection (d)(1) of
this Section 27-18, all such refuse/recyclable charges which remain
unpaid on the 31st of July shall be transferred to the City's tax roll
and assessed against the premises to which the refuse/recyclable
service, for which the unpaid charges accrued, was supplied or
furnished, and shall be collected with, and in the same manner as,
City taxes. If the same have remained delinquent and unpaid after
the expiration of the time limited in the treasurer's warranty for the
collection of taxes levied in said tax roll, such charges shall be
returned to the County Treasurer to be collected in the same
manner as the lien created by City taxes on the delinquent tax roll
of the City.
(e) In the event that any provision of this section shall prove to be
incomplete or inadequate for the carrying out of the purposes thereof,
the Council shall provide by ordinance such additional procedures as
may be required for the collection of refuse/recyclable charges, and, for
such purpose, shall have all the powers granted to cities by MCLA
§ 141.101 et seq., as amended.
Sec. 27-18 CHARTER Sec. 27-18
C:537

ARTICLE III
License Of Commercial Refuse And Rubbish Haulers And The
Designated Contract Hauler(s)
DIVISION 1
Commercial Refuse Collector's License
Sec. 27-19. Required. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
No person shall engage in the business of collecting or disposing of
commercial refuse without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner
provided in this chapter. No commercial refuse collector shall collect refuse
from a residential service user unless the collector shall be the designated
contract hauler of the City.
Sec. 27-20. Application; procedure for licensing. [Amended
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1718]
Sec. 27-21. Expiration; revocation. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992; Ord.
No. 1064, 8-19-1992; Ord. No. 1074, 12-16-1992]
(a) No commercial refuse collector's license shall be issued except upon
application to the City Clerk upon forms provided by him, stating, in
addition to such other information as shall be required by the City
Clerk, a statement of the trucks and equipment which the licensee
proposes to use for collecting refuse in the City including the following:
(1) The method and location of the disposal of refuse to be used by the
commercial refuse collector;
(2) The method and equipment to be used in collecting in the City;
(b) The City Clerk shall submit any such application to the City Council for
approval at its next regular meeting after submission, and the City
Council shall approve the applications of such licensee as it shall deem
best able to collect commercial refuse in the City in accordance with the
best interest of the City and its inhabitants.
(c) Whenever any application made hereunder shall have been approved by
the City Council, the City Clerk, upon payment of the fee by applicant
and filing of a certificate of insurance in the amounts specified by
resolution of the City Council, shall issue to such applicant a
commercial refuse collector's license.
(a) Unless sooner revoked as hereinafter provided, every refuse collector's
license shall expire on the 30th day of the next succeeding April
following its issuance.
(b) Any refuse collector's license issued under this chapter may be revoked
in the manner provided in Chapter 17 of this Code for the reasons
stated therein and, in addition, such license may be revoked if any
Sec. 27-19 CHARTER Sec. 27-21
C:539
unauthorized change is made in the method or equipment and in the
collection or the method or the location of disposal.
Sec. 27-21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-21
C:540
DIVISION 2
Refuse and Recyclable Material Contractor(s)/Designated Contract
Hauler(s)
Sec. 27-22. Designation as hauler required. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-8-1992; amended 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1593]
Sec. 27-23. Requirements. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992; amended
10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1593]
In addition to any requirements established by this chapter, the
requirements for the collecting and disposing of refuse, recyclable materials
and yard clippings from residential service users shall be incorporated and
set forth in a contract executed by the City and the designated contract
hauler(s).
(a) No person shall engage in the business of collecting or disposing of
refuse or recyclable material in the City from residential service users
unless such person is a designated contract hauler(s) who contracted
with the City for the collection of refuse and recyclable material from
residential service users.
(b) Except as set forth in Section 27-27, no person shall engage in the
business of collecting or disposing of yard clippings in the City from
residential service users unless such person is a designated contract
hauler(s) who contracted with the City for the collection of yard
clippings from residential service users.
Sec. 27-22 CHARTER Sec. 27-23
C:541

DIVISION 3
Rubbish Collector's License
Sec. 27-24. Required. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
No person shall engage in the business of collecting or disposing rubbish
without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner provided in this
chapter.
Sec. 27-25. Application; procedure for licensing. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-8-1992]
A rubbish collector's license shall be applied for and issued in the same
manner as refuse collector's licenses, as provided in this chapter.
Applications for such licenses shall state the equipment proposed to be
used. The City Council may approve the application of any person whom
it shall deem to be properly equipped to collect rubbish in the City, in
accordance with the best interest of the City and its inhabitants.
Sec. 27-26. Expiration; renewal. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-8-1992]
Rubbish collector's licenses shall terminate on the next succeeding April 30
and shall be obtained and renewed in the manner provided in Chapter 17 of
this Code, shall be subject to the provisions of that chapter in all respects.
Sec. 27-24 CHARTER Sec. 27-26
C:543

ARTICLE IV
Composting And Yard Clippings
Sec. 27-27. Yard clippings in refuse/recycling containers
prohibited; in solid waste prohibited; collection procedures. [Ord.
No. 1142, 3-15-1995; amended 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1593]
Sec. 27-28. Composting prohibitions. [Ord. No. 1142, 3-15-1995]
(a) It shall be unlawful to place any yard clippings in any refuse or recycle
container within the City of Holland.
(b) It shall be unlawful to place any yard clippings in any solid waste for
disposal.
(c) Commencing on January 1, 2013, residential services users may, but are
not required to, leave yard clippings for collection. If yard clipping
collection is elected, then the collection shall be done by the designated
contract hauler(s) on the day of collection in the designated residential
collection zone, or by a lawn service company contracted to provide
other lawn services to the residential service user in addition to the
collection of yard clippings. Residential service users who are subject to
an existing, multi-year contract for the collection of yard clippings,
which will remain in effect for the 2013 season or the 2013 and 2014
seasons, shall be required to comply with the requirements of this
subsection upon termination of that existing contract. Yard clippings
shall only be left for collection if the following requirements are met:
(1) The yard clippings are stored, prepared and disposed of as
provided in Sections 27-2 through 27-7 of Article I above;
(2) The yard clippings are separated from any refuse and recyclable
materials;
(3) The yard clippings are collected by the designated contract
hauler(s) or by a lawn service company as set forth in this
Subsection (c) of Section 27-27; and
(4) The yard clippings are directed to a composting or other facility
properly licensed to receive yard clippings for disposal or
composting.
(d) Charges for the collection of yard clippings by the designated contract
hauler(s) shall be in accordance with Section 27-18 of Article II.
(a) It shall be unlawful to place any meat, fish, milk product, bone, grease,
fat, oil, or animal wastes or by-products in any compost, compost, or
composting operation within the City of Holland.
(b) It shall be unlawful to have a composting operation on the front yard of
any lot within the City.
Sec. 27-27 CHARTER Sec. 27-29
C:545
Sec. 27-29. Composting requirements. [Ord. No. 1142, 3-15-1995]
A composting operation within the City of Holland shall be permissible only
when:
Sec. 27-30. Master composters. [Ord. No. 1142, 3-15-1995]
The Director of the Department of Environmental Health may designate
as "master composters" any individuals determined by the Department of
Environmental Health to be appropriately qualified in the art of composting.
Such master composters may be used by the Department of Environmental
Health to assist City residents in establishing appropriate composting
operations and in educating City residents as to the benefits of composting.
Sec. 27-31. Discontinuance of nuisance. [Ord. No. 1142, 3-15-1995]
The owner(s), tenant(s), and occupant(s) of property upon which a
composting operation is found by the Department of Environmental Health
to be a nuisance, shall immediately abate the nuisance as directed by the
Department of Environmental Health.
Sec. 27-32. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1142, 3-15-1995;
amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1718]
Sec. 27-33. Administrative searches; hindering. [Ord. No. 1142,
3-15-1995]
(1) The composting operation is adequately and properly contained within
a commercial composter or a homemade container which is approved
by the Department of Environmental Health; and
(2) The composting operation is maintained and operated in a manner
which does not create a nuisance by reason of unsightliness, odor, or
attraction of insects, rodents, or other pests; and
(3) The composting operation is located in the rear yard of a residential lot
within the City.
(a) Except as otherwise set forth in this article, each violation of any
provision of this article shall be a Class I Municipal Civil Infraction and
subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of fines in Section
2-118 of this Code and any other relief that may be imposed by the
Court.
(b) Each such violation (whether a first, second, third, or later violation)
shall also constitute a nuisance per se and shall be subject to abatement
pursuant to the nuisance provisions of this Code and state law.
(c) A person who, without good cause, fails to pay the fine and costs as set
forth in Subsection (a) above shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 27-29 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-33
C:546
(a) It shall be lawful for the Director of the Department of Environmental
Health, or any employee thereof, who has reasonable cause to believe
that a composting operation exists upon any property within the City of
Holland, to enter said property to determine whether such composting
operation exists and whether it is in compliance with this article, and to
take such action as is necessary to bring such composting operation
into compliance with this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, resist, hinder, or
oppose, or to aid or abet another to willfully obstruct, resist, hinder, or
oppose, any employee of the City or of the Department of
Environmental Health, or any master composter, when such person is
lawfully engaged in the inspection of composting operations pursuant
to this article.
Sec. 27-33 CHARTER Sec. 27-33
C:547
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 28, which pertained to service stations, adopted as
§§ 2-7.3 through 2-7.6 of the 1955 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 526,
was repealed 2-7-1990 by Ord. No. 1000.]
Chapter 29
SEWER USAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 27-33 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 27-33
C:548
ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 29-1. Rules applying to text. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;69 Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter.
Sec. 29-2. Abbreviations. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
U.S. EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
(a) The particular shall control the general.
(b) Except with respect to the definitions which follow in Section 29-3, the
headings which title a chapter, section or subsection are for
convenience only and are not to be considered in any construction or
interpretation of this chapter or as enlarging or restricting the terms
and provisions of this chapter in any respect.
(c) The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
(d) Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
(2) Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number;
and
(3) Words used in the plural number shall include the singular number.
(e) Words imparting masculine gender shall apply to feminine and also to
firms, companies, associations, partnerships, joint ventures,
corporations, joint stock companies, trusts, estates, governmental
entities and any other legal entities or any combination thereof.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended and reinstated Ch. 29 in its entirety. Former
Ch. 29 was adopted 5-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1143, as amended 5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1170;
3-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1247; 10-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1317; and 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 1322.
Sec. 29-1 CHARTER Sec. 29-2
C:549
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
WEF Water Environment Federation
Sec. 29-3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
For the purpose of their use in this chapter, the following terms and phrases
are hereinafter defined. Any word or phrase not defined herein shall be
considered to be defined in accordance with its common or standard
definition.
40 CFR 403 — The general pretreatment regulations outlined at 40 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 403.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by
the Clean Water Act and the Water Quality Act of 1987, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.
ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE — The committee established pursuant to
the "contract."
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 29-49 of this
chapter. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function;
(a)
In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor; and
(b)
An authorized representative of the individual designated above if:
Such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates;
(1)
(2) The authorization is in writing; and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
(c)
Sec. 29-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-3
C:550
standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20° C. (without addition of
nitrification inhibitors).
BPW — The Board of Public Works of the City of Holland, its authorized
deputy, agent, or representative.
BTEX — The sum of the concentration of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene
and xylene.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension of the building drain which begins five
feet outside the inner face of the building wall and continues to the sanitary
sewer or other place of disposal.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility as outlined in 40 CFR 403.17.
CESSPOOL — An underground pit into which household sewage or other
untreated liquid waste is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into
the surrounding soil or is otherwise removed.
CITY — The City of Holland, acting by and through its Holland Board of
Public Works unless the context of the term refers to the City of Holland as
a separate entity.
COD (denoting CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The amount of oxygen
required to chemically oxidize organic and inorganic constituents of
wastewater as measured under standard laboratory procedures.
COD/BOD RATIO — The ratio of COD to BOD in the plant influent calculated
using the average COD and BOD data as found on the state plant influent
sheet.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM — The waste stream at industrial facilities
where effluent from one regulated process is mixed, prior to treatment,
with wastewaters other than those generated by that regulated process.
Where required by federal or state law, the combined waste stream formula
provided in 40 CFR 403 will apply to limits applicable to a combined waste
stream.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A series of representative samples taken over a
specific time period which are then combined into one sample for testing
purposes.
CONTRACT — The Holland Area Wastewater Treatment Facilities Operation
Contract dated as of April 1, 1980, or any subsequent pact or amendment
made thereto.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City of Holland, acting through its Board of
Public Works or their authorized representatives.
DAILY MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION — The maximum concentration of a
pollutant in any individual sample during that day.
Sec. 29-3 CHARTER Sec. 29-3
C:551
DAILY MINIMUM CONCENTRATION — The minimum concentration of a
pollutant in any individual sample during that day.
DEBT RETIREMENT CHARGE — The charge levied to users for retirement
of bonded indebtedness for the POTW.
DEQ — The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or any
successor governmental agency having similar regulatory jurisdiction.
DISCHARGE — Includes, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking,
pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping.
DOMESTIC USER — All users of the POTW where the discharge into the
system is primarily domestic waste.
DOMESTIC WASTE — A water-carried waste from, but not limited to, toilet,
kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities used for household purposes.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The general manager of the Holland Board of
Public Works, or an authorized deputy, agent, or representative, unless
stated differently in this section.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER (IU) — Any person who introduces pollutants into a
POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under the Act, state law, or
local ordinance.
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS — Those processes which generate the types of
wastes as enumerated in Section 29-49.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid or liquid borne wastes from industrial
or manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic
waste.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERCEPTOR DEVICE — A device, including but not limited to, grease
traps, sand traps, oil separators, etc., designed and installed so as to
separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from
normal wastes and permit normal sewage or wastewater to discharge into
the disposal terminal by gravity. In case of acid or caustic wastes, an
interceptor is a device in which the wastes are neutralized prior to their
discharge into the solid or waste system of the premises, the building drain,
the building sewer, private sewer, or public sewer.
INTERFERENCE — Any discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW and any of its process or operations, or
its sludge use or disposal; and
(a)
Sec. 29-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-3
C:552
MINOR INDUSTRIAL USER (MIU) — A nondomestic user designated as
such by the control authority, which the control authority has determined
does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user. The control
authority may issue a minor industrial user a wastewater discharge permit
and require the user to conduct periodic monitoring and reporting, as
deemed appropriate.
MONTHLY AVERAGE CONCENTRATION — The sum of the concentrations
of the subject pollutant in all of the individual samples divided by the
number of samples analyzed for that pollutant during a calendar month. If
the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the limit of detection,
regard that value as zero when calculating monthly average concentration.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), which applies to a specific
category of industrial users.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:
NONDOMESTIC USER — Any user, including significant industrial users, of
the POTW that discharges wastes other than or in addition to water-carried
domestic wastes.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal.
(b)
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at
which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that caused the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing facility, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source should be considered; or
(c)
(d) As defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k)(2) and (k)(3).
Sec. 29-3 CHARTER Sec. 29-3
C:553
NONDOMESTIC WASTE — All water-carried wastes other than domestic
wastes.
NPDES or STATE DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
NUISANCE — Any condition or circumstance defined as a nuisance
pursuant to Michigan Statute, at common law or in equity jurisprudence
which includes, but is not limited to, any condition where sewage, industrial
waste, or the effluent from any sewage disposal facility or toilet device
is exposed to the surface of the ground or is permitted to drain on or to
the surface of the ground into any ditch, storm sewer, lake or streams, or
when the odor, appearance, or presence of this material has an obnoxious
or detrimental effect on or to the senses or health of persons, or when it
shall obstruct the comfortable use or sale of adjacent property, except as
otherwise permitted.
OPERATION MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT — All work and
activities including, but not limited to, engineering, contract preparation,
purchasing, repair, supervision, recruitment, training, expediting,
inspection, accounting, testing, protection, operating management, and
maintenance necessary to provide adequate wastewater treatment and/
or collection and/or disposal of treatment residues on a continuing basis
to conform with all applicable federal, state, and local wastewater
management requirements and to assure optimum long-term management
of the complete wastewater treatment system.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or assigns.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
PLANT — The Holland Area Wastewater Treatment Plant, as improved and
enlarged pursuant to the contract dated as of February 1, 1978, between
Ottawa County, Park Township, Holland Township, and Holland City and
a contract dated as of June 13, 1978, between Allegan County, Fillmore
Township, Laketown Township, and Holland City and as further improved
and enlarged pursuant to a contract dated as of June 1, 1994, between
Ottawa County, Holland City, Holland Township, Park Township, Laketown
Township, Fillmore Township, and Zeeland Township, and as it may be
further improved and enlarged.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible confined and discrete conveyance or
vessel from which pollutants are or may be discharged into a public
waterway or public sewer system.
Sec. 29-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-3
C:554
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial, and agricultural waste or
any other contaminant.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction, elimination, or
alteration of pollutant properties to a less harmful state prior to or in
lieu of discharge or introduction into a POTW. This can be accomplished
by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, or other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARD — Any local, state or federal
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits. This term includes local
limits, prohibitive discharge limits including those promulgated under 40
CFR 403.5, and categorical pretreatment standards.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — The treatment works
as defined by Section 212 of the Act including any devices and systems used
in the monitoring, testing, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation
of municipal sewage and industrial waste which are connected to or part
of the Holland Area Wastewater Treatment Plant. The systems include
sewers, pipes, and equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment
facility. The term also includes the municipality as defined in Section 502(4)
of the Act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the
discharges from such a treatment works.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned and/or controlled by any
governmental entity which is a participant in the plant.
RECURRING OFFENSE — Two or more consecutive monitoring periods
evidencing violations or a pattern of noncompliance.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Those expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works are designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USER — All noncommercial premises used only for human
residency and which are connected to the POTW.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEEPAGE PIT (or DRY WELL) — A cistern or underground enclosure
constructed of concrete blocks, bricks, or similar material loosely laid with
open joints so as to allow the septic tank overflow or effluent to be absorbed
directly into the surrounding soil.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle receiving sewage and having an
inlet and outlet so designed to permit the separation of suspended solids
from wastes and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition
therein.
Sec. 29-3 CHARTER Sec. 29-3
C:555
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage or property
damage to the POTW which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably
be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage
does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE — The water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
industrial establishments and/or other premises together with such
infiltration as may be present.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A privy, cesspool, seepage pit, septic tank,
subsurface disposal system, or other devices, used in the disposal of sewage
or human excreta, except treatment facilities covered by an NPDES permit.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — Significant noncompliance has
occurred in the event of any one or more of following have occurred:
Except as provided in Paragraph (b) of the definition, the term
significant industrial user means:
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(1)
Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW; or is designated as such by the control
authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement [in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)].
(2)
(a)
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in Paragraph
(a) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the control authority [as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a)]
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant
industrial user.
(b)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
an instantaneous limit as defined in Section 29-3;
(a)
Sec. 29-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-3
C:556
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.
STATE — The State of Michigan.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — Any portion of the stormwater
drainage system, including any natural outlet, which carries storm and
Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including an instantaneous limit, as defined in Section 29-3 multiplied
by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and
1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(b)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum,
longer-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that
the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(c)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(d)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
(e)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(f)
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Significant noncompliance for pH means:
Any discharge whose pH is less than or equal to two or greater than
or equal to 12.5 standard units.
(1)
Those discharges in which 25% or more of all of the measurements
taken during a six-month period are outside of the applicable limits
for pH.
(2)
(h)
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation
of best management practices, which the control authority determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(i)
Sec. 29-3 CHARTER Sec. 29-3
C:557
surface waters and drainage or unpolluted industrial process water, such as
permitted by Section 29-7(b).
SUBSURFACE DISPOSAL FIELD — A facility for the distribution of septic
tank overflow or effluent below the ground surface through a line or a series
of branch lines of drain tile laid with open joints to allow the overflow or
effluent to be absorbed by the surrounding soil throughout the entire field.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Holland Area Wastewater
Treatment Plant or the Superintendent's authorized representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — Solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified
as toxic pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act or other federal statutes or in regulations promulgated by the state
under state law.
UNPOLLUTED PROCESS WATERS — Any noncontact cooling or noncontact
processing water that is not chemically changed by its use for cooling or
processing, or water free of substances that are or may be harmful to
humans or wildlife or that may create or constitute a nuisance.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the control of the industrial user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation and as
further defined in 40 CFR 403.16.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
sewage into a public sewer.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on the users of a treatment works for the
costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the treatment works
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1284(b)(1), as amended.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities,
institutions and other facilities, whether treated or untreated.
WATERCOURSE — A channel, natural or artificial, in which a flow of water
occurs either continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Includes:
Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this
state subject to its jurisdiction, including all ponds, lakes, rivers,
streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems within
this state, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or
dispose of sewage; and
(a)
The floodplain free-flowing waters determined by the DEQ on the basis
of one-hundred-year flood frequency; and
(b)
Sec. 29-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-3
C:558
Sec. 29-4. Compliance with chapter, state law, etc. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
No person shall establish, replace or alter any connections with any public
sewer, or cause the same to be done, unless he shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state, and all other lawful
regulations.
Sec. 29-5. Damage to or tampering with sewage system; prohibited.
[Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenances, or equipment which
is part of the POTW.
Sec. 29-6. Unlawful disposal of wastes. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Sec. 29-7. Discharge into storm drain or natural drain prohibited;
exception. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(c) Any other waters specified by state law.
(a) No person shall dispose of wastes in such a manner, or permit the
facilities or fixtures thereof to be in such condition, as shall be
dangerous to public health.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any manner upon public or private property within the City
of Holland, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or any substances that possess the characteristics
described in Section 29-49 which constitute a nuisance unless
specifically permitted by law, or which may constitute a hazard to the
public health.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any waste into the
POTW through a connection that has not been authorized pursuant to
this chapter or directly into a public sewer without authorization.
(a) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Holland, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except for those facilities described below.
(b) Any industrial waste disposal facility operating with a state-approved
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall
be exempt from the prohibition of this section, and shall be subject to
the following:
(1) If a temporary excess of any of the parameters listed in the NPDES
permit is anticipated, Community Services and Development shall
be informed immediately, and a written report shall follow that
contains a description of the excess, the reasons for its occurrence,
Sec. 29-3 CHARTER Sec. 29-7
C:559
Sec. 29-8. Connection to public sewer required; exception. [Ord.
No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
No person shall maintain any building having a sewage discharge on any
premises where the public sewer is located on a street, alley, or right-of-way
abutting such premises that lies within any sanitary sewer district unless
that building is connected to the public sewer.
and a description of the corrective measures being taken and to
be instituted. Such reporting is in no way in lieu of other spill
reporting requirements that are the responsibility of the NPDES
permit holder.
(2) The industry shall allow EH&I access to its property at reasonable
times and under reasonable circumstances for the purpose of
taking samples of the discharge from the facility. Any industry that
discharges into the storm sewer system shall provide sampling
manholes or appropriate access that is approved by Community
Services and Development.
(c) The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of the Community
Services and Development Department of the City or an authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
(a) Such connection shall be made in accordance with this chapter and
applicable specifications provided by the BPW.
(b) Any structure in which sewage originates within the City shall be
connected to any available public sewer within 18 months after
publication of a legal notice of availability of a public sewer in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. For purposes of this
section, a public sewer shall be considered to be available when it is
located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street, or public way
which crosses, adjoins, or abuts upon the property in question and
passes not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from the structure in
which the sewage originates. For purposes of this section, the phrase
"structure in which sewage originates" shall mean a building in which
toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities that generate sewage
are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial
or other purposes. If the structure in which sewage originates has not
been connected to an available sanitary sewer within said eighteenmonth
period, then the City shall require the connection to be made in
accordance with Section 12754 of the Michigan Public Health Code, as
amended,70 or any similar successor statutory provision. In so
proceeding, the City shall have the rights and remedies provided in
Section 12754, as well as all rights and remedies provided by this
chapter.
70.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.12754.
Sec. 29-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-8
C:560
Sec. 29-9. Determination of unsanitary conditions; notice. [Ord. No.
1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Whenever the Council of the City of Holland, acting as a Board of Health,
determines that any waste conveyance or system is dangerous to the public
health, the Council may order improvements to abate the danger and
specify the time within such improvements shall be made.
Sec. 29-10. Rates. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; amended Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008; 12-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1643]
The City Council of the City shall establish rates for the use of, and the
connection to, the public sewer. All users of the POTW shall be required
to pay their proportionate use of the POTW in terms of volumetric and
pollutant loadings. User charges shall be levied to defray the operation,
maintenance, replacement, and debt retirement costs of the POTW.
(c) Such connection shall be used in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(d) It is unlawful to construct, replace, repair, renovate, extend, or expand
any septic tank system or other sewage disposal system for any house,
building, property, or other purpose on any premises where the public
sewer is located on a street, alley, or right-of-way abutting such
premises that lies within any sanitary sewer district.
(e) Any industrial waste disposal facility operating with a state-approved
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall
be exempt from the prohibition of this section.
(f) The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of the Community
Services and Development or an authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
(a) Waste conveyances and systems include, but are not limited to: sanitary
plumbing, toilet, or other fixture or facility for sanitary use or for the
disposal of waste, including any connection thereof to a public sewer.
(b) The abatement order shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Section 15.17 of the Charter of the City of Holland, and
shall include a statement of the opinion of Board of Health regarding
what aspects of the waste conveyance or system are unsanitary and
dangerous to the public health.
(a) Water meters are required for residential users who are connected to
the public water supply system in accordance with the City of Holland
Water Use Ordinance. Bills for wastewater service for residential users
connected to the public water supply system shall be calculated as
follows:
(1) Base period. The actual usage shall be billed for the consumption
months of December through April.
Sec. 29-8 CHARTER Sec. 29-10
C:561
(2) Other months. Customers are billed for an average monthly usage
from the base period usage. Either the average monthly usage or
the actual usage, whichever is lower, will be applied to the bills.
(b) Bills for nonresidential users connected to the public water supply shall
be based on actual metered flow. At a user's option and cost, and with
the approval of the BPW, additional metering may be installed to meter
water not discharged to the POTW, i.e., sprinkling, cooling water, etc.
(c) Nonresidential users have the option, at the customer's expense, to
install an approved flowmeter on their sanitary sewer service. The
customer must use a type of flowmeter approved by the BPW and must
install and maintain it according to manufacturer's specifications to
ensure the proper registering of all water being discharged to the
sanitary sewer. The customer shall be responsible for all maintenance
and calibration of the flowmeter device at the customer's expense. The
wastewater service bill will then be calculated based upon the reading
of the sewage flowmeter. The installation of the flowmeter shall be
inspected by the BPW prior to use to ensure proper installation and
accurate measurement. The customer must submit maintenance
records of the flowmeter on an annual basis as evidence of proper
maintenance. If records are not submitted on an annual basis, the
customer shall be billed for sewer charges based on water meter
measurement until such evidence of regular maintenance is submitted.
(d) Residential users who do not have access to a public water supply will
be given the option of:
(1) Paying a flat rate as established by the City Council of the City; or
(2) Using a meter to measure water use through the well supply and
paying actual usage. Users who choose to use meters on well
supplies shall be responsible for all maintenance and installation
costs for the meter. A failure to perform within 30 days' notice any
maintenance required for the meter to function accurately shall
automatically cause the user's account to convert to the flat rate
system, which will become effective in the month during which the
user was notified of the need for meter maintenance.
(e) Nonresidential users who do not have access to a public water supply
may not choose the flat rate option. Nonresidential users must install
metering devices (as approved by the BPW) to measure the quantity of
wastewater discharged to the sewage system.
(f) Each user who discharges compatible wastewater pollutants in
strengths that exceed maximum allowable concentrations as defined in
Section 29-51 shall pay appropriate surcharges for the treatment of
those excess waste strengths. Such surcharge rates shall be established
by the City Council of the City.
(g) Nondomestic users exceeding levels established in Section 29-50 must
obtain special discharge allocations for certain pollutants in accordance
Sec. 29-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-10
C:562
Sec. 29-11. Adoption of fees and charges. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The City may adopt charges and fees by resolution which may include:
with Article V (Section 29-47 et seq.); such users shall pay a rate for
that allocation that includes a calculation for reserved physical plant
capacity.
(h) All industrial users having monitored discharges shall pay a monthly
charge for the operation of the POTW pretreatment program pursuant
to Section 29-11 as shall be established by City Council of the City.
(i) The City shall reserve the right to adjust user charges based upon an
audit review of costs. Such an audit review shall be conducted annually
by the City.
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
industrial pretreatment program;
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including
the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by the IU;
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(d) Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing such
applications;
(e) Fees for filing appeals;
(f) Fees for consistent removal;
(g) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable
by the City.
Sec. 29-10 CHARTER Sec. 29-11
C:563

ARTICLE II
Violations—Penalties, Sanctions And Remedies
Sec. 29-12. Violations—nuisance per se. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Every violation of the provisions of this chapter and every failure to comply
with any notice given under authority of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance per se.
Sec. 29-13. Municipal civil infraction. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1719]
Except for a violation which is specifically designated in this chapter as a
misdemeanor violation, a person who violates or fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any of the sections or subsections within this
chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth below and any other relief that may be imposed by the court.
Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation. For this chapter, the schedule of civil fines
for municipal civil infractions and recurring offenses is as follows:
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
See Note
1
General Sewage
system
tampered
with or
damaged
29-5 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Unlawful
disposal
of waste
29-6 $500 N/A N/A N/A
Discharge
into
storm
drain or
natural
drain
29-7 $500 N/A N/A N/A
Failure to
connect
to public
sewer
29-8 $100 N/A N/A N/A
Sec. 29-12 CHARTER Sec. 29-13
C:565
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Unsanitary
conditions
exist
29-9 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Private
sewage
disposal
Failure to
obtain
private
sewage
system
permit
29-26 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Failure to
have
private
sewage
system
inspected
29-27 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Discharge
of private
septic
system
into
public
sewage
system
29-28 $100 N/A N/A N/A
Failure to
operate
private
disposal
system in
a
sanitary
manner
29-30 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Discharge
of
prohibited
waste
29-31 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Building
sewers
and
connections
Failure to
obtain
sanitary
sewer
connection
permit
29-34 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Sec. 29-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-13
C:566
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Opening
or
connecting
with
public
sewer
without
permission
29-35 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Failure to
install
interceptor
device
29-42 $100 N/A N/A N/A
Discharge
of wastes
not
containing
sewage
29-43 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Failure to
disconnect
roof
drain
after
notification
29-43 $500 N/A N/A N/A
Failure to
have
building
sewer
connection
inspected
29-45 $100 $250 $500 1 year
Sec. 29-13 CHARTER Sec. 29-13
C:567
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
See
Notes 1
and 2
Pretreatment
discharge
violation
Unpermitted
discharge;
no permit
was
obtained
29-49
and
29-68
$500 $1,000 $2,000 1 year
Any
discharge
that
causes
passthrough
or
interference
(See
Note 4)
29-49 N/A N/A $1,000 1 year
Any
discharge
that
causes
passthrough
or
interference
(2nd
time)
(See
Note 4)
29-49 N/A N/A $2,000 1 year
Any
discharge
that
causes
passthrough
or
interference
(3rd or
more)
(See
Note 4)
29-49 N/A N/A $5,000 1 year
Sec. 29-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-13
C:568
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Any
discharge
that
endangers
human
health or
the
environment
or has
caused
the
POTW to
exercise
its
emergency
authority
29-15(g) N/A N/A $10,000 1 year
Failure to
meet
compliance
date by
30 days
$0 N/A N/A 1 year
Failure to
meet
compliance
date by
60 days
$250 N/A N/A 1 year
Failure to
meet
compliance
date by
90 days
N/A N/A $500 1 year
Failure to
accurately
report
noncompliance
(1st time)
29-55 N/A N/A $0 N/A
Failure to
accurately
report
noncompliance
(2nd
time)
29-55 N/A N/A $500 N/A
Sec. 29-13 CHARTER Sec. 29-13
C:569
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Failure to
accurately
report
noncompliance
(3rd
time)
29-55 N/A N/A $1,000 N/A
Failure to
properly
operate
and
maintain
pretreatment
facility
29-52 $0 $500 $1,000 1 year
Waste
stream is
diluted in
lieu of
treatment
29-53 $500 $1,000 $2,000 1 year
Discharge
of waste
that
causes
obstruction
29-49 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Pretreatment
recordkeeping
violation
Failure to
develop
spill
prevention
and slug
control
plans
29-54 $100 $0 $0 1 year
Copies of
records
denied
29-57 $0 $500 $1,000 1 year
Pretreatment
reporting
violation
Failure to
provide
reports
within 30
days
Ch. 29,
Article V,
Division
4
N/A N/A $500 1 year
Sec. 29-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-13
C:570
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Failure to
report
spill or
changed
discharge
(no
harm)
29-55 $0 $500 $1,000 1 year
Failure to
report
spill or
changed
discharge
(harm)
29-55 $500 $1,000 $2,000 1 year
Incomplete
or
missing
records
or
reports
29-57 $0 $0 $500 1 year
Failure to
report
additional
monitoring
29-80.4 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Failure to
notify of
bypass
29-75 $100 $500 $1,000 1 year
Pretreatment
monitoring
violations
Failure to
monitor
all
pollutants
according
to permit
29-80.4 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Failure to
install
monitoring
equipment
29-74 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Sampling
at
incorrect
location
29-80.4 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Sec. 29-13 CHARTER Sec. 29-13
C:571
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Sampling
using
incorrect
sampling
type
29-80.4 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Sampling
using
incorrect
sample
collection
techniques
29-80.4 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Failure to
use
proper
analytical
requirements
29-80.4 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Other
pretreatment
violations
Failure to
post
POTW
phone
number
in facility
29-56 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Failure to
train
employees
in
emergency
notification
procedures
29-56 $0 $100 $500 1 year
Entry for
site visit
denied or
consent
withdrawn
29-56 $0 $500 $1,000 1 year
Sec. 29-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-13
C:572
Schedule of Fines
Violation
Type
Nature
of
Violation Sections
First
Offense
Fine
Second
Offense
Fine
Third
Offense
Fine
Period
for
Recurring
Offense
Failure to
meet
compliance
deadlines
for
existing
or new
source
29-61 $500 $1,000 $2,000 1 year
Other Any other
violation
of
Chapter
29
$100 $250 $500 1 year
Violation
Type
Nature of
Violation Sections Isolated Significant
Period for
Recurring
Offense
See Notes
1 and 2
Pretreatment
discharge
violation
Violation of
discharge
limit
29-49 $0 $500 1 year
Violation of
applicable
Technical
Review
Criteria
(TRC) (See
Notes 3
and 4)
29-49 $0 $1,000 1 year
Note 1: N/A means the offense accumulation time is not applicable or
each offense is considered to be a separate and new offense or each is
considered to be significant.
Note 2: Notwithstanding civil penalty amounts delineated on this schedule,
any violation delineated shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$1,000 per day.
Note 3: TRC = 140% for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 120% for all
other pollutants except pH which has no TRC.
Note 4: All mercury violations will be handled as outlined in the control
authority's enforcement response plan (ERP).
Sec. 29-13 CHARTER Sec. 29-14
C:573
Sec. 29-14. Misdemeanor. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter that is listed below is
guilty of a misdemeanor. Such misdemeanors are subject to a fine of not
more than $500 or the maximum allowable under state law, plus costs and
other sanctions, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. Misdemeanor violations include:
Sec. 29-15. Administrative remedies. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the
administrative remedies described herein in addition to being responsible
for a municipal civil infraction or a misdemeanor.
(a) Intentional unpermitted discharge;
(b) Falsification of monitoring report;
(c) Improper sampling, with evidence of intent to falsify or mislead;
(d) Intentional failure to install monitoring equipment after deadline was
established by administrative order;
(e) Intentional recurring violation of compliance schedule in permit, or a
violation of a compliance schedule in an administrative order; and
(f) Illegal discharge when the discharge causes harm and there is evidence
of intent.
(a) Notification of violation. Whenever the control authority finds that any
user has violated or is violating any provision of this chapter, or a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, the control
authority may serve upon said user written notice of the violation.
Within 10 days of the receipt date of such notice, the user shall submit
to the control authority an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific
required actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.
(b) Consent order. The control authority is empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, and other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the
noncompliance. Such documents will include compliance schedules,
stipulated fines or penalties, remedial actions, and signatures of the
control authority and user. Consent orders shall have the same force
and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to this section.
(c) Show cause order. The control authority may order any user which
violates this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should
Sec. 29-14 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-15
C:574
not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principal
executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Enforcement action
may be pursued as appropriate, whether or not a duly notified user
appears as noticed.
(d) Compliance order. When the control authority finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a wastewater discharge
permit issued thereunder, an order may be issued to the user
responsible for the violation directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed
and are properly operated, and compliance is achieved. In addition or
as an alternative, orders may contain such other requirements as might
be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
(e) Cease and desist order. When the control authority finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a wastewater discharge
permit issued thereunder, an order may be issued to the user
responsible for the violation directing that such violation cease and
desist immediately.
(1) In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by
telephone.
(2) In a nonemergency situation, the cease and desist order may be
used to suspend or permanently revoke industrial wastewater
discharge permits.
(3) The cease and desist order may order the user to take such
appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
(f) Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter,
any user who is found to have violated any provision under this chapter,
or permits and orders issued thereunder, may be fined in an amount of
$1,000 per day, or the maximum allowable under state law per
violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments
shall be added to user's next scheduled sewer service charge, and the
control authority shall have such other collection rights and remedies
as designated by law and this chapter to collect said service charges.
Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the
individual user's property. Users desiring to appeal such fines must
comply with Section 29-24 of this chapter.
(g) Emergency suspension. The control authority may suspend the
wastewater treatment service and the wastewater discharge permit of
Sec. 29-15 CHARTER Sec. 29-15
C:575
a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge that presents or causes an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the
POTW, or the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service or wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate its discharge. If a user fails to immediately comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the control authority shall
take such steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage
to any person, the POTW, or the environment. The control authority
shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the
endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings are
initiated against the user.
(2) A user who is responsible (in whole or in part) for imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the
control authority describing the causes of the harmful discharge
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Such
statement shall be submitted prior to the date of any appeals
hearing as may be scheduled in accordance with Section 29-24.
(h) Termination of wastewater discharge permit. Any industrial user who
violates the following conditions of his wastewater discharge permit or
any applicable state or federal law is subject to permit termination.
(1) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(2) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purposes of inspection, monitoring, or sampling.
Noncompliant users shall be notified of the proposed termination
of their wastewater discharge permit and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under the provisions of Section 29-15(c)
why the proposed action should not be taken.
(i) Annual publication of IUs in significant noncompliance. The control
authority shall publish, at least annually in the largest daily newspaper
circulated in the service area, a description of those users which are
found to be in significant noncompliance, as defined in Section 29-3 of
this chapter, with any provisions of this chapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder during the period since the previous publication.
Sec. 29-15 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-16
C:576
Sec. 29-16. Judicial remedies. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the judicial
remedies described herein in addition to being responsible for a municipal
civil infraction, a misdemeanor, or an administrative remedy.
(a) Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate
the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the
control authority, through counsel may petition the court for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be
appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the
user.
(b) Civil fines.
(1) Any user who has violated or continues to violate this chapter or
any order or permit issued hereunder, may be liable to the POTW
for a civil fine of up to $1,000, plus actual damages incurred by the
POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues
depending on the application of the facts and circumstances of the
violation. In addition to the above described penalty and damages,
the POTW may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with the enforcement activities,
including sampling, monitoring and analysis expenses.
(2) The control authority shall petition the court to impose, assess, and
recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Criminal prosecution.
(1) Violations generally.
a. Any user who violates Section 29-14 shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500 or the maximum allowable under state law per violation
per day or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both.
b. In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or the maximum
allowable under state law per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both.
(2) Falsifying information. Any user who knowingly or intentionally
makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in
any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater
Sec. 29-16 CHARTER Sec. 29-16
C:577
Sec. 29-17. Supplemental enforcement remedies. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
supplemental enforcement remedies described herein in addition to being
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, a misdemeanor, an
administrative remedy, or a judicial remedy.
Sec. 29-18. Recurring offense. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
As used in this chapter, "recurring offense" means a second (or any
subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or
provision of this chapter committed by a person within any six-month period
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly or
intentionally renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine in an amount not to exceed $500 or the maximum allowable
under state law per violation per day or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or both.
(a) Performance bonds/letters of credit. The control authority may decline
to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued
hereunder unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond or
letter of credit, payable to the control authority, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the control authority to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
(b) Liability insurance. The control authority may decline to reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit
issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW
damage caused by its discharge.
(c) Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the user may be severed and service will
only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply.
(d) Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
restrictions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
directed by the control authority. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 19 of the City
Code governing such nuisance, including reimbursing the City for any
costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
Sec. 29-16 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-18
C:578
or for any two successive six-month periods for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible.
Sec. 29-19. Each day a separate offense. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Sec. 29-20. Liens. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
Fines and costs incurred by any person found to be in violation of this
chapter that are not paid within the time frame allocated shall become a
lien against the user's property.
Sec. 29-21. Liable for costs. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage (including attorney fees)
incurred by the City by reason of such violation.
Sec. 29-22. Construction of chapter. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the powers of
the enforcing officer or other public officials or bodies to proceed to abate
a health nuisance or a pollutant discharge in violation of ordinance limits,
nor shall the provisions of this chapter be construed to provide adequate
protection under all situations.
Sec. 29-23. Order of additional requirements. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
If the enforcing officer determines that additional or more strict
requirements are necessary to avoid the creation or extension of a health
nuisance or a pollutant discharge in violation of ordinance limits, he shall
enter an appropriate order setting forth the requirements and the
conditions making such requirements necessary.
Sec. 29-24. Right of appeal. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Except for an appeal pursuant to Section 29-73 or notices of violation
(including such notices issued as a civil infraction under Section 29-13),
or administrative consent orders, or emergency actions as defined herein,
or a variance pursuant to Section 29-46, any decision relating to the
enforcement of this chapter may be appealed to the Board of Directors of
the BPW or the Council of the City, whichever is the enforcing body for that
decision, on written request of an aggrieved person. Unless this chapter
Sec. 29-18 CHARTER Sec. 29-24
C:579
specifically designates the Council of the City as the enforcing body, all
appeals under this section shall be appealed to the Board of Directors of the
Board of Public Works.
(a) In the event a petition to review is not filed within 15 days of being
notified of a violation, fine, or cost, the failure to file such an appeal
shall be deemed a waiver of any and all administrative appeal rights.
(b) In its petition, the appealing party shall state the basis for its appeal,
the reasons in support of its appeal, and any alternative relief which the
aggrieved party seeks.
(c) During the pendency of the appeal, the applicant must comply with the
enforcement action for which the appeal is taken.
(d) The enforcing body shall:
(1) Deny the appeal,
(2) Grant the appeal,
(3) Grant the appeal with additional conditions.
(e) The enforcing body's decision shall be made within 30 days of receiving
the appeal request.
(f) The decision of the enforcing body shall be the final administrative
action for purposes of judicial review.
Sec. 29-24 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-24
C:580
ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal Systems
Sec. 29-25. Where permitted. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or where a public sewer
is not available under the provisions of Section 29-8, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of this article.
Sec. 29-26. Permit required; fees. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by a representative of
the Community Services and Development office. The application for such
permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant
shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information, such
as soil data, that may be deemed necessary by a representative of the
Community Services and Development office. A permit and inspection fee
shall be paid to the City Treasurer at the time the application is filed in
accordance with the schedule of fees approved and adopted by City Council.
The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of the Community
Services and Development, or an authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
Sec. 29-27. Inspection. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of Community Services
and Development. Community Services and Development shall be allowed
to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify Community Services and Development
when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered.
The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of Community Services
and Development, or an authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Sec. 29-28. Compliance with rules and regulations; discharge into
public sewer prohibited. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
The City Council shall adopt rules and regulations governing the
construction, maintenance, and use of private sewage disposal systems.
Such rules and regulations may be adopted and/or amended by vote of the
City Council without the necessity of public hearing.
Sec. 29-25 CHARTER Sec. 29-28
C:581
No sewage disposal system shall be permitted to discharge to any public
sewer or natural outlet.
The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of Community Services
and Development, or an authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Sec. 29-29. Termination. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by
a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this chapter.
Sec. 29-30. Sanitary operation required. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City, and in such a
manner as to not create a public nuisance.
The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of Community Services
and Development, or an authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Sec. 29-31. Prohibited waste discharge—generally. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Liquid wastes which shall not be discharged into a private sewage disposal
system, unless specifically approved by Community Services and
Development, include:
Sec. 29-32. Same—Requirements for disposal. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Community Services and Development may require suitable provisions for
the proper discharge or disposal of liquid wastes enumerated in Section
29-31.
(a) Seepage water from footing drains or underground flows.
(b) Surface runoff or roof drainage from rainfall or snow melt.
(c) A swimming pool or its appurtenance.
(d) Brine or recharge water from a water softener of the ion-exchange type.
(e) Chemical solutions or other wastes which would interfere with
biological action in the treatment facilities.
The enforcing officer of this section is the Director of Community
Services and Development, or an authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
Sec. 29-28 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-33
C:582
Sec. 29-33. Emergency provisions. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by EH&I or the BPW in
case of an emergency or an immediate public health hazard.
Sec. 29-33 CHARTER Sec. 29-33
C:583

ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers And Connections
Sec. 29-34. Connection permit required from Community and
Neighborhood Services. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406,
3-2-2005]
No connections shall be made to any sanitary sewer until a connection
permit has been secured from Community and Neighborhood Services.
Sec. 29-35. Permission required for opening public sewers. [Ord.
No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
No person, other than authorized municipal employees, shall uncover, make
any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer
or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permission from the
BPW.
Sec. 29-36. Costs. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406,
3-2-2005]
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance of the building
sewer and connection with the public sewer systems.
Sec. 29-37. Reconstruction of sanitary sewer; new service; lien.
[Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
Sec. 29-38. Separate sewers required; exception. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
(a) In the event the City determines that the sanitary sewer connection of
the property owner is defective, violates the provisions of this chapter,
is subject to infiltration, or is functionally inoperable or incompatible
with the newly installed public sewer, the property owner shall be
responsible to install a new building sewer to the public sewer. All costs
incurred for the new sanitary sewer connection shall be paid by the
property owner.
(b) The City shall be permitted to construct a new building sewer and enter
on private property for such installation if a property owner fails to
construct a new building sewer pursuant to Subsection (a) hereof. The
City shall recover from the property owner a fee determined by the
Board of Public Works for installing such service or device. If such
reimbursement is not paid within 60 days after demand has been made
by the City, the amount demanded shall be deemed to be a lien on the
property for sewer service furnished.
Sec. 29-34 CHARTER Sec. 29-38
C:585
Sec. 29-39. Use of old building sewers. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found to be acceptable for use. Such determination shall
be at the discretion of Community and Neighborhood Services after
examination of the old sewer.
Sec. 29-40. Design and construction requirements. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer;
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing
and backfilling the trench; and the connection of the building sewer into
the public sewer shall all conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City
of Holland. In the absence of code provisions or in application thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM, and WEF MOP No. 9 and any amendments thereto shall apply.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection (b), a separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(b) An existing joint sewer shall be permitted to continue if all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) The shared section of the joint building sewer providing service to
two or more buildings is determined by Community and
Neighborhood Services to be of adequate size to serve all of the
buildings which are connected to it;
(2) The joint building sewer laterals are determined by Community and
Neighborhood Services not to have any defects or be subject to
infiltration;
(3) The joint building sewer was in existence at the time this ordinance
was adopted;
In the event a joint building sewer is permitted pursuant to this
Subsection (b), the joint sewer shall be replaced and separated
at such time: (i) as a public sewer repair or replacement project
is commenced in the right-of-way, or otherwise, making available
a lateral to service the property; or (ii) the joint building sewer
requires a replacement of more than five feet of the joint sewer
line and a lateral to service the property is available in the rightof-
way.
Sec. 29-38 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-41
C:586
Sec. 29-41. Requirements for lift devices. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
Sec. 29-42. Interceptor devices; when required; requirements. [Ord.
No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
Interceptor devices shall be provided when they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or
any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, interceptors shall not be required for living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the BPW and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. All interceptor devices shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. Such interceptor devices shall be of substantial construction,
watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted
in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All interceptor devices from
which such wastes emanate shall be maintained in continuously efficient
operation at all times by the owner of the building or premises or his
authorized representative, at their expense.
Sec. 29-43. Discharge of waters not containing sewage prohibited;
corrective action; lien for services. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
(a) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted process water to the
sanitary sewer system.
(b) If a connection to the sanitary sewer is found to exist, the property
owner shall be responsible for separating the connection and shall
perform all corrective repairs to comply with the provisions of this
section.
(c) If the property owner fails to separate the connection from the sanitary
sewer system, the City shall be permitted [to] enter onto private
property in order to separate the connection and make any necessary
installation or construction. The City shall recover from the property
owner a fee (as determined by the BPW) for separating such service or
device. If such fee is not paid within 60 days after the demand has been
made by the City, that amount shall constitute a lien on the property
and shall be subject to foreclosure and enforcement in accordance with
the statutes of this state.
Sec. 29-41 CHARTER Sec. 29-44
C:587
Sec. 29-44. Compliance with Building and Plumbing Code. [Ord.
No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specification of ASTM, and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 and any
amendments thereto. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight.
Sec. 29-45. Inspection required; notification. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
An applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify Community and
Neighborhood Services when the building sewer is ready for inspection.
The enforcing officer for this section is the Director of Community and
Neighborhood Services, or an authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Sec. 29-46. Request for variance. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1406, 3-2-2005]
Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by the provisions of Section
29-37, 29-38, or 29-39 may appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals for
variance from those provision and requirements.
(a) In the event a petition to review is not filed within 30 days of being
notified of the need to comply with a provision or requirement, the
failure to file such a variance request shall be deemed a waiver of any
and all administrative appeal rights.
(b) In its petition, the appealing party shall state the basis for its appeal,
the reasons in support of its request, and any alternative relief which
the aggrieved party seeks. The petition filed by the appealing party
shall include a staff report from the BPW reviewing the appealing
party's appeal with a recommendation to the Housing Board of Appeals.
(c) The Housing Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Deny the appeal;
(2) Grant the appeal;
(3) Grant the appeal with additional conditions.
(d) The enforcing body's decision shall be made within 30 days of receiving
the appeal request.
(e) The decision of the enforcing body shall be the final administrative
action for purposes of judicial review.
Sec. 29-44 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-46
C:588
ARTICLE V
Use Of Public Sewers
DIVISION 1
General Pretreatment Requirements
Sec. 29-47. Purpose of pretreatment requirements. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(a) The purposes of Article V are:
(1) To establish uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system
and to enable the POTW to comply with applicable state and federal
laws and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR, Part 403);
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will:
a. Interfere with the operation of the system;
b. Cause the POTW to violate its NPDES discharge permit;
c. Contaminate the sludge;
d. Pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere;
e. Pose a health threat to sewer workers; or
f. Be otherwise incompatible with the system.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
(b) Future conditions imposed on the control authority by jurisdictional
government agencies may require subsequent amendments of this
chapter or rules and regulations adopted hereunder by the control
authority. Where federal or state promulgated categorical pretreatment
standards require limits more stringent than those specified in this
chapter, the state and federal limits shall have precedence and take
effect with respect to the applicable user on the latter of:
(1) Their promulgation date, or
(2) The date specified for compliance with such standards.
Sec. 29-47 CHARTER Sec. 29-48
C:589
Sec. 29-48. Right of revision. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
The City shall have the right to establish any standard or prohibition as
long as it is as restrictive or more restrictive than any federal or state
requirements.
Sec. 29-49. General discharge prohibitions. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008; 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1719]
(a) Generally.
(1) It shall be unlawful to discharge any wastewater to the POTW
except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly to the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass
through or cause interference with the operation or performance of
the POTW.
(3) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public
sewer any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted air-conditioning
water or unpolluted industrial process water. No footing drain, roof
downspout, areaway drain or other source of surface water or
groundwater shall be connected to a public sewer. All footing
drainwater shall be discharged to storm sewers or dry wells.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the DEQ. The discharge of cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process water shall only be permitted when
authorized and approved by the DEQ.
(b) Prohibited. No user shall contribute the following substances to the
POTW:
(1) Any substances which by reason of their nature or quantity may
create a fire or explosion hazard or be injurious to the POTW or to
the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste
streams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F. or 60° C.
using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
POTW such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, or any material which can
be disposed of as trash.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 11.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the POTW.
Sec. 29-48 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-49
C:590
(4) Any substance which may cause a public nuisance, cause hazard to
life or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(5) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that
the temperature at the POTW exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(8) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points and as
otherwise designated by the control authority.
(9) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or concentration (including any slug
discharge), which may cause interference to the POTW.
(10) Any of the following toxic pollutants: a) those pollutants listed on
the current critical materials register prepared pursuant to the
Water Division of the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality or its successors, and b) those pollutants identified by the
BPW as a "toxic pollutant" by amendment to this chapter. If a
pollutant is specifically allowed by the BPW, Section 29-49(b)(14) or
categorical pretreatment standards, then the above paragraph
does not apply.
(11) Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated
by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Act of
1972, as amended.
(12) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the control authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(13) Any discoloration other than the color of normal strength domestic
waste including, but not limited to dyes, inks and vegetable tanning
solutions which singularly or in conjunction with other waste
constituents is deleterious to treatment and/or sludge disposal
practices or a hazard to the POTW and its employees.
(14) Any wastewater having effluent characteristics in excess of:
Sec. 29-49 CHARTER Sec. 29-49
C:591
Table 1 Prohibited Pollutants
Daily Maximum Allowable
Concentration
(mg/l)
Organics
Acetone 640
Benzene 0.32
Methyl ethyl ketone 640
Chloroethane 3.6
Chloromethane 2.3
Chloroform 1.2
Dibromochloromethane 0.18
1,4-Dichlorobenzene 0.38
1,1-Dichloroethane 16
1,1-Dichloroethylene 1.4
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene 2.9
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene 2.9
Diethyl ether 12
Ethyl benzene 0.87
Lindane 0.00076
4-methyl-2-pentanone 0.2
Methylene chloride 1.3
Styrene 0.64
Tetrachloroethylene 0.68
Toluene 3.5
1,1,1-trichloroethane 2
Trichloroethylene 0.68
1,2,4-trimethylbenzene 0.74
Xylenes, total 1.5
Phenols, total 2.5
Metals
Arsenic 0.098
Cadmium 0.093
Chromium 3.7
Copper 1.1
Cyanide, amenable 0.22
Lead 0.66
Sec. 29-49 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-49
C:592
Table 1 Prohibited Pollutants
Daily Maximum Allowable
Concentration
(mg/l)
Lithium 2.6
Mercury See Sec. 29-49(b)(15)
Molybdenum 0.27
Nickel 1.5
Selenium 0.18
Silver 0.25
Zinc 4.6
Compatibles
Chlorides 2,300
Grease and oil (nonpolar
fraction)
70
(15) There shall be no detectable amounts of mercury discharged into
the POTW. The local discharge limitation for mercury is established
at the method detection limit (MDL) in accordance with the
following:
a. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and
analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in
accordance with EPA Method 246.1. The MDL, developed in
accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136, shall
not exceed 0.2 ug/L for mercury, unless higher levels are
appropriate due to matrix interference. The evaluation of
potential matrix interference(s) shall include, at a minimum,
the following:
1. A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the
analysis is capable of achieving the MDL of 0.2 ug/L in
reagent water;
2. A demonstration that the MDL of 0.2 ug/L cannot be
achieved in the effluent; and
3. A demonstration that an attempt has been made to resolve
the matrix interference(s).
b. In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be
demonstrated, a discharge-specific MDL will be developed in
accordance with the procedure in 40 CFR 136. Dischargespecific
MDLs will be incorporated into the wastewater
discharge permit of the nondomestic user.
c. Mercury reduction plans.
Sec. 29-49 CHARTER Sec. 29-49
C:593
1. To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to
the POTW is not exceeded, the control authority may
require any nondomestic user with a reasonable potential
to discharge mercury to develop, submit for approval and
implement a mercury reduction plan (MRP). The MRP may
be required by permit if the nondomestic user has not
violated the local limit for mercury, but the control
authority has determined that a reasonable potential for
such a violation may exist. MRPs may be required in
notices of violations, orders or other enforcement actions
when the nondomestic user has violated the mercury local
limit. At a minimum, an approvable MRP shall contain the
following:
(i) A written commitment by the nondomestic user to
reduce all nondomestic discharges of mercury to
levels below the MDL within a time frame approved by
the control authority;
(ii) Within 60 days of notification by the control authority
that a MRP is required. The nondomestic user shall
supply an initial identification of all potential sources
of mercury which could be discharged to the POTW;
(iii) Specific strategies for mercury reduction with
reasonable time frames for implementation, capable
of ensuring that mercury discharges will be below the
specified MDL within a time frame approved by the
control authority;
(iv) A program for sampling and analysis of the
nondomestic discharge for mercury in accordance
with EPA Method 245.1 methods;
(v) A demonstration of specific, measurable and/or
otherwise quantifiable mercury reductions consistent
with the goal of reducing mercury discharges below
the specified MDL. Where such reductions cannot be
demonstrated through normal effluent monitoring
(e.g., mercury discharges are already near MDL), the
demonstration should incorporate the following:
[A] Internal process monitoring, documenting the
results of mercury reduction strategies at
sampling locations within the facility (e.g., a
program of regular monitoring of sink traps
where mercury containing reagents had
previously been disposed, but have since been
substituted by nonmercury containing
compounds).
Sec. 29-49 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-49
C:594
[B] Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing clean
and/or ultra-clean sampling and analytical
methods as referenced by USEPA federal register.
Note that the results of such monitoring will not
be used for compliance purposes unless
performed in accordance with EPA Method 245.1
and collected at the appropriate compliance
measurement location.
[C] Loading calculations wherein the nondomestic
user calculates the total mass of mercury reduced
from the sanitary sewer discharge through
reagent substitutions, changes in disposal
practices and/or other approved MRP strategies
implemented.
(vi) A semiannual report on the status of the mercury
reduction efforts. At a minimum, these reports shall:
[A] Identify compliance or noncompliance with
specific reduction commitments in the MRP;
[B] Summarize the analytical, mass-based or other
quantifiable demonstrations of mercury
reductions performed to date;
[C] Provide all applicable analytical data;
[D] Provide an evaluation of the effectiveness of
actions taken to date;
[E] Provide updates to the initial list of mercury
containing compounds discharged to the sanitary
sewer; and
[F] Propose for approval new strategies and/or
modifications to the current MRP to continue and
improve mercury reduction efforts.
(vii) Any other conditions that the control authority deems
necessary to ensure that mercury reduction efforts are
effective in achieving the goals of this section.
d. Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of the
required due date shall constitute significant noncompliance in
accordance with this section, and will result in publication as a
significant violator, in addition to other possible enforcement
action.
e. A MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by the
control authority. If such an evaluation determines that the
mercury reduction plan is inadequate, or the nondomestic user
has not complied with its approved MRP, the nondomestic user
Sec. 29-49 CHARTER Sec. 29-49
C:595
will be notified. Failure to comply with the MRP requirement
constitutes noncompliance. The control authority will follow
its enforcement response plan (ERP) to ensure that corrective
actions are taken.
f. A nondomestic user may request a release from MRP
requirements if (i) all samples of the discharge for a period of
one year are less than the specified MDL; (ii) the nondomestic
user has complied with the minimum monitoring frequency of
quarterly sampling events; and (iii) the control authority deems
that MRP commitments have been fulfilled sufficiently to
ensure continued compliance with the mercury limitation. The
control authority shall notify the nondomestic user of any
release from MRP requirements in writing.
g. If the MRP requirement is waived by the control authority, the
nondomestic user remains subject to the local limitation for
mercury in accordance with the requirements of this section.
h. Rediscovery of mercury in the nondomestic user discharge
subjects said user to the submission of a new MRP, or
escalation of enforcement in accordance with the ERP.
(16) Any wastewater containing more of the substances referenced in
Table 2, unless permitted by special discharge allocation under
§ 29-50. In addition to the limits in Table 2, any discharge that, in
the judgment of the control authority, would contribute a
significant amount of these substances, regardless of mg/l
concentration, shall be prohibited except by special discharge
allocation.
Table 2
Compatible Pollutants
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
Daily Maximum
Pounds
per Day
Biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD)
1,000* 40*
Chemical oxygen
demand (COD)
See Note 1 See Note 1
Total suspended
solids (TSS)
1,400* 100*
Total phosphorus
(TP)
40* 1*
Chlorides 2,300* 100*
Grease and oil (polar
fraction)
150* 5*
Sec. 29-49 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-49
C:596
Sec. 29-50. Special discharge allocation. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008; Ord. No. 1570, 11-2-2011]
A nondomestic user (user) may, at the time of application for a wastewater
discharge permit, or by a special discharge allocation permit application,
request that the uniform concentration limits for BOD or COD, TSS,
phosphorus, and grease and oil (polar fraction) be increased above
concentrations listed in Table 2 (Section 29-49) for that permit. Such special
discharge allocation shall be expressed as total daily pounds of pollutant
discharged. A user's special discharge allocation shall be determined using
rules and regulations established by the control authority and in accordance
with procedures approved by the Michigan DEQ. The rules and regulations
of the control authority shall be available for inspection at 42 South River
Avenue, Holland, Michigan 49423, and shall be posted on the website of the
BPW.
The control authority reserves the right to reduce or deny special discharge
allocations if total pollutant discharges near or reach the MAHLs set forth
in Table 3. The control authority reserves the right to amend the MAHLs set
forth in Table 3 at its discretion. The special discharge allocation must not
result in the POTW (including the collection system) receiving pollutants in
excess of its ability to convey or treat.
A user which requests a special discharge allocation through the permit
application process must sign a written acknowledgment whereby the user
consents to comply with all terms and conditions which may be imposed by
the control authority. Such acknowledgment shall be in a form provided by
the control authority, and must be executed by an authorized representative
of the user and be received by the control authority before any special
discharge allocation is effective. The user shall be charged for the special
discharge allocation as determined by the adopted rate schedule.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, payment of the plant capacity portion of
the surcharge rate shall not confer any right to any particular amount of
capacity in future periods. In addition, the control authority reserves the
right to institute a review of any previously permitted special discharge
allocation at any time, pursuant to which the control authority, in its
discretion, upon notice and the opportunity for hearing, may reduce or
eliminate a user's previously permitted or approved special discharge
allocation (including in particular, but not limited to, any allocation amount
for which a user has previously paid the physical plant capacity component
* Or as approved by the Michigan DEQ in accordance with the
control authority's approved procedures, with any change in such
approved amounts being effective upon publication by the control
authority in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the
Holland area.
Note 1. COD daily maximum mg/l and pounds will be calculated
using the influent COD/BOD ratio times the BOD daily maximum
mg/l and pounds.
Sec. 29-49 CHARTER Sec. 29-50
C:597
of the surcharge but not the operation and maintenance component of the
surcharge).
Any discharge in excess of the amount permitted by the special discharge
allocation is prohibited and is therefore a violation of Section 29-49 and
the user's wastewater discharge permit. In addition, a user shall pay the
full surcharge rate (the plant capacity component and the operation and
maintenance component) for any amount discharged in excess of the
amount permitted by a special discharge allocation.
Table 3
Maximum Allowable Headworks Loading (MAHL)
Pounds per Day
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 43,080*
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) See Note 1
Total suspended solids 50,000*
Total phosphorus 725*
Grease and oil (polar fraction) 5,451*
* Or the maximum pounds approved by the DEQ in accordance
with the control authority's approved procedures.
Note 1. The MAHL for COD will be calculated using the influent COD/
BOD ratio times the BOD pounds per day.
Sec. 29-51. Surcharges. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
All nondomestic users of the POTW shall pay a surcharge for the discharge
of sewage or waste containing more of the pollutant as referenced in Table
4, with the exception that a surcharge can be made for either BOD5 or COD,
whichever is the greater dollar cost, but not for both.
Table 4
Pollutant Surcharge Above
BOD5 250 mg/l
COD 500 mg/l
Total suspended solids 250 mg/l
Phosphorus 5 mg/l
Grease and oil (polar fraction) 50 mg/l*
* Surcharges for grease and oil (polar fraction) will be applied only if
a user has received a special discharge allocation for grease and oil
(polar fraction). Any users discharging above 50 mg/l may be required
to submit grease trap maintenance records.
Sec. 29-50 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-51
C:598
Surcharge rates shall be established periodically by the control authority.
To determine the amount of the surcharge for any particular user, the
control authority shall collect samples at a predetermined frequency and
apply the surcharge rate to the analytical results of such samples. In
the alternative, with the prior approval of the control authority, the user
may utilize an independent company to take such samples, at the user's
expense, under conditions and standards determined to be acceptable by
the control authority. The surcharge shall be calculated and billed at a
frequency determined by the control authority. Any surcharge billing not
paid when due shall be a violation of this chapter.
Sec. 29-52. Pretreatment requirements. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Sec. 29-53. Dilution prohibition. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
No user shall increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with concentration limitations as
established herein or any pretreatment standard or requirement.
Sec. 29-54. Spill prevention and slug control plans. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(a) Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with the most stringent requirement of this chapter,
or federal pretreatment standards as established by 40 CFR Chapter N,
Subpart I, or state standards or wastewater discharge permit
conditions, and shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the
federal pretreatment regulations, and with any other pretreatment
standards by applicable deadlines.
(b) Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the control authority for review, and shall be approved by the control
authority before construction of the facility. The review and approval of
plans and operating procedures does not relieve the industrial user
from complying with the provisions of this chapter and wastewater
discharge permit conditions. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and
approved by the control authority prior to the industrial user's initiation
of the changes.
(a) Nondomestic users shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of materials which may interfere with the POTW by developing spill
prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be
Sec. 29-51 CHARTER Sec. 29-54
C:599
Sec. 29-55. Notification. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
provided and maintained at the owner's or user's expense. Spill
prevention plans, including the facilities and the operating procedures
shall be approved by the control authority before construction of the
facility.
(b) Nondomestic users that store hazardous substances shall not
contribute to the POTW after the effective date of this chapter unless a
spill prevention plan has been approved by the control authority.
Approval of such plans shall not relieve the user from complying with all
other laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and
transportation of hazardous substances.
(1) The control authority shall evaluate all new SIUs for the need for a
slug control plan within a year of the industrial user being
designated as a SIU. Each significant industrial user shall be
evaluated at least once every two years, and other nondomestic
users as necessary, to determine whether such user needs a plan to
control slug discharges. If the control authority decides that a slug
control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the
following elements:
a. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
b. Description of stored chemicals;
c. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
prohibition under Section 29-49, with procedures for follow-up
written notification within five days;
d. If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of
storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of industrial site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(a) Notification of discharge violation.
(1) In the case of any discharge in violation of this chapter or
wastewater discharge permit conditions, and in the case of any
discharge that could cause problems to the POTW, including any
slug discharges, as defined by Section 29-3 of this chapter, the user
shall immediately notify the control authority of the discharge by
telephone. The notification shall include:
Sec. 29-54 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-55
C:600
Sec. 29-56. Posting of emergency notification number; employee
training. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Each nondomestic user shall permanently post a notice in a prominent place
advising all employees to call the POTW, at the number supplied on the
wastewater discharge permit, in the event of a dangerous discharge for
which notification is required. Employers shall advise all employees who
may cause or be injured by such a discharge of the emergency notification
procedure.
Sec. 29-57. Records. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
a. The date, time, location and duration of the discharge;
b. The type of waste including concentration and volume; and
c. Any corrective actions taken by the user.
(2) Within five days following such a discharge the user shall submit a
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures that will be taken by the user to prevent similar future
discharges.
(3) Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability resulting from the discharge, nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed under this chapter or other
applicable state or federal law.
(b) Notification of changed discharge. The user shall notify the control
authority prior to the introduction of new wastewater or pollutants or
any significant change in sewer use or characteristic of the wastewater
being introduced into the POTW from the user's processes. Formal
written notification shall be submitted prior to such an introduction.
Significant change in sewer use is defined as an increase in the
concentrations of pollutants discharged of 20% over those reported on
the wastewater discharge disclosure report, or the increase in
discharge volume of 1,000 gallons/day or more than 10% over that
reported on the baseline monitoring report/wastewater discharge
disclosure report, whichever is less.
Any change which would violate categorical pretreatment standards or
local limits is prohibited.
(c) Significant industrial users are required to notify the control authority
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a
slug discharge.
(a) Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by
Sec. 29-55 CHARTER Sec. 29-57
C:601
Sec. 29-58. Analytical requirements. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
All analyses, including sampling results submitted in support of any
application reports, evidence or required by any permit or order shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures and methods outlined in
Section 29-80.2.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Where the standard
requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the
applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard.
Sec. 29-59. Confidential information. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with best management
practices. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the date
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.
(b) These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years
after their collection.
(c) This period shall be extended during any litigation concerning
compliance with this chapter or wastewater discharge permit
conditions.
(a) Information and data (other than effluent data) about a user obtained
from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
public unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the control authority in accordance with state and
federal disclosure statutes that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When
such a confidentiality claim is asserted, the information shall be treated
as such until a determination is made by the control authority. Effluent
data shall be available to the public without restriction.
(b) When the person furnishing a report satisfies the control authority that
such person has made the demonstration required by Subsection (a),
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection except by the state
or EPA for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES permit, or the
pretreatment program. Confidential portions of a report shall be
available for use by the state or EPA in judicial review or enforcement
Sec. 29-57 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-59
C:602
Sec. 29-60. Right of entry. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Representatives of the control authority, the state and EPA, upon showing
proper identification shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises
of any user who may be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Nondomestic users shall allow authorized representatives of the control
authority, state and EPA access to all premises for the purpose of inspecting,
sampling, examining records or seize for purposes of copying records in
the performance of their duties. Authorized representatives of the control
authority, state and EPA shall have the right to place on the user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and monitoring. Where
a user has security or safety measures in force which would require
clearance, training, or wearing of special protective gear, the user shall
make necessary arrangements at its own expense, to enable authorized
representatives of the control authority, state and EPA to enter and inspect
the premises as guaranteed by this paragraph.
Sec. 29-61. Existing and new source compliance deadlines. [Ord.
No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards
shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a
shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N. Direct dischargers with NPDES permits modified
or reissued to provide a variance pursuant to Section 301(i)(2) of the Act
shall be required to meet compliance dates set in any applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. Existing sources which become significant
industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable pretreatment
standard shall be considered existing significant industrial users except
where such sources meet the definition of a new source as defined in 40
CFR 403.3(k). New sources shall install and have in operating condition and
shall "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable
pretreatment standards.
Sec. 29-62. Equivalent mass and concentration limits. [Ord. No.
1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only
in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the control authority
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass
of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Effluent data
will not be recognized as confidential information.
Sec. 29-59 CHARTER Sec. 29-62
C:603
Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and
(c)(4) shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section
307(d) of the Act and Title 40, Part 403 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in
lieu of the promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the
equivalent limitations were derived.
40 CFR 403.6(c)(6) and (c)(7) shall apply to those industrial users for whom
equivalent mass or concentration limits are calculated.
Sec. 29-63. Net/gross calculation. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence
of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15.
Sec. 29-64. Removal credits. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
The control authority may at its discretion and subject to the conditions
of 40 CFR 403.7, grant removal credits to reflect removal by the POTW of
pollutants specified in the categorical pretreatment standard(s).
Sec. 29-65. Improper use of sewers; discontinuance of service.
[Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The BPW is authorized to inspect any existing building service sewer and
drain, lateral or collecting sewers that discharge wastewater directly or
indirectly to the POTW. If it is found that such lateral or collecting sewers
are used or maintained in such a way as to cause discharge of septic
wastewater or groundwater or debris which exceeds the design criteria of
said sewer or any other substance deemed objectionable, the BPW will give
notice of the unsatisfactory condition to the person responsible for such
discharge and shall direct that the condition be corrected.
In cases of noncompliance continuing after such directive, the BPW, in
its discretion, may discontinue service to persons responsible for such
discharge.
Sec. 29-66. Indemnification for additional sewer maintenance
expenses. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a sanitary sewer,
either directly or indirectly, any nondomestic waste that creates a stoppage,
plugging, breakage, reduction in sewer capacity or any other damage or
loss to any public sewer, the POTW or the control authority. The person
causing such discharge shall indemnify the BPW or control authority for
any additional sewer maintenance expenses, or any other resulting costs or
expenses, including attorney fees, caused by such a discharge.
Sec. 29-62 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-67
C:604
Sec. 29-67. Accidental discharges. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Every user of the POTW shall provide, when deemed necessary by the
control authority, protection from accidental discharge into the sewage
system of nondomestic wastes or liquid materials not meeting the
requirements of Section 29-49 or other nondomestic wastes.
Sec. 29-67 CHARTER Sec. 29-67
C:605

DIVISION 2
Administration
Sec. 29-68. Wastewater discharge permits. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(a) When a wastewater discharge permit is required. The control authority
may, in its discretion, require that an existing potential nondomestic
user procure and maintain in effect a wastewater discharge permit,
issued by the control authority, as a condition precedent to making any
discharge to the POTW. The control authority may require an existing or
potential user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit whenever it
shall reasonably determine that the user is an SIU or MIU as defined in
Section 29-3 of this chapter.
(b) Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with the control authority, an application
in the form prescribed by the control authority, and accompanied by a
fee as required in Section 29-11. Proposed new nondomestic users shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location, (if different from the address) and
name of owners and operator;
(2) Standard industrial classification (SIC) code of both the industry as
a whole and any process for which categorical pretreatment
standards have been promulgated.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not
limited to those mentioned in Section 29-49 of this chapter as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended;
(4) Time and duration of discharge;
(5) Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater
flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation and a current water use schematic;
(7) Description of activities, facilities and industrial processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any City, state, or federal pretreatment
Sec. 29-68 CHARTER Sec. 29-68
C:607
requirements and a statement signed by an authorized
representative of the user regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract
for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
b. No increment referred to in Paragraph (a) shall exceed nine
months.
c. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the control authority including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the control authority.
(10) Each product and/or by-product produced by type, amount, process
or processes and rate of production;
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(12) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of facility
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
(13) List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;
(14) Any other information as may be deemed by the control authority
to be necessary to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.
Sec. 29-68 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-68
C:608
The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the control authority may issue
a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
Sec. 29-68 CHARTER Sec. 29-68
C:609

DIVISION 3
Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
Sec. 29-69. Permit contents. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Wastewater discharge permits shall contain, as appropriate, the following:
(a) Statement of duration (not greater than five years) including issuance
and expiration dates;
(b) Effluent limitations based on the more stringent of categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits as established by this chapter,
state and local law or the combined waste stream formula as outlined in
40 CFR 403.6(e);
(c) General and specific discharge prohibitions as established by Section
29-49 of this chapter;
(d) Requirements to pay fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the
POTW;
(e) Limitations on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization, including the
maximum monthly flow which shall be permitted by a user;
(f) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
(g) Requirements and specifications for monitoring programs including
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(h) Compliance schedules;
(i) Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge reports or
certification statements. These include any reporting requirements
contained in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or
pretreatment requirement;
(j) Requirements for collecting/retaining and providing access to facility
records relating to the user's discharge and for providing entry for
sampling and inspection;
(k) Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater treatment system;
(l) Requirements for notification of spills, potential problems to the POTW
including slug loadings, upsets or violations;
(m) Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of pollution
control equipment;
Sec. 29-69 CHARTER Sec. 29-69
C:611
Sec. 29-70. Permits duration. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance at least
180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
Sec. 29-71. Permit modifications. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject
to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject
to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
Section 29-68, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within
180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater
discharge permit shall submit to the control authority within 180 days
after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment
standard the information required by Paragraph (b)(8) and (9) of Section
29-68.
Sec. 29-72. Permit transfer. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific process or operation.
A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or
sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed
operation without prior approval of the control authority.
(n) Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug control plans;
(o) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to
ensure compliance with this chapter, state and federal pretreatment
standards and requirements including a requirement that the user shall
deliver to the control authority a copy of the permit which is
acknowledged, agreed to and executed by an authorized representative
of the user in order for the permit to be effective;
(p) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements;
(q) Statement of nontransferability;
(r) Conditions for modification or revocation of permit.
Sec. 29-69 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-73
C:612
Sec. 29-73. Wastewater discharge permit appeals. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Any aggrieved person, including a nondomestic user, may petition the
administrative committee to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit ("permit") within 30 days of the permit issuance.
Sec. 29-74. Monitoring. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
(a) Failure to file a timely petition for review of the permit issuance shall be
deemed a waiver of any and all administrative appeal rights.
(b) In the appeal petition, the appealing party shall indicate those portions
of the permit objected to; the reasons for the objection; and any
alternative conditions, if any, the applicant seeks to establish in the
permit.
(c) During the pendency of the appeal, all terms and conditions of the
newly issued permit, which are not contested, shall remain in full force
and effect. During the pendency of the appeal and until a final
administrative determination by the administrative committee, the
prior permit requirements shall apply to any contested portions.
(d) The administrative committee shall deny the appeal; grant the appeal;
or grant the appeal with conditions within 30 days of the appeal
request. The administrative committee may table the additional appeal
request within the thirty-day period to request additional information
from the applicant. The decision of the administrative committee shall
be final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(a) Nondomestic users shall provide and maintain in safe and proper
condition, at their own expense, facilities to allow the authorized
representatives of the control authority, EPA or the state to inspect,
sample, or measure flows from wastewater subject to this chapter.
(b) There shall be ample room in or near facilities to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
(c) If locating such facilities on a user's property would be impractical, the
user may apply to the City for a right-of-way or for permission to
construct on public property.
(d) The control authority may require a suitable control manhole located on
the nondomestic user's premises, which shall be installed on the
building sewer when deemed necessary by the control authority. When
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
user, the City may allow such facility to be constructed in the public
right-of-way, with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction
over such right-of-way, and located so that it will not be obstructed by
public utilities, landscaping or parked vehicles. The manhole shall be
Sec. 29-73 CHARTER Sec. 29-74
C:613
Sec. 29-75. Bypass. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516,
9-3-2008]
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him
to be safe and accessible at all times.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the control manhole
shall be constructed in accordance with the control authority's
requirements and all applicable construction standards and
specifications.
When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the
control authority may require installation of separate monitoring
equipment and control manhole for each user. When there is a
significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics
produced by different operations of a single user, the control authority
may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each
separate discharge.
(a) Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. A nondomestic user may allow any bypass to occur which
does not violate pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to (b) and (c) hereafter.
(b) Notice.
(1) If a nondomestic user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the superintendent, if possible at least
10 days before the date of the bypass.
(2) A nondomestic user shall orally notify the superintendent of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five
days of becoming aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of
the bypass, including exact times and dates, and if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass.
(c) Prohibition of bypass.
(1) A bypass is prohibited and the control authority may take
enforcement action against an individual user for a bypass, unless:
a. The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
b. There are no feasible alternatives to bypass, such as use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of wastes or
Sec. 29-74 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-75
C:614
Sec. 29-76. Upset provisions. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No.
1516, 9-3-2008]
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment
should have been installed to prevent bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative
maintenance;
c. The user submitted notices as required by Paragraph (b) of this
section.
(2) The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines
that it will meet the three conditions listed in Paragraph (c)(1) of
this section. However, such approval does not limit cost recovery by
or indemnification of the control authority.
(a) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with pretreatment standards if the requirements of
Paragraph (b) are met.
(b) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures.
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the
superintendent and control authority within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five days):
a. A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue;
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(c) In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(d) In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, control authority
enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance
was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the
Sec. 29-75 CHARTER Sec. 29-76
C:615
review constitute final control authority action subject to judicial
review. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(e) A nondomestic user shall control production and all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails. This may not be a defense against cost recovery by or
indemnification of the control authority.
Sec. 29-76 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-76
C:616
DIVISION 4
Reporting
Sec. 29-77. Baseline report (for categorical dischargers only). [Ord.
No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(a) Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall
submit baseline reports to the control authority on a form prescribed
and furnished by the control authority.
(b) Within 180 days after the effective date of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or 180 days after a final administrative
decision has been made upon a categorical determination submission in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, nondomestic
users which are existing sources subject to such National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to the POTW shall
submit a properly completed baseline report.
(c) New sources, when subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, shall submit a baseline report at least 90 days prior to
commencement of discharge to the POTW.
(d) In support of the baseline report, the nondomestic user shall submit, in
units and terms specified in the application, the following information:
(1) Name and address of the facility including the name of the operator
and owners.
(2) List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(3) Brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by
such user. This description shall include a schematic process
diagram indicating points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes.
(4) Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the
following:
a. Regulated process streams, and
b. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(5) The nondomestic user shall identify the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards applicable to each regulated process, and
shall:
a. Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum
Sec. 29-77 CHARTER Sec. 29-77
C:617
and average concentrations shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations.
b. A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For
all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must
be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling
techniques where feasible. The control authority may waive
flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user
that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is
infeasible. In such cases samples may be obtained through
time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates
that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged.
c. A nondomestic user shall take a minimum of one
representative sample to compile that data necessary to
comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
d. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to
evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where
an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority.
(6) A nondomestic user shall provide a statement, reviewed by an
authorized representative of the user, indicating whether National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O&M) measures or additional pretreatment is required for the
user to meet the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(7) If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the user will provide
the shortest schedule which will provide such additional
pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall
not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or as follows:
a. Where the user's National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7) or
the combined waste stream formula [[40 CFR 403.6(e)], or net/
gross calculations (40 CFR 403.15), at the time the user
submits a baseline report containing the information required
Sec. 29-77 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-77
C:618
Sec. 29-78. Compliance date report. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW,
any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the
control authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
in Section 29-77(d)(6) and (7) shall pertain to the modified
limits.
b. If the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard for the user
is modified after the baseline report is submitted, the industrial
user shall make any necessary amendments to information
provided as a response to Section 29-77(d)(6) and (7) and
submit them to the control authority within 60 days after the
modified limit is approved.
(8) The following conditions shall apply to any schedule submitted in
response to Section 29-77(d)(7):
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
b. No increment referred to in Section 29-77(d)(8)a. shall exceed
nine months.
c. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the control authority including, at a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the control authority.
(9) Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the
control authority.
(e) The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures.
Sec. 29-77 CHARTER Sec. 29-78
C:619
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited
by such standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment
standards or requirements. Where equivalent mass or concentration limits
are established by the control authority for a user, this report shall contain
a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. Where a
user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms
of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, the report shall
include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance
with the applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed
by an authorized representative of the user.
Sec. 29-79. Periodic compliance reports. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(a) Any user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new
source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall
submit to the control authority during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standard or by the control authority, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record
of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the
average daily flow reported in Section 29-77(d)(4). At the discretion of
the control authority and in consideration of such factors as local high
or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority
may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted.
(b) The control authority may impose mass limitations on users which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
Paragraph (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These
reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the control authority, of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards.
(c) For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established
by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), the report required by Section 29-79(a) shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all
other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
Sec. 29-78 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-79
C:620
Sec. 29-80.1. Self-monitoring. [Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The control authority may require industrial users to conduct selfmonitoring.
The control authority shall determine the frequency of selfmonitoring
necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial
user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The control
authority may require the industrial user to provide a split of selfmonitoring
samples. The control authority shall require appropriate
reporting from industrial users required to conduct self-monitoring.
Sec. 29-80.2. Sampling and analysis procedures and methods. [Ord.
No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
All sampling and analyses conducted shall be performed in accordance with
the procedures and methods detailed in the most current version of:
Sec. 29-80.3. Laboratory utilized by industry conducting selfmonitoring
to be approved by control authority; quality control
documentation required. [Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), the report required by
Section 29-79(a) shall include the user's actual average production rate
for the reporting period.
(d) Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the control
authority at least once every six months (on dates specified by the
control authority) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of
the pollutants required to be reported by the control authority. In cases
where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
user must submit documentation required by the superintendent or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user.
(1) "The Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of
Pollutants" 40 CFR, part 136, as amended.
(2) "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
American Public Health Association.
(3) "Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,"
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(4) Any other method as may be approved by the control authority.
(a) Each laboratory utilized by industries conducting self-monitoring as
required by the control authority shall be approved by the control
authority and required to operate a formal quality control program as
outlined in the most current version of:
Sec. 29-79 CHARTER Sec. 29-80.3
C:621
Sec. 29-80.4. Monitoring and analysis in support of self-monitoring
requirements. [Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(1) "Handbook for Analytical Quality Control in Water and Wastewater
Laboratories," United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(2) "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
American Public Health Association.
(b) Laboratories conducting analyses for industrial users must submit a
copy of the formal quality control documentation prior to approval by
the control authority. Approval of laboratories shall be subject to
periodic review. The control authority shall have the right to issue blind
standards to be analyzed by other laboratories being utilized for selfmonitoring.
In the case of resolving disputes between analytical data
generated by the control authority and another laboratory, any data
without documented supporting quality control data will be rejected.
(a) The reports required by Sections 29-69, 29-77, 29-78, 29-79, 29-81 and
29-82 shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period
covered by the report, at the location set forth by the control authority,
and performed in accordance with the sampling and analysis
procedures as outlined in Section 29-80.2. This sampling and analysis
may be performed by the control authority in lieu of the industrial user.
Where the control authority itself collects all the information required
for the report, the user will not be required to submit the report.
(b) If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall
notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within
30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the user is not
required to resample if:
(1) The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month, or
(2) The control authority performs sampling at the user between the
time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when
the user receives the results of this sampling.
If the control authority performs the sampling for the SIU, the
control authority must perform any required repeat sampling and
analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of a violation.
(c) The reports required in Paragraph (a) and (d) of Section 29-79 shall be
based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
performed during the period covered by the report, which data is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The
control authority shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary
to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable
pretreatment standards, and requirements.
Sec. 29-80.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-80.4
C:622
Sec. 29-81. Reporting requirements for significant industrial users.
[Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
Every significant noncategorical industrial user shall submit to the control
authority at least once every six months (on date specified by the control
authority) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the
pollutants required to be reported by the control authority. These reports
shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by
the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques describe in 40
CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or
where the DEQ or control authority determines that the Part 136 sampling
(d) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in Sections
29-69, 29-77, 29-78, 29-79, 29-81 and 29-82 monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the control authority, using the
procedures prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.
(e) Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports
required by Sections 29-77, 29-78, 29-79, 29-81 and 29-82 shall include
the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and
shall be signed by an authorized representative.
(f) The reports required in Sections 29-77, 29-78, 29-77(a) and 29-79(d)
must be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data
are representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
The control authority shall require that frequency of monitoring
necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and
volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour
composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority. Where
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized
by the control authority, the samples must be representative of the
discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part
136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the
analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples
may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organic
compounds and oil and grease the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as
appropriate.
Sec. 29-80.4 CHARTER Sec. 29-81
C:623
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical
methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures
suggested by the control authority or other persons, approved by the DEQ.
In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
user must submit documentation required by the control authority or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the
user. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the control authority
in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user. Where the control
authority itself collects all the information required for the report, the
significant noncategorical industrial user will not be required to submit the
report.
Sec. 29-82. Reporting requirements for nonsignificant industrial
users. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The control authority may require appropriate reporting from those
industrial users with discharges that are not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards and are not otherwise deemed by the control
authority to be significant.
Sec. 29-83. Hazardous waste notification. [Ord. No. 1323,
12-5-2001; Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
(a) Any nondomestic user, except as specified in Subsection (e) below,
which discharges to the POTW any substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic hazardous waste under
40 CFR Part 261, shall notify the control authority in writing of such
discharge.
(b) All hazardous waste notifications shall include:
(1) The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261;
(2) The EPA hazardous waste number;
(3) The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other); and
(4) A certification that the user has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical.
(c) In addition to the information submitted in Section 29-83(b),
nondomestic users discharging more than 100 kg of hazardous waste
per calendar month to the POTW shall contain to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the nondomestic user:
(1) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
waste;
Sec. 29-81 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-83
C:624
Sec. 29-84. Signatory requirements. [Ord. No. 1323, 12-5-2001;
Ord. No. 1516, 9-3-2008]
The reports required in Sections 29-77, 29-78, 29-79, 29-81 and 29-82 shall
include the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and
shall be signed as follows:
(2) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
(3) An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
(d) Hazardous waste notifications shall be submitted no later than
February 19, 1991, except that IUs commencing the discharge of listed
or characteristic hazardous wastes after August 23, 1990, shall provide
the notification no later than 180 days from the discharge of the wastes.
Any notification under this provision need be submitted only once for
each hazardous waste discharged, although notifications of changed
discharges must also be submitted under Section 29-55(b) of this
chapter.
(e) Nondomestic users are exempt from the hazardous waste notification
requirement during a calendar month in which they discharge 15 kg or
less of nonacute hazardous wastes. Discharge of any quantity of acute
hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e)
requires a one-time notification.
(a) By a responsible corporate official, if the industrial user submitting the
reports is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a
responsible corporate official means (a) a president, secretary,
treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision making functions for the corporation, or (b) The manager of
one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
employing 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25,000,000 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to
sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
(b) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the
reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
(c) By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Section 29-84(a) or (b) if:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in
Section 29-84(a) or (b);
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
Sec. 29-83 CHARTER Sec. 29-84
C:625
manager, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company;
and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
(d) If an authorization under Section 29-84(c) is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying
the requirements of Section 29-84(c) must be submitted to the control
authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
Sec. 29-84 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-84
C:626
ARTICLE V1
Charges For Sewer
Sec. 29-84.1. Charges for sewer. [Ord. No. 1417, 6-15-2005; Ord.
No. 1431, 11-2-2005]
The following charges and fees shall apply to all connections to the sanitary
sewer system of the City of Holland:
(a) Lateral fee. If a lateral fee has not been paid or assessed against the
premises to be served, a lateral fee, in an amount to be established and
adjusted from time to time by a resolution of the City Council, for the
installation and use of a sewer lateral line from the sewer line to the
property line, shall be payable by each premises connecting to the
system provided that no lateral fee shall be payable where the sewer
lateral to be utilized was constructed as a part of the development or
project in which private parties or the City on behalf of or at the
expense of private parties have constructed the sewer lateral. The
terms of the payment of the sewer lateral fee shall be established and
adjusted from time to time by a resolution of the City Council. This
resolution shall specify whether the lateral fee is payable in cash in full
at the time application to connect is made or in installments. If the
lateral fee is payable in installments, such resolution shall specify the
number of installments, the amount of each installment, the date on
which each installment is due and payable, the interest rate, if any, on
the unpaid balance of the lateral fee, when interest begins, and the date
on which interest on the unpaid balance is due and payable. If paid in
installments, the unpaid balance of the lateral fee and all interest
thereon shall constitute a lien on the premises served.
(b) Special assessment. The special assessment procedure as prescribed in
Chapter 15 of the City Charter for the construction of sanitary sewer
improvements and assessment for sanitary sewer will be followed. A
special assessment for sanitary sewer may be authorized by the City;
may be accepted upon petition of the property owners; or may be
initiated by such other method as specified by City Charter or
authorized by law. Following a public hearing and adoption of a
resolution of necessity, the project may be authorized by the City
Council to proceed. The special assessment placed on the premises
shall include the frontage fee and the lateral fee. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the amount of the special assessment shall not exceed the
cost of the public improvement as specified by Section 15.9 of the
Holland City Charter. The special assessment shall be payable in full or
in equal installments as authorized and specified in Chapter 15 of the
City Charter. To the extent that an assessment for sanitary sewer does
not exceed the cost of the public improvement as required by Chapter
15 of the Charter of the City of Holland, the sanitary sewer special
assessment shall be established annually by resolution of the Board of
Directors of the Holland Board of Public Works and approved by the
City Council. The resolution shall specify whether the frontage charge
Sec. 29-84.1 CHARTER Sec. 29-84.1
C:627
is payable in cash in full at the time application to connect is made
or installments. If the frontage charge is payable in installments, such
resolution shall specify the number of installments, the amount of each
installment, the date on which each installment is due and payable, the
interest rate, if any, on the unpaid balance of the frontage charge, when
interest begins, and the date on which interest on the unpaid balance
is due and payable. If paid in installments, the unpaid balance of the
frontage charge and all interest and penalties thereon shall constitute
a lien on the premises served.
(c) Trunkage charge.
(1) [Provisions regarding charge.] All premises which have not been
included in a special assessment district which included a trunkage
charge as a part of the assessment shall pay a trunkage charge.
Those premises which have previously paid a trunkage charge as a
part of a special assessment on a cash or installment basis as
provided in this article but later are expanded and the use of the
premises is altered so as to increase the amount and intensity of
sewer use, shall pay an additional trunkage charge for such
increase in sewer use. Those premises which were assessed for
trunkage as an unimproved parcel but which are later improved or
expanded, resulting in an increase in sewer use, shall pay a
trunkage charge for such improvements. The trunkage unit rate
shall be calculated based on general system extension costs, which
may include, but are not limited to, such items as oversizing, extra
depth, nonassessable frontage, lift station, force mains, pump
stations, and other costs not included in the special assessment and
frontage calculation. The trunkage unit rate shall be established
and adjusted from time to time by a resolution adopted by the
Holland Board of Public Works and approved by the City Council.
The trunkage fee shall be based upon a residential equivalent unit
("REU factor") and applied against the meter size for the proposed
or expanded use of the premises. An REU factor will be established
for a single-family residential unit. All other types of uses will be
calculated based on a schedule of unit factors based upon meter
size and using the basic REU rate as the base cost. After initial
adoption of the REU rates and factors, the REU rates will be
adjusted annually based on the construction cost index as
published by the Engineering News Record or such other nationally
recognized publication recording costs and inflationary
adjustments to cost. The trunkage unit rate shall be the rate in
effect on the date the meter is installed to connect to the sewer
system. If the premises are already connected to the sewer system,
the trunkage unit rate shall be the rate at the time the meter
change is made for the expansion or alteration of use.
(2) Private development. Sewer trunkage fees will be the only fee
required to be paid for building connections made within the
proposed private development. The private party must pay in full
Sec. 29-84.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-84.1
C:628
all existing assessments and any other charges or assessments
prior to sanitary sewer system extensions or connections. Costs
incurred by the developer which are normally included in the
trunkage fee calculation may be credited against the calculated
fees in accordance with the resolution adopted by the Holland
Board of Public Works and approved by the City Council.
(3) Single connections. For premises which have not been specially
assessed or were not a part of a private development for which
assessments, trunkage, and lateral fees have been charged, the
cost of connection to sanitary sewer will be determined based upon
the rate formula established in the resolution adopted by the
Holland Board of Public Works and approved by the City Council.
Any premises which were previously charged under the alternate
assessment procedure of the City shall be charged consistent with
the terms and conditions of this article. Any previously charged and
levied alternate assessments including any ordinances or
resolutions thereto are hereby rescinded, revoked, and vacated
and, in lieu thereof, all premises will be charged and assessed in
accordance with this article. The City Council may choose to permit
installment payments of an assessment under those conditions as
specified in the resolution adopted by the Holland Board of Public
Works and approved by the City Council. The owner of the premises
to be served shall sign an agreement with the City stating the
amount owed, the interest rate and other payment terms, and that
the unpaid charges and all interest and penalties thereon shall
constitute a lien on the premises served. If any installment of a
lateral fee, frontage charge, trunkage charge, or any interest or
penalty thereon is not paid in a timely manner, the City shall have
the right to discontinue utility service to the premises and also, if
the premises are connected to a sanitary sewer supply, the right to
turn off the sanitary sewer to the premises. Sewer service shall not
be restored to the premises until all amounts then due and payable
are paid in full.
(4) Installment payment of trunkage. The City Council may choose to
permit installment payments of trunkage charges under those
conditions as specified in a resolution adopted by the Holland
Board of Public Works and approved by the City Council. This
resolution shall specify whether the trunkage charge may be
payable in cash in full when the obligation is incurred, or in
installments. The resolution shall specify the number of
installments, the amount of each installment, the date on which
each installment is due and payable, the interest rate, if any, on the
unpaid balance of the trunkage charge, when interest begins, the
date on which interest on the unpaid balance is due and payable,
and the amount of any administrative fee to be charged by the City
for the installment payment agreement. If paid in installments, the
unpaid balance of the trunkage charge and all interest and
penalties thereon shall constitute a lien on the premises served in
Sec. 29-84.1 CHARTER Sec. 29-84.1
C:629
accordance with the Charter of the City of Holland and the
applicable provisions of state law.
(5) Agreement. At the time of each application to connect to the
sanitary sewer system of the City, and also at the time any
additional trunkage charges become payable as provided in
Subsection (c)(1) of this section, if any portion of the trunkage
charge will be paid over time, as a condition precedent to
connection and/or use of the sanitary sewer system, the owner of
the premises to be served shall sign an agreement with the City
stating the amount owed, the interest rate, and other payment
terms, and that the unpaid charges and all interest and penalties
thereon shall constitute a lien on the premises served. If any
installment of any trunkage charge or any interest or penalties
thereon is not paid in a timely manner, the City shall have the right
to discontinue sewer service to the premises, and also, if the
premises are connected to a public water supply, the right to turn
off the water service to the premises. Sewer service and/or water
service shall not be restored to the premises until all amounts then
due and payable are payable in full.
(6) Tax bill collection. If any lateral fee, frontage charge, or trunkage
charge, or any interest or penalties thereon is delinquent for three
months or more, then on or before November 1 of each year, it shall
be certified to the City Treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the
next tax roll against the premises to which sewer service has been
provided, and the charges shall then be collected and the lien shall
be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of
taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for
taxes.
(7) Lien for payment of charges. If an installment of a trunkage charge
is not paid, with all interest, on or before its due date, then such
delinquent installment shall be treated and have the same status as
a delinquent installment of a special assessment pursuant to Public
Act No. 188 of 1954 (MCLA § 41.721 et seq.), as amended, or any
similar statute, and such delinquent installment shall be collected
by the City in the same manner as provided in Public Act 188 or
similar successor statute for delinquent installment payments of
special assessments in addition to any other remedy provided for in
the Ordinance Code of the City of Holland or in an agreement
executed by the owner of the premises served and the City.
Sec. 29-84.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-84.1
C:630
ARTICLE VI
Stormwater
DIVISION 1
Generally
Sec. 29-85. Definitions. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 175371]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Director of the City
Transportation Services or the Director's designees.
BASE FLOOD — The 100-year flood with a magnitude which has a onepercent
chance of occurring or being exceeded in any given year.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — A practice, or combination of
practices and design criteria, to minimize stormwater runoff and prevent
the discharge of pollutants into stormwater discharged from a site, and
designed in accordance with City Stormwater Standards.
BUILDING OPENING — Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or
door, through which floodwaters could penetrate.
CITY — The City of Holland, Michigan, acting by and through its
Transportation Services Department for the purposes of this article, unless
the context refers to the City of Holland as a whole.
CITY STORMWATER STANDARDS — The most current version of the City
of Holland, Michigan, Stormwater Standards Manual published pursuant to
this article.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated
thereunder.
CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER RUNOFF — Stormwater runoff from
a development site following an earth change.
COUNTY ENFORCING AGENCY — A county agency or a conservation
district designated by a county board of commissioners under § 9105 of Part
91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, of the Natural Resource and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.9101 et
seq.).
DESIGN ENGINEER — A registered and licensed professional engineer in
the state responsible for the design of a drainageplan.
71.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also deleted former Art. VI, Severability, and former Art. VII,
Conflict, both adopted 12-5-2001 by Ord. No. 1323.
Sec. 29-85 CHARTER Sec. 29-85
C:631
DETENTION — A system that is designed to capture stormwater and
release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT — The installation or construction of
impervious surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to state
law or local ordinance, the City's approval of a site plan, plat, site
condominium, special land use, planned unit development, rezoning of land,
land division approval, private road approval or other approvals required
for the development of land or the erection of buildings or structures.
DEVELOPER — Any person proposing or implementing the development of
land.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — Any land that is being or has been developed, or
that a developer proposes for development.
DISCHARGER — Any person or entity who directly or indirectly discharges
stormwater from any property. The term "discharger" also means any
employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who
participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission
which is or results in a violation of this article.
DRAIN — Any drain as defined in the Michigan Drain Code of 1956, Public
Act 40 of 1956 (MCLA § 280.1 et seq.), other than an established county or
intercounty drain.
DRAIN COMMISSIONER or WATER RESOURCES COMMISSIONER — The
county agency charged with the management of county and intercounty
drains established pursuant to the Michigan Drain Code of 1956, Public Act
40 of 1956 (MCLA § 280.1 et seq.), and responsible for site plan drainage
review pursuant to the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended by Public Act 591 of 1996 (MCLA § 560.101 et seq.), and the
Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96, of 1987 (MCLA § 125.2301 et
seq.).
DRAINAGE — The collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater and/
or surface water.
DRAINAGE PLAN — See "plan."
DRAINAGEWAY — The area within which surface water or groundwater is
carried from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel
or to adjacent land.
EARTH CHANGE — A human made change in the natural cover or
topography of land, including cut and fill activities.
EROSION — The process by which the ground surface is worn away by
action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.
The term "earth change" includes, but is not limited to, any excavating,
surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative roots.
(a)
The term "earth change" does not include the practice of plowing and
tilling soil for the purpose of crop production.
(b)
Sec. 29-85 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-85
C:632
EXEMPTED DISCHARGES — Discharges other than stormwater as
specified in Section 29-126.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The agency
of the federal government charged with emergency management.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow
of water bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water
runoff from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — The base flood elevation plus one foot
at any given location.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of land adjoining any watercourse or waterbody
that will be inundated by the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any structural and/or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures or property that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to land or improvements, including utilities and other
structures.
FLOODWAY — The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved to carry and discharge a base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1/10 of a foot
due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage.
GRADING — Any stripping, clearing, stumping, excavating, filling, leveling
or stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its
excavated or filled condition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any method or means for conveying an illicit
discharge into water bodies or the City's stormwater drainage system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the City's stormwater drainage
system or water bodies that does not consist entirely of stormwater,
discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit, or exempted
discharges as defined in this article.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface, such as a paved or gravel driveway,
roof, parking area or road, that prevents the infiltration of water into the
soil.
LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION FACILITY — An agricultural activity, in which
100 or more livestock are fed, bred and/or raised within a confined area,
other than an open pasture, either inside or outside an enclosed building.
Sec. 29-85 CHARTER Sec. 29-85
C:633
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor or the lowest enclosed area, including
a basement, but not including an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
which is usable solely for parking of vehicles or building access.
MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (DEQ) — The
state department charged with protection of the environment.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A publicly
owned conveyance system designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater (may also be referred to as "stormwater drainage system").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA, or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b), that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. The
permit may be applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide
basis.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the stormwater
drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
OVERLAND FLOW-WAY — Surface area that conveys a concentrated flow of
stormwater runoff.
PLAN — Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, maps,
written standards, supporting calculations, operating procedures, or any
combination of these, which contain information pursuant to this article.
POLLUTANT — A substance discharged which includes, but is not limited
to, the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes,
animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and
agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as
a pollutant under the Clean Water Act.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person having legal or equitable title to property
or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any
property.
REDEVELOPMENT — Redevelopment projects are those that change the
existing site footprint, or offer new opportunities for stormwater control.
Projects that do not disturb the underlying or surrounding soil, remove
surrounding vegetation, or increase the area of impervious surface are not
considered redevelopment projects. For roadway projects, reconstruction
of the subbase is considered redevelopment, whereas an overlay of the
pavement surface is not.
RETENTION — A system which is designed to capture stormwater and
contain it until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates.
Sec. 29-85 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-85
C:634
SOIL EROSION — The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land
creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling
formation of new sedimentary deposits.
STATE WATER QUALITY STANDARDS — All applicable state rules,
regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of
§ 3106 of Part 31, Water Resources Protection, of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.3106).
STORM DRAIN — Any portion of the stormwater drainage system, including
any natural outlet, which carries storm and surface waters and drainage or
unpolluted industrial process water, such as permitted by Section 29-7(b).
(May also be referred to as "storm sewer").
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — The method, structure, area,
system, or other equipment or measures which are designed to receive,
control, store, or convey stormwater.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — All of the stormwater
management facilities used on a site.
STORMWATER PERMIT — A permit issued by the City pursuant to this
article.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPP) — A document
which describes the best management practices and activities to be
implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
STORMWATER REVIEW AND APPROVAL — Review and approval of a site
stormwater management system conducted by either the Drain
Commissioner or Water Resources Commissioner pursuant to state law.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The runoff and drainage of precipitation
resulting from rainfall or snowmelt or other natural event or process.
STREAM — A river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a
drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible
evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The
agency of the federal government charged with environmental protection.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATER BODY — A river, lake, stream, creek or other watercourse or
wetlands.
WATERSHED — A region draining into a water body.
WETLANDS — Land characterized by the presence of hydric soils and water
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or
aquatic life.
Sec. 29-85 CHARTER Sec. 29-86
C:635
Sec. 29-86. Statutory authority and title. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
Sec. 29-87. Findings. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
The City finds that:
(a) This article (Article VI of Chapter 29 of the City Code of Ordinances) is
adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as amended,
Public Act 279 of 1909 (MCLA § 117.1 et seq.); the Michigan Drain
Code of 1956, Public Act 40 of 1956 (MCLA § 280.1 et seq.); the Land
Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967 (MCLA § 560.101 et seq.); the
Revenue Bond Act, Public Act 94 of 1933 (MCLA § 141.101 et seq.); and
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act
451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.101 et seq.); § 401(p) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (also known as the "Clean Water Act"), as
amended [33 U.S.C. § 1342(p) and 40 CFR 9, 122, 123 and 124]; and
other applicable state and federal laws.
(b) This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Holland,
Michigan, Stormwater Ordinance."
(a) Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and
downstream of the City are at times subjected to flooding.
(b) Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a
danger to the natural resources of the City and the region.
(c) Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, which
may result in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased
flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment
transport and deposition.
(d) Stormwater runoff produced by land development may contribute to
increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
(e) Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source
pollution may have occurred as a result of land development, and may
cause deterioration of the water resources of the City and downstream
municipalities.
(f) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution may
have resulted in a deterioration of the water resources of the City and
downstream municipalities.
(g) Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and
pollutants associated with stormwater runoff, absent reasonable
regulation and control, can adversely affect the City's water bodies and
water resources, and those of downstream municipalities.
(h) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development.
Sec. 29-86 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-87
C:636
Sec. 29-88. Purpose. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the
following objectives:
(i) Post-construction stormwater runoff program requirements for new
and redevelopments within the City are set forth in the State of
Michigan National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit
Application for Discharge of Storm Water to Surface Waters of the State
from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (DEQ, 2013 Rev. 10/
2014).
(j) Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this
article and implementing the same can address many of the deleterious
effects of stormwater runoff.
(k) Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare.
(l) Adopting these standards is necessary to comply with the NPDES MS4
permit.
(m) Illicit discharges may contain pollutants that can significantly degrade
the City's water bodies and water resources.
(n) Illicit discharges enter the MS4 through either direct connections (e.g.,
wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the
storm drains) or indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the
stormwater drainage system or spills connected by drain inlets).
(o) Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and
connections contained in this article and implementing the same will
address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges.
(a) To reduce artificially induced flood damage.
(b) To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from
identified new land development.
(c) To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and
bridges, and other structures.
(d) To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically
favorable conditions exist.
(e) To prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution.
(f) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes.
(g) To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and
streambed stability.
Sec. 29-87 CHARTER Sec. 29-88
C:637
Sec. 29-89. Applicability, exemptions and general provisions.
[11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
(h) To reduce erosion from development or construction projects.
(i) To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by
means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and
runoff pollution.
(j) To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were
developed without stormwater management controls meeting the
purposes and standards of this article.
(k) To reduce the adverse impact of changing the land use along water
bodies and, to that end, this article establishes minimum standards to
protect water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land
use where there are insufficient stormwater management controls.
(l) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
(m) To prohibit illicit discharges and connection to the MS4.
(n) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
(a) This article shall apply to all new development and all redevelopment
projects, including private, commercial and public projects that disturb
one acre or more, and projects less than one acre that are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre
or more as required by the NPDES MS4 permit.
(b) Further:
(1) This article shall apply to any development or redevelopment site
which:
a. Requires approval of a plat under Chapter 33.
b. Requires approval of a site plan under Chapter 39, Article II, a
building permit, or any other permit for work which will alter
stormwater drainage characteristics of the site.
c. Is exempt from site plan and permit approval, but work will
alter stormwater drainage characteristics of the site, and there
is an increase in impervious surface exceeding 5,000 square
feet.
(2) Provided, however, that this article shall not apply to the following:
a. The construction of, or addition, extension or modification to,
an individual single-family or a two-family detached dwelling.
Sec. 29-88 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-89
C:638
Sec. 29-90. through Sec. 29-96. (Reserved)
b. Non-motorized improvements (sidewalk, pathway) within
public rights-of-way that disturb less than one acre.
c. The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a
mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to
apply to the construction, expansion, or modification of a
mobile home park.
d. Farm operations and buildings, except dwellings, directly
related to farm operations. This exemption shall not apply to
livestock production facilities as defined in this article,
greenhouses and other similar structures.
e. Plats with preliminary plat approval and other developments
with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this
article, where such approvals remain in effect.
(c) Redevelopment and additions requiring a stormwater permit shall
comply with City Stormwater Standards for the redeveloped or newly
constructed portion of the site, except that the City reserves the right to
require the entire site be brought up to the current standards. The City
also reserves the right to define the last land use for a redevelopment
site as the interim vacant condition.
(d) This article shall apply to all discharges entering the stormwater
drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands
unless explicitly exempted.
Sec. 29-89 CHARTER Sec. 29-90
C:639

DIVISION 2
Stormwater Permit
Sec. 29-97. Permit required. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-98. Review procedures. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
(a) A developer shall not engage in any development without first receiving
a stormwater permit from the City pursuant to this article via the City's
site plan approval process contained in the zoning regulations in
Chapter 39, Article II.
(b) The granting of a stormwater permit shall authorize only such
development for which the permit is issued, subject to the terms of the
permit, and it shall not be deemed to approve other development or
other land use activities, or replace other required permits.
(a) The City shall grant a stormwater permit after approval of the site plan
(Chapter 39, Article II) and before issuance of a building permit(s), and
may impose terms and conditions in accordance with Section 29-104,
only upon compliance with all of the following requirements:
(1) Completed stormwater permit application form.
(2) The developer has submitted a drainage plan for the site complying
with Section 29-99 for the approval of post-construction
stormwater runoff BMPs.
a. The drainage plan contains a description of adequate,
temporary stormwater management facilities to control
construction site stormwater runoff and prevent off-site
sedimentation, satisfying the requirements of Section 29-117,
and the developer has obtained a soil erosion permit from the
County Enforcing Agency, if necessary.
b. The drainage plan contains permanent on-site stormwater
management facilities complying with the City Stormwater
Standards, and the performance and design standards as set
forth in Division 8 of this article.
(3) The developer has submitted restrictive covenant language for
review and subsequent recording at the County Register of Deeds,
if required for the development.
(4) Written construction plan approval obtained from the County Drain
or Water Resources Commissioner, or intercounty drainage board,
if required.
(5) The developer has paid or deposited the stormwater permit review
fee pursuant to Section 29-100.
(6) The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial guaranty
pursuant to Section 29-101.
Sec. 29-97 CHARTER Sec. 29-98
C:641
Sec. 29-99. Drainage plan. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
A preliminary drainage plan meeting the requirements of Section
39-23(a)(4)m through n shall be included on the site plan submitted to the
City for site and development plan review. The drainage plan submitted
for stormwater permit review shall be shown on the approved site plan
if Planning Commission or administrative staff review is required, or on a
site plan meeting the requirements in the City Stormwater Standards. The
drainage plan shall identify and contain all of the information required in
the City Stormwater Standards.
Sec. 29-100. Review fees; escrow. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
(7) The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the
approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this article,
including, but not limited to, Section 29-163. All easements shall be
acceptable to the City in form and substance and shall be recorded
with the County Register of Deeds.
(8) The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for
routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all structural
and vegetative BMPs installed and implemented to meet the
performance standards. This agreement shall be in compliance
with the approved drainage plan and this article, including, but not
limited to, Section 29-164. The maintenance agreement shall be
acceptable to the City in form and substance and shall be
subsequently recorded with the County Register of Deeds.
(b) Limitations of review. The City will review private developments for offsite
impacts, but will not review the internal storm sewer and drainage
system for the site.
(a) All expenses and costs incurred by the City directly associated with
processing, reviewing and approving or denying a stormwater permit
application shall be paid or reimbursed to the City from the funds paid
directly to the City. The City reserves the right to request a separate
escrow account be established by the developer, as provided in
Subsection (b) of this section. The City may draw funds from a
developer's escrow account to reimburse the City for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by the City relating to the application. Such
reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to, expenses related
to the following:
(1) Services of the City Attorney directly related to the application.
(2) Services of the City Engineer directly related to the application.
(3) Services of other independent contractors working for the City,
which are directly related to the application.
(4) Review required by the County Drain or Water Resources
Commissioner.
Sec. 29-98 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-100
C:642
Sec. 29-101. Financial guaranty. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
(5) Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice
requirements necessitated by the application.
(b) At the time a developer applies for a stormwater permit, the developer
shall pay the required fees established by the City for a stormwater
permit. The developer may also be required to deposit with the City, as
an escrow deposit, an initial amount as determined by resolution of the
City Council for such matters and shall provide additional amounts as
requested by the City in such increments as are specified in said
resolution. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow account after the
application has been fully processed, reviewed, and the final City
approval and acceptance of the development has occurred will be
refunded to the developer with no interest to be paid on those funds. At
no time prior to the City's final decision on an application shall the
balance in the escrow account fall below the required initial amount. If
the funds in the account are reduced to less than the required initial
amount, the developer shall deposit into the account an additional
amount as determined by City Council resolution, before the
application review process will be continued. Additional amounts may
be required to be placed in the escrow account by the developer, at the
discretion of the City.
(a) The City shall not approve a stormwater permit until the developer
submits to the City, in a form and amount satisfactory to the City, a
letter of credit or other financial guaranty for the timely and
satisfactory construction of all stormwater management facilities and
site grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan. Upon 1)
certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater
management facilities have been completed in accordance with the
approved drainage plan, and 2) receipt of construction record drawings
for all private drainage systems meeting the minimum requirements of
the City Stormwater Standards, the City may release the letter of credit
or other financial guaranty, subject to final City acceptance and
approval.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection (c) of this section, the amount of the
financial guaranty shall be equal to the construction cost estimate
provided by the developer of all stormwater management facilities and
site grading, unless the City determines that a greater amount is
appropriate, in which case the basis for such determination shall be
provided to the developer in writing. In determining whether an amount
greater is appropriate, the City shall consider the size and type of the
development, the size and type of the on-site stormwater management
system, and the nature of the off-site stormwater management facilities
the development will utilize.
(c) The City may waive the financial guaranty for a development if the
County Drain or Water Resources Commissioner or the County Road
Commission, as part of its review process, requires a letter of credit or
Sec. 29-100 CHARTER Sec. 29-101
C:643
Sec. 29-102. Certificate of occupancy. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a stormwater permit has
been issued and stormwater management facilities have been completed in
accordance with the approved drainage plan and all applicable restrictive
covenants, construction record drawings have been submitted and
approved, and until the executed maintenance agreement is recorded with
the County Register of Deeds; provided, however, that the City may issue
a temporary certificate of occupancy if an acceptable letter of credit or
other financial guaranty has been submitted to the City, the County Drain
or Water Resources Commissioner, or the County Road Commission for the
timely and satisfactory construction of all stormwater management facilities
and site grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan.
Sec. 29-103. No change in approved facilities. [11-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 1753]
Stormwater management facilities, after construction and approval, shall
be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved drainage
plan, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except
in accordance with the approved drainage plan, or in accordance with
approved amendments or revisions in the plan.
Sec. 29-104. Terms and conditions. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-105. through § 29-111. (Reserved)
other financial guaranty for the satisfactory construction of all
stormwater management facilities.
(d) The City may reduce or waive the amount of the financial guaranty for a
development that will not increase the percentage of impervious
surface of the development site by more than 10%.
(e) This article shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a
developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site
private stormwater runoff facilities as well as those costs arising from
the need to make other drainage improvements in order to reduce a
development's impact on a drain consistent with City Stormwater
Standards.
(a) In granting a stormwater permit, the City may impose such terms and
conditions as are reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this article. A developer shall comply with such terms and conditions.
(b) Approval of the stormwater management system is considered to be
granted by the City upon issuance of a stormwater permit, unless
authorization is required to be granted by the County Drain or Water
Resources Commissioner under state law and this approval has not
been offered.
Sec. 29-101 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-105
C:644
DIVISION 3
Stormwater Management System; Protection and Other Standards;
Soil Erosion Control
Sec. 29-112. Responsibility for stormwater management system.
[11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-113. Construction and maintenance. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
All stormwater management facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and
rules and regulations.
Sec. 29-114. Public health, safety and welfare. [11-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 1753]
Protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall be a primary
consideration in the design of all stormwater management facilities.
Sec. 29-115. Protection of environmentally sensitive areas.
[11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-116. Flood protection and building openings. [11-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 1753]
(a) The City is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on private
property for the management of stormwater on such property. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to provide for, and maintain,
private stormwater management facilities serving the property and to
prevent and correct any conditions interfering with, or impeding, the
management of stormwater, including the accumulation of debris that
interferes with the drainage function of a water body.
(b) Existing sites found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to
enforcement as outlined in §§ 29-147 through 29-155.
(a) Environmentally sensitive areas shall be identified on the site plan with
measures shown for protection of these areas as defined and in
accordance with City Stormwater Standards.
(b) The City may include provisions for the acceptable replacement of
floodplain storage volume, where such storage volume is lost or
diminished as a result of approved development.
(a) All new buildings and substantial improvements to existing buildings
shall be protected from flood damage up to the flood protection
elevation and shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state
and City ordinances (Chapter 39 Zoning, Article X, Flood Damage
Prevention)72.
Sec. 29-112 CHARTER Sec. 29-116
C:645
Sec. 29-117. Soil erosion and sedimentation control. [11-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 1753]
(b) Additionally, the lowest floor shall not be constructed below the
following elevations:
(1) One foot above the design high-water level of stormwater
management facilities.
(2) Two feet above the highest known groundwater elevation.
(3) The lowest floor elevation established at the time of plat or
development approval and on file in the City and/or County Drain or
Water Resources Commissioner.
(c) A waiver from elevations stated in Subsection (a) of this section may be
granted by the City following receipt of a certification from a registered
professional engineer demonstrating that the proposed elevation does
not pose a risk of flooding. Floodproofing measures must be in
accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletins and Michigan Building
Codes.
(d) Land survey and elevation certificate. If the City and/or County Drain or
Water Resources Commissioner has specified a minimum building
opening at the time of plat or development approval, or if construction
occurs within the 100-year floodplain pursuant to Sections 39-370
through 39-378, upon completion of construction of the structure's
foundation and/or slab on grade, a registered land surveyor shall certify
any minimum building opening elevation specified by this article. This
certificate shall attest that the building opening elevation complies with
the standards of this article. The permittee for the building permit shall
submit the certificate to the City building inspections official prior to
the commencement of framing and/or structural steel placement. If the
surveyor should find that the minimum building opening elevation is
below the elevation specified in Subsection (a) of this section, that
opening must be raised using a method that meets with the approval of
the City. After reconstruction, a registered land surveyor or engineer
shall recertify that the minimum building opening elevation complies
with the standards of this article prior to the commencement of framing
and/or structural steel placement.
(e) Waiver of land survey. The City Building Inspection Official may grant a
waiver of the required land survey under Subsection (c) of this section if
the minimum building opening appears to be at or above the elevation
of adjacent buildings that have already been certified, or if a grade map
shows that the low opening elevation of the building is at least three
feet higher than the minimum building opening established pursuant to
Subsection (a) of this section.
72.Editor's Note: Article X, Flood Damage Prevention, of Ch. 39, Zoning, was repealed
11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1572. See now Ch. 6, Buildings, Art. V, Floodplain Management
Provisions.
Sec. 29-116 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-117
C:646
(a) All persons who cause, in whole or in part, any earth change to occur
shall provide soil erosion and sedimentation control so as to adequately
prevent soils from being eroded and discharged or deposited onto
adjacent properties or into a stormwater drainage system, a public
street or right-of-way, wetland, creek, stream, water body, or floodplain.
(b) Prior to making any earth change on a development site regulated by
this article, the property owner or developer shall first obtain a soil
erosion and sedimentation control permit from the County Enforcing
Agency issued in accordance with Part 91 of Public Act 451 of 1994
(MCLA § 324.9101 et seq.), if one is required.
(c) A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit is required for any
earth change that is greater than one acre or less than 500 feet from
any lake or stream. Permits are obtained from the County Enforcing
Agency.
(d) The property owner and other persons causing or participating in the
earth change shall comply with the terms of the soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit.
(e) During earth change activities on the development site, the City
Engineer may inspect the site to ensure compliance with the approved
construction site runoff controls.
(f) During any earth change which exposes soil to an increased risk of
erosion or sediment tracking, the property owner and other persons
causing or participating in the earth change shall do the following:
(1) Comply with the stormwater management standards of this article.
(2) Prevent damage to any public utilities or services within the limits
of grading and within any routes of travel or areas of work of
construction equipment.
(3) Prevent damage to or impairment of any water body on or near the
location of the earth change or affected thereby.
(4) Prevent damage to adjacent or nearby land.
(5) Maintain all required soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures, including, but not limited to, measures required for
compliance with the terms of this article.
(6) Promptly remove all soil, sediment, debris, or other materials
applied, dumped, tracked, or otherwise deposited on any lands,
public streets, sidewalks, or other public ways or facilities,
including catch basins, storm sewers, ditches, drainage swales, or
water bodies. Removal of all such soil, sediment, debris or other
materials within 24 hours shall be considered prima facie
compliance with this requirement, unless such materials present
an immediate hazard to public health and safety.
Sec. 29-117 CHARTER Sec. 29-117
C:647
Sec. 29-118. through Sec. 29-124. (Reserved)
(7) Refrain from grading lands at locations near or adjoining lands,
public streets, sidewalks, alleys, or other public or private property
without providing adequate support or other measures so as to
protect such other lands, streets, sidewalks or other property from
settling, cracking or sustaining other damage.
Sec. 29-117 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-118
C:648
DIVISION 4
Prohibitions and Exemptions
Sec. 29-125. Prohibited discharges. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-126. Exempted discharges. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
The following non-stormwater discharges shall be permissible, provided
that they do not result in a violation of state water quality standards or
Section 29-125(a)(3):
(a) Prohibition of illicit discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the City's
stormwater drainage system or waterbodies any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than stormwater, or an exempted discharge
pursuant to Sections 29-7 and 29-126, or discharges specified in
writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary
to protect public health and safety.
(2) The City is authorized to require dischargers to implement
pollution prevention measures, utilizing BMPs, necessary to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the City's
stormwater drainage system.
(3) No water shall be discharged in a manner that causes it to run over
the City sidewalk, over the street or over neighboring properties.
Pursuant to Section 29-49(a)(3), all unpolluted water shall be
discharged onto the person's private property to soak into the
ground, into a dry well, or through a direct connection to the City
storm sewer system upon issuance of a permit by the City.
(b) Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying wastewater to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
(a) Water supply line flushing;
(b) Landscape irrigation;
(c) Diverted stream flows;
Sec. 29-125 CHARTER Sec. 29-126
C:649
Sec. 29-127. Interference with natural or artificial drains.
[11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
(d) Rising groundwater;
(e) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
(f) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(g) Discharges from potable water sources;
(h) Foundation drains;
(i) Air conditioning condensate;
(j) Individual residential car washing;
(k) Dechlorinated swimming pool water;
(l) Street wash water;
(m) Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities; and
(n) Discharges for which a specific federal or state permit has been issued.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave, alter
the course of, or otherwise interfere with, any natural or constructed
drain or drainageway without first submitting a drainage plan to the
City and receiving approval of that plan. Any deviation from the
approved plan is a violation of this article. This section shall not
prohibit, however, necessary emergency action so as to prevent or
mitigate drainage that would be injurious to the environment or the
public health, safety, or welfare. When any of the activities mentioned in
this section involves an established county drain, a drain use permit is
required from the County Drain or Water Resources Commissioner.
(b) No filling, blocking, fencing or above-surface vegetation planting shall
take place within a floodplain/floodway.
(c) For an overland flow-way:
(1) Silt fence shall not be permitted below the top of the bank of a
water body.
(2) Chain-link fences shall be permitted if the City determines that the
fence will not obstruct or divert the flow of water.
(3) If a fence is removed by the City or the County Drain or Water
Resources Commissioner for drain access or drain maintenance,
the fence shall be replaced by the owner of the fence at the owner's
expense, as long as the owner complies with Subsection (c)(2) of
this section.
Sec. 29-126 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-127
C:650
Sec. 29-128. Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in
drainageway. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store
or stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials unless
adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent
any such materials from entering a drainageway.
Sec. 29-129. through Sec. 29-135. (Reserved)
(4) No shrubs or trees shall be planted below the top of the bank of a
water body, or within an easement for a waterway (for example, a
backyard swale).
(d) Shrubs, trees or other above-ground vegetation shall not be planted
over the top of an underground storm sewer or over the top of the
easement within which the storm sewer has been installed.
Sec. 29-127 CHARTER Sec. 29-129
C:651

DIVISION 5
Inspection, Monitoring, Reporting and Recordkeeping
Sec. 29-136. Inspection and sampling. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
To ensure compliance with the standards in this pervasively regulated area,
the City may inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater
management facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the
requirements of this article. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the
City's properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the
discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or
sampling. The City shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice
of such inspection and/or sampling. The City or its properly identified
representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or
devices used for such sampling or inspection.
Sec. 29-137. Stormwater monitoring facilities. [11-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 1753]
A discharger of stormwater runoff shall provide and operate equipment
or devices for the monitoring of stormwater runoff, so as to provide for
inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water
body or a stormwater runoff facility, when directed in writing to do so by
the City. The City may require a discharger to provide and operate such
equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine
whether adverse effects from or as a result of such discharges may occur.
All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
Sec. 29-138. Accidental discharges. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
(a) Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a water body any
substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall
immediately inform the City concerning the discharge. If such
information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge
shall be filed with the City within five days. The written report shall
specify:
(1) The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof.
(2) The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge.
(3) All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any
recurrence.
(4) The name and telephone number of the person making the report,
and the name of a person who may be contacted for additional
Sec. 29-136 CHARTER Sec. 29-138
C:653
Sec. 29-139. Recordkeeping requirement. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
Any person subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less
than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents,
memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on
magnetic or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records,
relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or
stormwater runoff from any property.
Sec. 29-140. through Sec. 29-146. (Reserved)
information on the matter. A properly reported accidental
discharge shall be an affirmative defense to a civil infraction
proceeding brought under this article against a discharger for such
discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal action
brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to
obtain other relief as a result of or arising out of the discharge.
A discharge shall be considered properly reported only if the
discharger complies with all the requirements of Subsection (a) of
this section.
Sec. 29-138 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-140
C:654
DIVISION 6
Enforcement
Sec. 29-147. Sanctions for violation. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-148. Stop-work order. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or in
part, a violation of any provision of this article, the City is authorized to
issue a stop-work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations
or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop-work order is directed, or
who are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stopwork
order, shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The City may also
undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective
measures so as to prevent violations of this article or to avoid or reduce
(a) Any person violating any provision of this article other than Sections
29-117, 29-125 and 29-127, and except as provided in Subsection (b) of
this section, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
subject to a fine of not less than $500 for a first offense, and not less
than $1,000 for a subsequent offense, plus costs, damages, expenses,
and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87 of the Revised
Judicature Act of 196173 and other applicable laws, including, without
limitation, equitable relief. Each day such violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed a separate offense and shall make the violator liable for
the imposition of a fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided
for in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies
provided by law. An admission or determination of responsibility shall
not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this
article.
(b) For purposes of this section, "subsequent offense" means a violation of
the provisions of this article committed by the same person within 12
months of a previous violation of the same provision of this article for
which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be
responsible.
(c) Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop-work order
issued under Section 29-148 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment, and such person shall also pay such costs as
may be imposed in the discretion of the court.
(d) Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this article shall
be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
(e) A person who violates Section 29-117, 29-125 or 29-127 shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, subject to penalties set forth in Section 1-10.
73.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.101 et seq.
Sec. 29-147 CHARTER Sec. 29-148
C:655
the effects of noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective
measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon
which the work was performed.
Sec. 29-149. Failure to comply. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with
the provisions of this article, the City may, after the giving of reasonable
notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and
the owner shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the City for all costs of
such work.
Sec. 29-150. Emergency measures. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to
protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury
or damage to property, the City is authorized to carry out or arrange for
all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the
cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this
article and shall promptly reimburse the City for all of such costs.
Sec. 29-151. Cost recovery for damage to stormwater drainage
system. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City as the result
of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes
damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of the provisions of this
article. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the
EPA or DEQ for violation of an NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other costs
and expenses.
Sec. 29-152. Collection of costs; lien. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Costs incurred by the City pursuant to Sections 29-148, 29-149, 29-150,
29-151 and 29-164, shall be a lien on the premises which shall be
enforceable in accordance with the Revenue Bond Act, Public Act 94 of 1933
(MCLA § 141.101 et seq.). Any such charges which are delinquent for six
months or more may be certified annually to the City Treasurer, who shall
enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises, and the costs shall
be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided
for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of
a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the
City shall have all remedies authorized by such Act.
Sec. 29-153. Appeals. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Any person to whom any provision of this article has been applied may
appeal in writing, not later than 30 days after the action or decision being
appealed from, to the City Council the action or decision whereby any
such provision was so applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter being
appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The City Council shall consider
Sec. 29-148 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-153
C:656
the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the
action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the City Council
may consider the recommendations of the City Engineer and the comments
of other persons having knowledge of the matter. In considering any such
appeal, the City Council may grant a variance from the terms of this article
so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed,
but only upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied:
Sec. 29-154. Suspension of MS4 access. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
Sec. 29-155. Tracking enforcement. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
The City shall implement a method for tracking instances of noncompliance.
The tracking procedure shall ensure that detailed information about
noncompliance and follow up enforcement action is adequately
documented, including at a minimum:
(a) The application of the article provisions being appealed will present or
cause practical difficulties for a development or development site;
provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need
for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to
comply with the article; and
(b) The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent the
goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by this article, nor result
in less effective management of stormwater runoff.
(a) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to
the MS4. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in
an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or the environment, or to
minimize danger to the health or welfare of persons.
(b) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have the person's
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of the violator's MS4 access. A person commits an offense if
the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this section, without the prior approval of the City.
(a) Name of the person responsible for violating the article.
(b) Date and location of violation.
(c) Description of the violation, including how the violation was identified.
Sec. 29-153 CHARTER Sec. 29-155
C:657
Sec. 29-156. through Sec. 29-161. (Reserved)
(d) Description of the enforcement response.
(e) Schedule for returning to compliance.
(f) Date the violation was resolved.
Sec. 29-155 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-156
C:658
DIVISION 7
Stormwater Easements and Maintenance Agreements
Sec. 29-162. Applicability of requirements. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
The requirements of this division concerning stormwater easements and
maintenance agreements shall apply to all persons required to submit a
drainage plan to the City for review and approval.
Sec. 29-163. Stormwater easements. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
The developer shall provide all stormwater easements necessary to
implement the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this
article in form and substance required by the City, and shall record such
easements as directed by the City. The easements shall ensure access for
proper inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities
and shall provide adequate emergency overland flow-ways. Easements for
private stormwater management systems shall be conveyed by each
landowner to the entity responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater management system. The City will not accept easements over
private stormwater management systems.
Sec. 29-164. Maintenance agreements. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
(a) Maintenance agreement required. The developer shall provide all
stormwater maintenance agreements necessary to implement the
approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this article in
form and substance as required by the City. The maintenance
agreement shall be signed and submitted to the City for review and
approval at the time application for a stormwater permit is made. After
construction of the stormwater management system has been verified
and approved or accepted by the City, the developer shall execute a
final maintenance agreement with the City, record such agreements
with the County Register of Deeds, and provide a copy of the recorded
document to the City. The City reserves the right to require the
maintenance agreement be recorded prior to issuance of a stormwater
permit.
(b) Maintenance agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall,
among other matters, ensure access for proper inspection by the City or
its designee, allow for maintenance or corrective actions of stormwater
BMPs, and include provisions for the tracking of maintenance activities,
and transfer of operation and maintenance responsibility to ensure the
performance standards are met in perpetuity.
(1) Maintenance plan. The maintenance agreement shall include a
maintenance plan and schedule for routine, emergency and longterm
maintenance of all structural and vegetative stormwater
BMPs installed and implemented to meet the performance
Sec. 29-162 CHARTER Sec. 29-164
C:659
Sec. 29-165. Prohibition of orphan drains. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1753]
Prior to issuance of a stormwater permit, all stormwater management
systems must have a single entity responsible for long-term operation and
maintenance. The City will not approve an orphan drainage system serving
multiple landowners without recorded stormwater easements and
maintenance agreements.
standards, with a detailed annual estimated budget for the initial
three years, and a clear statement that only future maintenance
activities in accordance with the maintenance plan shall be
permitted without the necessity of securing new permits.
(2) Maintenance documentation. Written notice and submittal of
maintenance documentation shall be provided to the City by the
property owner at the interval set forth in the maintenance
agreement and subject to the provisions of Sections 29-136
through 29-153.
(3) Failure to perform maintenance. If it has been found by the City,
following notice and an opportunity to be heard by the property
owner, that there has been a material failure or refusal to
undertake maintenance as required under this article and/or as
required in the approved maintenance agreement as required
hereunder, the City shall then be authorized, but not required, to
hire an entity with qualifications and experience in the subject
matter to undertake the monitoring and maintenance as so
required, in which event the property owner shall be obligated to
advance or reimburse payment for all costs and expenses
associated with such monitoring and maintenance, together with a
reasonable administrative fee. The maintenance agreement
required under this article shall contain a provision spelling out the
requirements; and if the applicant objects in any respect to such
provision or the underlying rights and obligations, such objection
shall be resolved prior to the commencement of construction of the
proposed development on the property. If the property owner fails
to pay the costs incurred by the City under this section, the costs
shall be a lien on the property and enforced as provided in Section
29-152.
(c) Tracking operation and maintenance. The City shall implement a
tracking system to include procedures for filing and retrieval of all
recorded maintenance agreements, maintenance plans, and
stormwater management system maps to document location and ages
of stormwater BMPs. The City shall also track annual inspection reports
required to be submitted from the developer, and any inspection
conducted by the City to document condition of stormwater BMPs and
maintenance performed.
Sec. 29-164 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-166
C:660
Sec. 29-166. through Sec. 29-172. (Reserved)
Sec. 29-166 CHARTER Sec. 29-166
C:661

DIVISION 8
Performance and Design Standards
Sec. 29-173. Resolution to implement performance and design
standards. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
The City Council may adopt a resolution establishing detailed design and
performance standards for stormwater management facilities, consistent
with the terms of this article, and in order to further implement the goals
and purposes set forth in this article. Amendments to the design and
performance standards must be approved by the City Council.
Sec. 29-174. Performance standards. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
In order to achieve the goals and purposes of this article, sites shall meet
the stormwater management performance standards for water quality
treatment, channel protection, flood control, and other site-specific
standards as published in the City Stormwater Standards.
Sec. 29-175. Alternatives for meeting performance standards.
[11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Sec. 29-176. Design standards. [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
Stormwater BMPs shall be designed to meet the performance standards as
described in § 29-174. Stormwater management system design shall be in
accordance with the City Stormwater Standards.
Sec. 29-177. Responsibility to implement best management
practices (BMPs). [11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1753]
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at the owner's or operator's own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
City's stormwater drainage system or waterbodies through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is or may be the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance
with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater
(a) The City may establish programs and procedures for alternative means
to meet the channel protection performance standard if on-site
retention is determined to be not feasible.
(b) Requirements for programs and procedures (if any) adopted by the City
are given in the City Stormwater Standards.
Sec. 29-173 CHARTER Sec. 29-177
C:663
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
Sec. 29-177 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 29-177
C:664
Chapter 30
SMOKE CONTROL
Sec. 30-1. Definitions. [Code 1955, § 3-2.1.]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DUST — Gas and airborne particles larger than one micron in mean
diameter.
DUST SEPARATING EQUIPMENT — Any device for separating dust from
the gas medium in which it is carried.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, incinerator, refuse-burning
equipment, boiler, apparatus, device, mechanism, stack or structure used
in the process of burning fuel or combustible material, excepting cooking
stoves or ranges, service water heaters, room or space heaters that use gas,
kerosene or gasoline as fuel, and such equipment as is covered by this Code.
FUMES — Gases or vapors that are of such character as to create an
unclean, destructive, offensive or unhealthful condition.
INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE — An engine in which combustion of
a gaseous, liquid or pulverized solid fuel takes place within one or more
cylinders.
OPEN FIRE — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into
the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — The Ringelmann Chart, with instructions
for use, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines.
SMOKE — Small gas and air-borne particles consisting essentially of
carbonaceous material in sufficient number to be observable.
SMOKE REGULATION OFFICER — The Director of the Department of
Environmental Health of the City or his authorized assistant or deputy.
SOOT — Agglomerated particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material.
STACK OR CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening arranged for emitting
air containing dust and gases containing dust or smoke into the open air.
Sec. 30-2. Smoke regulation officer—enforcement of chapter; advice
and assistance from Chiefs of Fire and Police Departments. [Code
1955, § 3-2.2.]
The smoke regulation officer shall carry out and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. In carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the smoke regulation officer shall be privileged to call upon the Chief of the
Fire Department and the Chief of the Police Department and to receive from
Sec. 29-177 CHARTER Sec. 30-2
C:665
them such advice and assistance as may be within their respective powers
and functions to render.
Sec. 30-3. Same—Duties generally. [Code 1955, § 3-2.3.]
To secure the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the smoke
regulation officer shall perform the following duties:
Sec. 30-4. Same—Interference with, etc.; right of entry. [Code 1955,
§ 3-2.6.]
No person shall in any manner hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent or
in any way interfere or attempt to interfere with the smoke regulation
officer, his assistant or deputy, or any of his or their subordinates, in the
performance of any duty imposed or required of them by this chapter,
or, after proper identification, refuse to permit such persons to perform
their duty by refusing them, or any of them, entrance to the premises at
reasonable hours.
Sec. 30-5. Inspection, notice and order to correct, etc., defective
equipment. [Code 1955, § 3-2.4.]
If, upon inspection, it is found that any fuel burning equipment is in such
condition that it cannot be operated within the provisions of the chapter, the
smoke regulation officer shall give notice in writing to the person owning,
operating or in charge of such equipment of the defects found and an order
to correct, repair or replace the defective equipment. Failure to comply with
this order within 30 days from its date shall be a violation of this section.
Sec. 30-6. Prohibited emissions; standards; exceptions. [Code 1955,
§ 3-2.5.]
No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be emitted into the open air from
any fuel-burning equipment, internal combustion engine, premises or open
fire, smoke the shade or appearance of which is equal to or darker than No.
2 of the Ringelmann chart excepting:
(a) The investigation of complaints and the making of inspections and
observations of smoke conditions; and
(b) The keeping of a record of all violations and complaints and the
disposition thereof.
(a) Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker
than No. 2 of the Ringelmann chart for one or more periods aggregating
four minutes in any 30 minutes;
(b) When building a new fire, or blowing down or cleaning flues, or when
break-down of equipment occurs such as to make it evident that the
emission was not reasonably preventable, smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is equal to but not darker than No. 3 of the
Ringelmann chart for one or more periods aggregating three minutes in
Sec. 30-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 30-6
C:666
Sec. 30-7. Emissions to be visible to operators. [Code 1955, § 3-2.8.]
Each person who shall be the owner, agent or lessee of fuel-burning
equipment, except such as use gas fuel only, and except coal-burning boilers
of not to exceed 20 horsepower rating or of 2,500 square feet, or less,
of equivalent direct radiation, shall provide means whereby the fireman,
engineer or other person firing the fuel-burning equipment may be enabled
to know, without leaving the boiler or furnace room, whether smoke is being
emitted contrary to the provisions of this chapter, so that the necessary
corrections in firing may be made promptly.
Sec. 30-8. Persons liable under chapter. [Code 1955, § 3-2.7.]
Each person owning, operating or in charge or control of any equipment,
who shall cause or permit or participate in any violation of this chapter,
either as proprietor, owner, lessee, tenant, manager, superintendent,
constructor, installer, mechanic, repairman, captain, janitor, engineer,
fireman or otherwise, shall be individually and collectively liable for any
penalties resulting from a violation of this chapter.
Sec. 30-9. Violations and penalties—generally.
Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, and shall be
any 15 minutes; provided, that wherever possible flues shall be blown
down or cleaned during the nighttime.
For the purpose of grading the shade or appearance of smoke, the
Ringelmann chart as now published and used by the United States
Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of the chapter by
reference, shall be the standard.
No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be emitted into the open air
from any fuel-burning equipment or premises or to pass a convenient
measuring point nearest to the stack outlet, dust in the gases to exceed
eighty-five hundredths pound per one thousand pounds of gases,
adjusted to 50% excess air for products of combustion; except, that
for fuel-burning equipment constructed or installed subsequent the
effective date of this chapter, special dust-separating equipment with
up to 85% efficiency may be required, and that for fuel-burning
equipment constructed or installed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, special dust-separating equipment with up to 75% efficiency
may be required. The limitations given shall be waived during periods
when break-down of equipment occurs such as to make it evident
that the emission was not reasonably preventable. The amount of
solids in the gases shall be determined according to the Test Code
for Dust-Separating Apparatus of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, revised and amended to the date of the adoption of this
chapter, which is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference.
Sec. 30-6 CHARTER Sec. 30-9
C:667
subject to the nuisance proceedings referred to in Section 1-10, where
applicable.
Sec. 30-10. Same—Certain violations constitute nuisances per se.
[Code 1955, § 3-2.9.]
Every violation of the provisions of this chapter in respect to the emission
of smoke, soot, dust or fumes shall constitute a nuisance per se.
Chapter 31
SOLICITATIONS
Sec. 31-1. "Solicit" defined. [Code 1955, § 3-5.1.]
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "solicit" shall have its commonly
accepted meaning and shall include oral and written requests and shall
apply to direct and indirect solicitation.
Sec. 31-2. License—required; exceptions. [Code 1955, § 3-5.2.]
No person shall solicit any funds or assistance for any purposes other
than those prohibited by Section 31-6, unless such person shall have first
obtained a license to do so; provided, that the prohibition herein contained
shall not apply to the solicitation of funds or contributions by
representatives of an organization from its own members.
Sec. 31-3. Same—Applications generally; standards for granting
license; applicability of Chapter 17. [Code 1955, § 3-5.2.]
(a) To whom application made; form. Each application for a license to
solicit within the City shall be made to the City Clerk, on forms provided
by him.
(b) Applications from national, state, City, etc., organizations. In the case of
national, state, regional and City organizations which propose to solicit
on an organized basis, the application for a license to solicit shall be
made by the promoter or other person or agent designated by such
organization, who shall file with the City Clerk proof of his appointment
or designation as the promoter or agent of such organization for the
purpose of soliciting in the City.
(c) Submission of applications to Council; standards for granting license.
Applications for licenses to solicit upon the streets or other public
places of the City shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the Council not
later than its next regular meeting. The Council shall grant any such
license upon a showing in the application filed that the proposed
solicitation is for a religious, charitable, philanthropic, health,
benevolent, educational or cultural purpose, that not more than 15% of
the gross amount to be collected under the provisions of the license
applied for will be paid to or retained by the collector thereof or will be
Sec. 30-9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 31-3
C:668
Sec. 31-4. Same—Contents of application. [Code 1955, § 3-5.3.]
The application forms provided by the City Clerk under the provisions of
this chapter shall be designed to show, among other things, the identity
of the person or organization making application for a license to solicit,
the purpose or object to which funds collected by the solicitation will be
devoted, the name of the local person in charge of or responsible for the
solicitation on behalf of an organization, the amount which will be retained
by or paid to such person and his subordinate collectors out of any funds
collected by the solicitation, and the percentage of all funds collected which
will be used or are estimated to be used to defray the cost of solicitation
and collection. The City Clerk may also require of any applicant such other
information as he deems pertinent for the purpose of determining the bona
fide nature of the application and the object or purpose for which the
proposed solicitation is intended. Such additional information may include
financial statements.
Sec. 31-5. Identification of solicitors. [Code 1955, § 3-5.4.]
Each individual licensee under the provisions of this chapter and each
person charge of or responsible for solicitation on behalf of an organization,
under the requirements of Section 31-2, shall be identified by the license
issued to him. Each such person shall furnish to his subordinate solicitors
adequate identification to be approved by the City Clerk. No person shall
solicit without such identification, nor shall any solicitor fail to show his
identification upon request by any police officer or any person from whom
solicitation is made.
Sec. 31-6. Soliciting funds, alms, etc., for personal use prohibited;
soliciting during Tulip Time week prohibited. [Code 1955, § 3-5.1;
Ord. No. 799.]
No person shall solicit funds, alms, aid, assistance or support for himself
nor shall a license be issued to solicit funds during the week of the annual
Tulip Time Festival held each year during the month of May.
Chapter 32
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
paid to defray the cost of collection, and that the object of, or the
conduct of, the solicitation will not be a fraud upon the public.
(d) Soliciting on private premises. In each case of an application for a
license to solicit upon private premises within the City, the City Clerk
shall grant a license to solicit upon the same showing as is set forth for
the granting of a license by the Council.
(e) Applicability of Chapter 17. The application for, granting of, expiration
of and the suspension and revocation of licenses to solicit shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.
Sec. 31-3 CHARTER Sec. 31-6
C:669

ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 32-1. Placing merchandise, material or signs or engaging in
commercial activity upon streets, etc. [Code 1955, § 5-1.7; Ord. No.
452; Ord. No. 1530, 3-4-2009]
No person shall place any merchandise, material or sign upon, or engage in
commercial activity upon, any sidewalk, street or alley; provided, however,
that:
Sec. 32-2. Driving, etc., upon new pavement, etc., moving, defacing,
signs, barriers, etc. [Code 1955, § 5-1.13]
(a) The City Manager may issue a written permit which shall be valid for a
period of not more than 90 days allowing the temporary storage of a
reasonable quantity of building and construction materials thereon,
which permit shall impose such limitations and requirements as shall
protect the safety and general welfare of the public. Before a permit is
issued, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as established by resolution
of the City Council.
(b) Upon application, the Council of the City may, in its discretion, allow a
temporary commercial use of streets, alleys or sidewalks if it
determines that the proposed use will not unduly interfere with the
public use thereof. If such proposed use be granted, the Council shall
impose such conditions and requirements to such use as are
appropriate to safeguard the public health and safety, to assure needed
passage area for pedestrians or vehicles, or both, and to prevent the
creation of a public nuisance. The right to exercise any such
commercial use of a public street, alley or sidewalk may be terminated
forthwith by the Council without notice or hearing thereon.
(c) For purposes of this chapter, the occupant of adjacent property, or in
the case of unoccupied property, the owner shall be rebuttably
presumed to be the owner of the material or commercial activity for any
enforcement activities or violations of this chapter.
(a) No person shall go upon, drive or cause to be driven any animal or
vehicle on any new pavement, sidewalk, curbing, gutter or other
construction work until the same has been completed and any street
closing sign or barricade posted or placed thereon has been removed by
the proper City officer or employee or other person who is responsible
for such construction.
(b) No unauthorized person shall move, alter, deface, injure or destroy any
part of accessory of any street or alley or any sign or barricade erected
or placed to protect, warn or guide the public.
Sec. 32-1 CHARTER Sec. 32-3
C:671
Sec. 32-3. Encroachments generally. [Code 1955, § 5-1.8; Ord. No.
1530, 3-4-2009]
If any building, fence or other structure, or any tree, hedge or shrub shall
extend near to or in any manner encroach upon any part of any street,
alley or sidewalk so as to interfere with the public safety or convenience,
the enforcing officer shall serve notice upon the owner or occupant of
the premises where such encroachment exists, or if the premises are
unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by posting such notice in
a conspicuous place upon the premises, specifying the extent and location
of such encroachment and requiring the owner or occupant to remove the
same within 30 days. Refusal or failure to comply with such notice shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Code.
Sec. 32-4. Suspending object over streets, etc. [Code 1955,
§ 5-1.14]
No person shall suspend anything over any sidewalk or street area unless
expressly authorized in this code.
Sec. 32-4.1. City event signs. [Ord. No. 1429, 10-19-2005]
The City, including all of its departments, the Mainstreet/Downtown
Development Authority (the "DDA"), and the Downtown Principal Shopping
District (the "PSD") are authorized to place a sign in the street or on the
sidewalk for advertising or identifying an event of the City, the DDA, or the
PSD upon administrative approval of the City Manager. The request shall
include all information that is required by the City Manager. A request for
approval of the sign shall be made to the City Manager at least 10 days
before the event.
Sec. 32-4.2. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1530, § 32-51,
3-4-200974]
A person who violates or fails to comply with Sections 32-1, 32-3, 32-4, 32-5,
32-11, 32-12 or 32-15 of this chapter is responsible for a Class II municipal
civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of fees
and charges in Section 2-118 of this Code or any other relief that may be
imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally added this material as Section 32-51. As a Section
32-51 already existed, the material was added as Section 32-4.2.
Sec. 32-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-4.2
C:672
ARTICLE II
Street Cuts And Excavations
Sec. 32-5. Permit—required. [Code 1955, § 5-1.11]
No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street,
alley or public place without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer.
Sec. 32-6. Same—Insurance prerequisite to granting permit; permit
fee. [Code 1955, § 5-1.11; Ord. No. 995, 1-3-1990; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992; Ord. No. 1530, 3-4-2009]
Sec. 32-7. Excavation of paved street, etc., within two years of
paving or thereafter. [Code 1955, § 5-1.11]
No person shall make any opening or excavation in or under a paved
street or alley within a period of two years after completion of any paving
or resurfacing thereof. If the public safety or welfare requires immediate
action, the City Manager may suspend operation of this provision. The City
Engineer may refuse the granting of a permit following the expiration of
such two-year period if he deems that the opening or excavation applied
for is unnecessary or could be reasonably avoided. Appeal may be had to
the Council with respect to any decision of the City Manager or the City
Engineer concerning the enforcement of the prohibition of this section. The
decision of the Council on such appeal shall be final.
(a) Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall present evidence
satisfactory to the City that public liability and property damage
insurance has been obtained under which the applicant and the City are
both insured with respect to any personal injury, death or property
damage arising out of any act done or negligence committed while
acting under any permit, whether such act or negligence be of the
licensee, subcontractors of the licensee, or any other person who may
be performing any act related to the authority granted by such permit.
Such insurance shall be in the amount specified in the resolution on
fees and insurance periodically adopted by City Council from an insurer
authorized or licensed to do business in Michigan by the Commissioner
of insurance and approved by the City. Every policy of insurance
required by this section shall bear an endorsement to the effect that the
insurer shall notify the licensee and the City in writing at least 10 days
prior to reductions in coverage or the expiration or cancellation of such
policy.
(b) Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as
established by resolution of City Council.
Sec. 32-5 CHARTER Sec. 32-8
C:673
Sec. 32-8. Notice to property owner to make gas and sewer
connections prior to paving. [Code 1955, § 5-1.11]
Before any street within the City is paved, it shall be the duty of the
City Engineer to serve a written notice upon each owner of the premises
abutting on such street, as shown by the City tax roll, requiring him, within
30 days from the date of such notice, to make all necessary gas and sewer
connections that may be laid in such street.
Sec. 32-9. (Reserved)75
75.Editor's Note: Former Section 32-9, which pertained to insurance requirements, adopted
as § 5-1.12 of the 1955 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 426 and 1-3-1990 by Ord. No. 995,
was repealed 3-4-2009 by Ord. No. 1530.
Sec. 32-8 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-9
C:674
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks, Curbs And Driveways
DIVISION 1
Generally
Sec. 32-10. Sidewalk openings. [Code 1955, § 5-1.9]
Sec. 32-11. Snow, ice, obstructions, rubbish, etc., on sidewalks.
[Code 1955, § 5-1.6]
No person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any house,
building or lot shall permit any snow, ice, dirt, rubbish, including broken
bottles and glass, filth, obstruction or other articles or any nuisance to
remain upon any sidewalks in front of such house, building or lot for longer
than 24 hours; and when ice is formed on any sidewalk, the owner or
occupant of the abutting premises shall, within 12 hours after the same has
formed, cause the same to be removed or cause salt, sawdust, sand or other
abrasive to be strewn thereon.
Sec. 32-12. Curb cuts for driveways. [Code 1955, § 5-1.10; Ord. No.
426, § 1; Ord. No. 1225, 10-7-1998; Ord. No. 1530, 3-4-2009;
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1720]
(a) No person shall maintain, use or operate any trapdoor, coal hole or
other sidewalk unless the doors or covers for such opening shall be of
metal or reinforced concrete with nonslipping wearing surface and
unless the surfaces thereto shall be flat with the surface of sidewalk,
and shall present no hazard to traffic.
(b) No coal hole, trapdoor or other sidewalk opening shall be allowed to
remain open, except when actually in use.
(c) When any coal hole, trapdoor or other sidewalk opening is open, such
opening shall be protected by guards, not less than 32 inches in height
and fully protecting all sides of the opening; provided, however, that the
guard on the loading side may be removed therefrom during the period
of loading and unloading.
(a) Permit required. No person shall make any opening in or through any
curb in any street, alley or public place without first obtaining a written
permit in accordance with this chapter from the City Engineer.
(b) Requirements generally. No permits shall be issued, except upon
approval of the Council, for any curb cut serving as an approach to any
service driveway across any curb, sidewalk or public property which
does not comply with the requirements of Chapter 39, and those set
forth in Subsection (b)(1) through (9).
(1) When the frontage of any premises does not exceed 40 feet in
width, there may be constructed one service driveway only, and
Sec. 32-10 CHARTER Sec. 32-12
C:675
such driveway shall not exceed 10 feet in width which shall be in
compliance with Subsection (b).
(2) When the frontage of any premises exceeds 40 feet in width, but
does not exceed 50 feet in width, there may be constructed one
service driveway which does not exceed 20 feet in width or two
service driveways, when allowed by Chapter 39, each of which does
not exceed 10 feet in width, which shall be in compliance with
Subsection (b)(4).
(3) When the frontage of any premises exceeds 50 feet in width but
does not exceed 100 feet in width, there may be constructed two
service driveways when allowed by Chapter 39, each of which does
not exceed 20 feet in width, three service driveways when allowed
by Chapter 39, each of which does not exceed 10 feet in width, or
one service driveway which does not exceed 20 feet width, and one
which does not exceed 10 feet in width, and all of such driveways
shall be in compliance with Subsection (b)(4).
(4) Not less than 18 feet of straight curb shall separate two curb cuts
under one ownership.
(5) In case any one owner shall own nonresidential premises with a
frontage in excess of 100 feet, each 100 feet, or fraction thereof,
shall be considered as separate frontage.
(6) No curb cut shall be made within 10 feet of the right-of-way line of
a street intersecting the street upon which the curb cut is made.
(7) The width of curb cuts and service driveways shall be determined
by the City Engineer.
(8) No permanent cut may be made which, in the opinion of the City
Manager, may interfere with the safety of the public.
(9) Width restrictions are measured at the right-of-way line for
purposes of this section. An additional flare of three feet for
residentially used properties, and an additional flare of five feet for
nonresidentially used properties are allowed in addition to the
maximum width at the right-of-way line.
(c) Plans and specifications. No such curb cut shall be made except in
accordance with plans and specification established by the City
Manager.
(d) Residential driveways in the Central Neighborhood District. In addition
to the requirements set forth herein, curb cuts for residential driveways
in the Central Neighborhood District shall comply with Section 39-58 of
Chapter 39 of this Code.
Sec. 32-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-12
C:676
DIVISION 2
Construction, Repair, Etc., Generally
Sec. 32-13. (Reserved)76
Sec. 32-14. (Reserved)77
Sec. 32-15. Permit required to construct or repair any sidewalk,
crosswalk, driveway approach or curb. [Code 1955, § 5-1.3; Ord. No.
1530, 3-4-2009]
No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk, crosswalk, driveway
approach or curb without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as
established by resolution of City Council.
Sec. 32-16. General requirements. [Code 1955, § 5-1.3]
No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk, crosswalk, driveway
approach or curb, except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and
specifications established in this chapter. The City Engineer shall set proper
grade and line stakes for such walks whenever the same shall have been
permitted or ordered.
Sec. 32-17. Specifications for sidewalk construction. [Code 1955,
§ 5-1.5]
All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications on
file in the office of the City Engineer.
Sec. 32-17.1. Construction of residential sidewalks required;
certificate of occupancy; administrative variance. [Ord. No. 1530,
3-4-2009; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1720]
(a) Definitions.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Director of Community and
Neighborhood Services or its authorized representative.
FRONT YARD — The dimension along the front line of the residence and
the right-of-way extending the full width of the lot. On a corner lot, the
narrowest lot dimension along a right-of-way shall be deemed the front
yard.
76.Editor's Note: Former Section 32-13, License–required; application; fee; expiration,
adopted as § 5-1.3 of the 1955 Code, amended by Ord. No. 426 and 3-4-2009 by Ord. No.
1530, was repealed 10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1662.
77.Editor's Note: Former Section 32-14, which pertained to license application requirements,
adopted as § 5-1.2 of the 1955 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 426, 1-3-1990 by Ord. No.
995, and 10-7-1992 by Ord. No. 1069, was repealed 3-4-2009 by Ord. No. 1530.
Sec. 32-13 CHARTER Sec. 32-17.1
C:677
RESIDENCE — A newly constructed building or structure of four
dwelling units or less, constructed and designed for residential
occupancy.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The open, unoccupied space between the traveled
portion of the roadway and the front yard or side yard lot line of the
residence.
SIDE YARD — The dimension along the right-of-way extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. On a corner lot, the widest lot dimension
along a right-of-way shall be deemed the side yard.
SIDEWALK — A path designed for pedestrian or bicycle travel of
Portland cement, brick pavers, or other material being deemed similar
by the City Engineer and constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the City Engineer effective on the date of the issuance
of a building permit for the construction of the residence or other
structure.
(b) Construction of sidewalks; residential requirement; other.
(1) Commencing on August 7, 1991, all residences in the City shall be
constructed with a sidewalk in the right-of-way abutting and
extending the width of the front yard. All residences constructed on
corner lots shall be constructed with a sidewalk in the right-of-way
abutting and extending the width of the front yard and side yard of
the lot of the residence. Sidewalks shall be constructed to extend
and connect adjacent and adjoining sidewalk installations or shall
be installed within the right-of-way as determined by the City
Engineer.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Subsection (b)(1)
hereof, all residential structures containing more than four units,
churches, schools, commercial uses, or any other developments
which are required to install sidewalks as a condition of subdivision
approval, site plan approval, restrictive covenant, or development
agreement, shall construct sidewalks as required at the time of
approval.
(c) Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The enforcing officer shall not
issue a certificate of occupancy unless the residence shall comply with
the provisions of this section. The enforcing officer may issue a
conditional certificate of occupancy if compliance with this section is
rendered reasonably impracticable or impossible by weather, seasonal
construction limitations, or pending construction in the right-of-way.
The duration of a conditional occupancy permit shall not exceed six
months beyond the date of occupancy when issued for weather or
seasonal reasons, nor six months beyond the completion of construction
for other reasons. Occupancy of a residence or structure beyond the
expiration of the conditional occupancy permit shall constitute a
violation of this section.
Sec. 32-17.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-17.1
C:678
(d) Administrative variances. If a property owner clearly demonstrates that
literal enforcement of this section is impractical or will impose undue
hardship in the use of the residence because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his land, the City Manager may permit a variance as he
administratively determines to be reasonable and within the general
purposes of this section and chapter upon application of the criteria set
forth in Subsection (e) hereof. In the event the City Manager
determines to grant the request for variance, the City Manager shall file
a report with the City Council delineating the findings of fact and
conclusions for the grant of variance. The variance shall be effective
within 30 days of the filing of the report by the City Manager unless the
City Council shall reverse the determination of the City Manager.
(e) Criteria for variances; findings; conditions.
(1) City Manager considerations. In making an administrative
determination to grant a variance, the City Manager shall consider
the following:
a. The location of existing sidewalk and its proximity to the
sidewalk to be constructed for the residence;
b. The existence of grades, open ditches, and topographical
features of the lot which would render the construction of
sidewalk impractical or constitute an unreasonable hardship;
c. Special circumstances or conditions, including but not limited
to lot size, configuration, and proximity of inconsistent uses
which would mitigate against the strict application of this
chapter;
d. The anticipated construction of sidewalk by the City, private
property owners, or developers within reasonable proximity of
the residence.
(2) Provisions to grant variance. No variance shall be granted unless
the City Manager finds that:
a. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property of the residence such that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would deprive the owner of the
reasonable use of his land.
b. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant.
c. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to public
health, safety, or general welfare and would not create a
precedent which would prevent the enforcement of the
ordinance for similar conditions or situations in the area in
which the residence is located.
Sec. 32-17.1 CHARTER Sec. 32-17.1
C:679
Sec. 32-18. Construction or relaying of sidewalks upon resolution of
Council. [Code 1955, § 5-1.4; Ord. No. 846]
(3) Conditions. In permitting any such variance, the City Manager may
impose such conditions as shall be necessary to secure the objects
of this section or to preserve the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(4) Recommendation of City Engineer and other staff. In reviewing the
request for a variance, the City Manager may request input and
recommendations from the City Engineer or other departments of
the City.
(5) Denial of variance. Upon the denial of a variance by the City
Manager, an aggrieved party may appeal the denial to the City
Council within 21 days of the date of denial. The City Council shall
conduct a public hearing, at which time the aggrieved party may
present reasonable evidence to support the request for a variance.
The Council shall apply the criteria set forth in Subsection (e)(1)
hereof, and shall grant a variance only upon the findings set forth in
Subsection (e)(2).
(6) Duration of variance. A grant of variance that is not limited by a
specific duration shall be deemed indeterminate in length, but shall
in no instance be considered a permanent waiver of sidewalk
requirements, nor abrogate in any way the right of the City to
order, install, or assess for sidewalks in accordance with other
sections of this Code or Charter upon a determination that
conditions are necessary for the construction of sidewalk in
accordance with public need, health, safety, and general welfare.
(f) Building permits issued after effective date. This section shall apply to
residences or structures constructed pursuant to building permits
issued or renewed after August 28, 1991.
(a) Notice to abutting owners — Generally. Whenever the Council shall, by
resolution, determine that a sidewalk be constructed or relaid, the
Council shall direct the City Clerk to serve notice on the abutting
property owners of the area to be constructed and shall set a date for a
public hearing to review the proposed construction of the public
improvement.
(b) Same—Requirements of notice. The notice required by Subsection (a)
of this section shall designate the following:
(1) The time, date and place of the public hearing where Council shall
determine whether the sidewalk will be constructed or relaid. The
public hearing shall not be scheduled less than 14 days after the
adoption of the resolution by Council specifying the area for the
construction of the proposed public improvement. Notice shall be
Sec. 32-17.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-18
C:680
Sec. 32-19. Repair of sidewalks upon notice of City
Clerk—generally. [Code 1955, § 5-1.4; Ord. No. 846]
Whenever any sidewalk shall require repair, reconstruction or
rehabilitation, the Council shall, by resolution, direct the City Clerk to serve
notice and conduct a public hearing in the same manner as set forth in
Section 32-18, the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference.
Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall, by resolution,
mailed to the abutting property owners not less than 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
(2) The projected cost of construction and the estimated front foot cost
to the abutting property owner.
(3) The right of the abutting property owner to attend the public
hearing and object to the proposed sidewalk construction or the
estimated cost of construction.
For the purposes of this subsection, notice shall be mailed to the
property owner listed on the tax rolls of the City abutting the
public improvement by first class mail.
(c) Public hearing. The Council shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with the rules of the Council. Upon conclusion of the public
hearing, the Council shall, by resolution, determine the necessity of the
construction of the sidewalk and the estimated front foot cost to the
abutting property owner and order that the sidewalks be constructed
by the abutting property owner within 30 days of the public hearing.
The resolution shall further establish the estimated cost, rate of interest
and method of payment by the abutting property owner if the sidewalk
is not constructed in accordance with Subsection (d) of this section.
(d) Duty of abutting property owners; construction, etc., by City Engineer
upon failure of property owner to do so; expense. Every person so
notified shall construct or relay the sidewalk in the manner and within
the time required in the resolution of Council ordering the same, and
under the general supervision and direction of the City Engineer.
In case any sidewalk shall not be constructed or relaid within the time
specified by the Council, or in the manner required by the provisions
of this chapter, the City Engineer shall construct or relay the same,
unless otherwise ordered by the Council, and shall keep an accurate
record of the expense of such construction or relaying, including his
own time, and the amount of such expenses, properly itemized, shall
be reported to the Council, duly verified by the City Manager. Such
report shall also contain a description of the lot or premises upon or in
respect to which the expense was incurred and the name of the owner,
if known, chargeable therewith. The expense of the construction or
relaying of such sidewalk shall be assessed to the owner in the manner
provided in Section 15.19 of the Charter of the City.
Sec. 32-18 CHARTER Sec. 32-19
C:681
determine the necessity of the repair, reconstruction or rehabilitation of
the sidewalk and order that the sidewalk be reconstructed, repaired or
rehabilitated within 30 days of the public hearing.
Sec. 32-20. Same—Repair by City Engineer upon failure of owner to
comply with notice; expense. [Code 1955, § 5-1.4; Ord. No. 846]
If a sidewalk designated by the Council is not repaired, reconstructed or
rehabilitated within the time fixed in the resolution of the Council, the City
Engineer shall proceed to repair, reconstruct or rehabilitate such sidewalk
at the expense of the owner of the abutting lot or premises. The City
Engineer shall maintain an itemized account for all expenses incurred,
which shall be reported to the Council and verified by the City Manager. The
Council shall assess the costs of the repair, restoration and reconstruction
of the sidewalk in the manner set forth in Section 15.20 of the Charter.
Sec. 32-19 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-20
C:682
ARTICLE IV
Numbering Buildings
Sec. 32-21. Required; plan and system generally. [Code 1955,
§ 5-1.1]
All buildings fronting on any street or avenue within the City shall be
numbered, and such numbering shall be in accordance with the following
plan and system, except as otherwise provided by this article:
The City is hereby divided into two districts, with Central Avenue as the
dividing line, and numbering shall run east and west from that avenue.
The numbering on the streets and avenues running north and south and
northerly and southerly shall commence on the north section line of
Sections 29 and 30, Town 5 North, Range 15 West, and run thence south to
Thirty-second Street. A number shall be assigned to every 22 feet frontage
on all streets and avenues, both those running north and south and those
running east and west. The odd numbers shall be given to the north and
east sides of the streets and avenues, and the even numbers to the south
and west sides of the streets and avenues; provided, that the Council may
at any time by resolution exempt from the provisions of this section such
portions of the City for such time as it may deem proper.
Sec. 32-22. Numbers to be reserved for vacant lots, etc. [Code
1955, § 5-1.1]
A number shall be reserved and allowed for every 22 feet of any vacant or
unplatted lot or parcel of land fronting or facing on any street or avenue
within the City.
Sec. 32-23. Numbers to be affixed by owners; size and location of
numbers. [Code 1955, § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 1015, 2-6-1991]
So that emergency service workers such as police, firefighters, and
emergency medical technicians can quickly locate a particular location in
an emergency, the owner, occupant, or agent of each building shall affix
or inscribe the proper address number according to the plan set forth in
Section 32-21 and according to the following rules:
(a) Every building located 50 feet or less from the edge of a public roadway
shall have Arabic numbers not less than three inches high displayed on
the side of the building facing the street to which the address is
assigned. The numbers shall be clearly visible and readable to the
occupants of an emergency service vehicle on the public roadway.
(b) Every building located more than 50 feet but 70 feet or less from the
edge of a public roadway shall display numbers in accordance with
Subsection (1) except that the numbers shall be not less than four
inches in height. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply if the
numbers are also displayed at the street in accordance with Subsection
(d) below.
Sec. 32-21 CHARTER Sec. 32-23
C:683
(c) Every building located more than 70 feet but 90 feet or less from the
edge of a public roadway shall display numbers in accordance with
Subsection (1) except that the numbers shall be not less than five
inches in height. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply if the
numbers are also displayed at the street in accordance with Subsection
(d) below.
(d) Every building located more than 90 feet from the edge of a public
roadway, and/or any building for which the numbers are not clearly
visible and readable to the occupants of an emergency service vehicle
on the public roadway, shall have, in addition to the numbers specified
in Subsection (a), Arabic numbers not less than three inches in height
displayed on a post, or on a regulation United States Postal Service
mailbox, or on a sign, which post, mailbox, or sign shall be located
directly in front of the building on the same side of the public roadway
and not more than 10 feet from the edge of the roadway. The numbers
shall be clearly visible and readable to the occupants of an emergency
service vehicle on the public roadway.
(e) Every multifamily residential apartment complex shall have its assigned
number displayed in accordance with Subsection (d) above. In addition,
each individual building in such a complex shall have Arabic numbers
and/or letters displayed on the side of the building in such a manner as
to be clearly visible and readable to the occupants of an emergency
service vehicle on the public roadway or on the private driveway of the
complex. Further, each individual apartment shall have Arabic numbers
and/or letters not less than three inches high displayed on or near the
front entrance to the apartment.
(f) The color of the Arabic numbers and/or letters shall be in contrast to
the immediate background to which they are affixed or inscribed. The
numbers shall be displayed so as to be readily visible and readable
during normal daylight hours.
(g) The above sections shall be construed to mean that, if the Arabic
numbers and/or letters as specified herein are hidden by an awning,
overhang, or other obstruction, or if the numbers are not clearly visible
and readable to the occupants of an emergency service vehicle on the
public roadway or on the private driveway of a complex, then the owner,
occupant, or agent of the building shall place supplementary Arabic
numbers and/or letters in the manner determined by the enforcing
official to best meet the intent of this article.
(h) Building numbers may be spelled out for decorative purposes; however,
Arabic numbers meeting the intent of this section shall also be
required.
(i) All applicants for building permits for new construction shall be given a
copy of the requirements for numbering buildings, and each such
applicant shall agree to comply with these requirements as a condition
of receiving the permit. A building shall be numbered in accordance
Sec. 32-23 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-23
C:684
Sec. 32-24. Procedure in case of building not properly
numbered—generally; notice. [Code 1955, § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 1015,
2-6-1991]
Whenever the owner, occupant, or agent of a building shall have failed to
affix or inscribe house numbers as provided above, it shall be the duty
of the designated enforcing official to serve or cause to be served on the
owner, occupant, or agent, a written or printed notice instructing the owner,
occupant, or agent to properly affix or inscribe the house numbers as
provided in this article and to do so within 10 days from the date of service.
Such notice shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
1-6 of the Holland City Code.
Sec. 32-25. Same—When enforcing officer to affix
number—generally. [Code 1955, § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 1015, 2-6-1991]
In the event that the owner, occupant, or agent shall neglect, fail, or refuse
to properly affix or inscribe the house numbers as provided in Section 32-24
within 10 days from the date of service, the enforcing official shall properly
affix or inscribe the house numbers as provided in this article.
Sec. 32-26. Same—Same—Costs. [Code 1955, § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 1015,
2-6-1991]
In the event that the enforcing official affixes or inscribes the house
numbers on a building as provided in Section 32-25, the cost thereof shall
be assessed against the premises and spread upon the next tax roll in
accordance with Section 15.20 of the City Charter, unless such cost has
been paid by the owner, occupant, or agent of such building.
with the provisions of this article before any certificate of occupancy is
granted by the Building Inspector.
(j) The inspector in charge of the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City is
designated as the enforcing officer of this article.
(k) For the purposes of this article, an "owner" shall be defined as: any
person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state,
county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of
any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such
person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. For the
purposes of this article, the owner shall be presumed to be the
designated person or entity listed on the tax rolls maintained by the
City for the structure or building, unless the enforcing officer is
otherwise notified in writing.
Sec. 32-23 CHARTER Sec. 32-26
C:685

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Or Outdoor Cafes
Sec. 32-27. Definitions. [Ord. No. 980, 6-21-1989;78 Ord. No. 1391,
6-2-2004]
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any accumulation of tables, chairs, and other
appurtenances related to and used for the sale of food and drink on private
property, not fully enclosed by a structure.
SIDEWALK CAFE — Any accumulation of tables, chairs, and other
appurtenances, related to or used for the sale of food and drink on public
sidewalk property, not fully enclosed by a structure.
Sec. 32-28. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 980, 6-21-1989; Ord.
No. 1391, 6-2-2004]
Prior to the commencement of any sidewalk cafe or outdoor cafe, a person,
firm, or entity wishing to operate such a cafe shall file an application for a
permit with the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services. The
application shall contain all of the following:
Sec. 32-29. Requirements for issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 980,
6-21-1989; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-1990; Ord. No. 1391, 6-2-2004; Ord.
No. 1444, 2-15-2006; Ord. No. 1469, 3-7-2007; Ord. No. 1554,
11-17-2010]
(a) The full name, telephone number, and business address of all persons or
entities who will be involved in the ownership and operation of the
sidewalk cafe.
(b) The address of the property on which the outdoor cafe will be located or
the property to which the sidewalk cafe is adjacent.
(c) A statement of the operator's proposed time period and hours of
operation, as well as the proposed types of activity.
(d) For a sidewalk cafe, a signed addendum and proof of insurance.
(e) Such additional requirements to determine compliance with Section
32-29.
(a) A person wishing to establish a sidewalk cafe or outdoor cafe may do so
only if all of the following conditions are met. The Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services shall issue a permit authorizing
the cafe only if it meets the following requirements:
(1) The tables, chairs, and other appurtenances of the outdoor cafe are
placed on the same parcel where a licensed food service
establishment is located, or in the case of a sidewalk cafe, on the
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally added a new Art. IV to this Ch. 32. As an Art. IV
already existed, this new material was added as Art. V.
Sec. 32-27 CHARTER Sec. 32-29
C:687
sidewalk adjacent to a building containing a licensed food service
establishment owned or leased by the person operating the cafe;
(2) The tables, chairs, and other appurtenances of the cafe are placed
in a way that they do not hinder safe pedestrian use of the
sidewalks and do not block ingress or egress from any building.
There shall be provided, at all times, an unobstructed, straight
sidewalk aisle of not less than six feet in width. For sidewalk and
outdoor cafes within the C-3 Central Business District, the
unobstructed sidewalk aisle shall be a minimum of eight feet;
however, the Design Review Board shall have the authority to
reduce this dimension to no less than six feet when the Board
determines that a lesser clear dimension is adequate and
appropriate given the volume of pedestrian traffic; the placement,
nature and extent of intrusion of streetscape elements and
furnishings; the location of building entrances or gathering places;
the location and volume of activity of waiting areas for business
patrons; or other similar factors. Cafes within the C-3 Central
Business District approved prior to the effective date of this
amendment (November 17, 2010) shall be allowed to continue,
subject to City permitting, with the previously approved
unobstructed, straight sidewalk aisle;
(3) The tables, chairs, and other appurtenances of the sidewalk cafe
are not permanently anchored to the sidewalk in any way;
(4) The establishment and operation of the sidewalk cafe does not
occur before March 1 nor after December 1 of the same year;
however, a nonfenced cafe and associated appurtenances shall not
be permitted on the day of a Tulip Time Festival parade until one
hour after such parade;
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the cafe owner that the area in and
about the cafe is kept free of debris and litter;
(6) The operation of the cafe occurs only during the normal business
hours of the licensed food service establishment within the building
owned or leased by the person operating the cafe;
(7) The appearance of the tables, chairs, and other appurtenances of
the cafe shall be compatible with the architectural character of the
building which it is in front of and with the surrounding area in
general. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services shall receive approval from
the Design Review Board of the Downtown Development Authority
determining that this condition has been met for those sidewalk
cafes and outdoor cafes located in the C-3 Central Business
District;
(8) Only the service and consumption of food and beverage products
shall be allowed; and
Sec. 32-29 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-29
C:688
Sec. 32-30. Issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 980, 6-21-1989; Ord. No.
1391, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1530, 3-4-2009]
The issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit or outdoor cafe permit by the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall require that
the operator and/or permit holder shall continue compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and any special provisions as shall be required
by the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
Sec. 32-31. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 980, 6-21-1989; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992; Ord. No. 1391, 6-2-2004]
Any person, requesting issuance of the sidewalk cafe permit for a sidewalk
cafe or an outdoor cafe shall pay the permit fee as established by resolution
adopted by City Council.
Sec. 32-32. through Sec. 32-39. (Reserved)
(9) The applicant has complied with all applicable ordinance
requirements of the City and state relating to the outdoor business
operation and, if the sidewalk cafe is located in a public right-ofway,
indemnifies the City and maintains insurance in amounts
established by resolution by the City Council.
(b) A permit for a sidewalk cafe shall expire after 360 days.
(c) A permit for an outdoor cafe shall expire after the operation of the cafe
has been abandoned for a period of time exceeding 360 consecutive
days.
Sec. 32-29 CHARTER Sec. 32-32
C:689

ARTICLE VI
Street Performers
Sec. 32-40. Intent. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005]
The City hereby finds and declares: Street performers provide a public
amenity that enhances the character of the City; however, the City also
recognizes that street performers affect the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City and certain activities create congestion, excessive
noise, illegal activity, and diminished aesthetics. The City acknowledges
that its interest in regulating street performers must be accommodated
within the parameters of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution
and Article I, Section 5 of the Michigan Constitution. This article seeks to
impose reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on street performers
to the extent necessary to ensure the safety of performers, their audiences
and the general public and to prevent unreasonable interference with
residents' enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes or the ability of
businesses to conduct business.
Sec. 32-41. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005; Ord. No. 1521,
11-5-2008]
The following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed in
accordance with the following definitions.
(a) CONTEMPORARY COMMUNITY STANDARDS — The customary limits
of candor and decency in the City of Holland at or near the time of the
alleged actions or speech.
(b) DESIGNATED PUBLIC AREA — An area on public property designated
for street performances.
(c) OBSCENE — Any action or speech that meets all of the following
criteria:
(1) The average individual, applying contemporary community
standards, would find the action, taken as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest.
(2) The reasonable person would find the actions or speech, taken as a
whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
(3) The actions or speech describes sexual conduct in a patently
offensive way.
(d) PERFORM — Includes, but is not limited to, the following activities:
acting; singing; playing musical instruments; juggling; dancing;
demonstrating pantomime; exhibiting magic; tumbling; stilt-walking;
cycling; acrobatics; certain activities using fire; exhibiting puppetry; or
other similar activity.
Sec. 32-40 CHARTER Sec. 32-41
C:691
Sec. 32-42. Prohibition of performing. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005]
No person shall perform in the streets, parks, or rights-of-way in the City
without obtaining a permit and complying with the provisions of this article
and the Code.
Sec. 32-43. Street performer application; fee. [Ord. No. 1403,
2-2-2005; Ord. No. 1441, 2-1-2006; Ord. No. 1521, 11-5-2008]
The Coordinator of the Mainstreet/Downtown Development Authority (the
"Coordinator") shall issue street performer permits. Every person desiring
to perform is required to make written application for a permit to the
Coordinator and accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City
Council. Each member of a group of performers shall apply separately to
the Coordinator. The application form provided by the Coordinator. The
applicant shall truthfully and fully state the information requested on the
application such as:
(e) PERFORMER — A person who has obtained a permit pursuant to this
section.
(f) PRURIENT INTEREST — A shameful, morbid interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion.
(g) SEXUAL CONDUCT — One or more of the following:
(1) Representations of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated.
(2) Representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals.
(h) SIMULATED — The explicit description of any types of conduct set forth
in the definition of sexual conduct, which creates the appearance of
such conduct.
(i) ULTIMATE SEXUAL ACT — Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
and intercourse, or any other inference, however slight, of any part of a
person's body or of any object into the genital or anal openings of
another person's body, or description of sexual bestiality,
sadomasochism, masturbation, or excretory functions.
(a) The applicant's name, address, and telephone number;
(b) Whether the applicant is 18 years or older;
(c) Whether the performances include any of the following: tumbling; stiltwalking;
cycling; aerobatics; or any activities using fire (collectively
referred to as "extraordinary activities");
(d) A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter and
method of the performing in which the applicant will engage;
Sec. 32-41 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-43
C:692
Sec. 32-44. Review of application. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005; Ord.
No. 1441, 2-1-2006; Ord. No. 1521, 11-5-2008]
(e) The period of time for which the permit would apply;
(f) The date, or approximate date, of the last permit that was issued to the
applicant under this article;
(g) A statement as to whether or not any City permit or license issued to
the applicant (or any related organization or entity) has ever been
revoked, and if so, the reason for the revocation;
(h) Applicant's driver's license or personal identification number; and
(i) Such other information the Coordinator deems necessary to approve
the application.
(a) Upon filing of the application for a permit, the Coordinator shall review
and evaluate the application. In determining whether a permit should
be issued, the Coordinator shall evaluate whether the application and
the applicant meet all of the following:
(1) Whether the proposed activities comply with all of the provisions of
this article and the Code;
(2) Whether the proposed activities involve the safe use of the streets
by the public for vehicles and pedestrians;
(3) Whether the proposed activities would be obscene; and
(4) Whether the applicant has not previously violated two or more
provisions of this article or the Code.
(b) For applications that include any extraordinary activities, the Chief of
Police shall review and approve as to whether the extraordinary
activities satisfy Section 32-44(a)(2).
(c) An applicant must be 18 years or older to obtain a permit.
Notwithstanding, the Coordinator may approve a permit for a minor if
that minor is performing in a group with other performers who are 18
years or older.
(d) The Coordinator shall not approve a permit unless all previous year's
tickets for violation of this article are paid.
(e) If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company,
copartnership, or other such business entity, the person who will act as
the principal in charge of the business to be licensed shall sign the
application and all of the owners of the business entity shall meet all of
the requirements for individual applicants.
(f) If the permit is not approved, the applicant may file an appeal as
provided in Section 32-48.
Sec. 32-43 CHARTER Sec. 32-44
C:693
Sec. 32-44.1. Review of application for amplification device permit.
[Ord. No. 1441, 2-1-2006; Ord. No. 1521, 11-5-2008]
Upon filing of the application for an amplification device permit, the
Coordinator shall review and evaluate the application under Subparagraphs
(a) through (g) of Section 32-44. In addition, the application shall be
reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police.
Sec. 32-45. Street performer permits; conditions for issuance. [Ord.
No. 1403, 2-2-2005; Ord. No. 1441, 2-1-2006; Ord. No. 1521,
11-5-2008]
(g) The Coordinator shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an
application for a street performer's permit within 15 days of it being
filed.
(a) Upon approval by the Coordinator, the permit shall be issued. If the
approval by the Coordinator includes conditions of the applicant, all
conditions shall be met prior to the issuance of the permit by the
Coordinator.
(b) Prior to the issuance of a permit, a street performer shall agree to
indemnify the City, the Mainstreet/Downtown Development Authority
and the Downtown Principal Shopping District, their officials,
employees, and agents from any liability arising out of the performer's
street performance.
(c) Permits granted by the Coordinator shall be issued upon payment of the
fees required and compliance with the requirements of this article.
(d) For a permit that involves any extraordinary activities, the applicant
will provide a certificate of insurance for general liability insurance in
an amount determined by the Coordinator and name the City of
Holland, the Mainstreet/Downtown Development Authority, the
Downtown Principal Shopping District, their officials, employees, and
agents as additional insureds. Further, the Coordinator may impose
reasonable conditions in the permit on the time, place, or manner of the
performance of extraordinary activities to the extent that they may be
harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of pedestrians or surrounding
property.
(e) The permit shall bear the name and address of the person performing,
the term of the permit, the type of performance and the location of
performing, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an
endorsement by the City of the purpose of the performing or of the
person or group conducting the performance.
(f) A permit shall be valid from the date on which it is issued through
December 31, or for the specific duration noted on the permit. A permit
shall be nontransferable.
Sec. 32-44 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-45.1
C:694
Sec. 32-45.1. Amplification device permits; conditions for issuance.
[Ord. No. 1441, 2-1-2006]
Upon approval of the Chief of Police, City Manager, and the Coordinator,
the Coordinator shall follow the procedure outlined in Subparagraphs (a)
through (e) of Section 32-45 as it relates to the issuance of an amplification
device permit.
Sec. 32-46. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005; Ord.
No. 1441, 2-1-2006; Ord. No. 1521, 11-5-2008; Ord. No. 1556,
1-5-2011]
(a) Performances shall only take place in one of six designated locations in
the Mainstreet/Downtown Development Authority District as defined in
Section 2-98 of the Code and approved by the Mainstreet/Downtown
Development Authority Board. Notwithstanding, the Mainstreet/
Downtown Development Authority Board may reasonably designate
(and subsequently revoke) in writing additional locations for
performances.
(b) Except as otherwise approved by the Coordinator, no performances will
take places during the Tulip Time Festival. The Mainstreet/Downtown
Development Authority Board may establish time, place and manner
restrictions on performances during the Tulip Time Festival.
(c) A performer shall clearly display his or her permit while performing and
shall allow inspection of the permit by any police officer or the
Coordinator upon request.
(d) A performer may request contributions or money or property at a
performance. Contributions may be received in any receptacle, such as
an open musical instrument case, box or hat.
(e) A person who is under the age of 15 shall not perform unless
accompanied at all times by a responsible adult who is 18 years of age
or older. A person who is 15 years of age or older may perform without a
responsible adult who is 18 years of age or older. Notwithstanding, the
Coordinator may prohibit a person who is under the age of 18 from
performing extraordinary activities if that person is not accompanied by
a responsible adult who is 18 years of age or older and the
extraordinary activities are determined to be unsafe for surrounding
property and pedestrians.
(f) A performer shall be responsible for cleanup of all litter at the
performance site.
(g) No performer shall:
(1) Perform within 10 feet of the outer edge of any entrance of any
business, including, but not limited to, doors, vestibules, driveways,
outdoor dining area entries, sidewalk cafes, and emergency exits
during the hours that any business on the premises is open to the
Sec. 32-45.1 CHARTER Sec. 32-46
C:695
public or to persons having or conducting lawful business within
those premises.
(2) Perform in any areas not designated by the Mainstreet/Downtown
Development Authority Board.
(3) Perform in any area prohibited by the City Manager, his or her
designee, or the Chief of Police in the case of an emergency.
(4) Use any of the following:
(i) Any knife, sword, torch, flame, axe, saw or other object that
can cause serious bodily injury to any person, or engage in any
activity, including, but not limited to, acrobatics, tumbling or
cycling that can cause serious bodily injury to any person;
(ii) Any amplification device;
(iii) Any generator, wet cell battery with removable fill caps, or any
other power source that poses a fire or public safety hazard; or
(iv) Any connection to or maintenance of an electrical cord to an
adjacent building or to a City power source.
(5) Utilize or prevent the public from utilizing any public benches,
waste receptacles, or other street furniture during the
performance.
(6) Place any object on a public sidewalk which causes less than a six
foot contiguous sidewalk width being kept clear for pedestrian
passage.
(7) Perform with more instruments, props, equipment, merchandise or
other items than the performer can reasonably transport or remove
at one time.
(8) Place his or her instruments, props, equipment, merchandise or
other items on a public sidewalk, public street, or public right-ofway
for more than two hours without performing in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
(9) Offer for sale or make available for a price or donation any items.
(10) Display any sign other than the street performer permit.
(11) Violate the applicable provisions of the code regarding noise.
(12) Block or obstruct a curb cut.
(13) Block or obstruct the free and safe movement of pedestrians. If a
sufficient crowd gathers to observe a performer such that the
passage of the public through a public area is blocked or
obstructed, a police officer or fire official may disperse that portion
of the crowd that is blocking or obstructing the passage of the
Sec. 32-46 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-46
C:696
Sec. 32-47. Revocation of permits. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005; Ord.
No. 1441, 2-1-2006]
public. If a performer cannot conduct a performance in a location
without blocking or obstructing the passage of the public, a police
officer or fire official may cause the performer to leave the location,
but shall not prevent the performer from occupying another
location in compliance with this article.
(14) Obstruct the visibility of a motorist.
(15) Perform in a manner that is obscene as defined by Section 32-41.
(16) Except as expressly permitted in this article, perform in any way
that violates any other provisions of the code.
(h) The City Council authorizes the Mainstreet/Downtown Development
Authority the authority to promulgate rules and regulations relating to
the time, place, and manner of performances.
(a) The Coordinator or an officer of the Police Department may
immediately and without notice revoke a street performer permit or an
amplification device permit if the underlying violation poses an
immediate danger to the public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) Except as provided in Section 32-47(a), the Coordinator may revoke a
street performer permit or an amplification permit if, upon receipt of
written information or upon the Coordinator's own investigation, the
Coordinator has reason to believe a performer:
(1) Has provided a false statement in the application;
(2) Has violated two or more provision of this article in a term set forth
in a permit; or
(3) Has violated a provision of this article or the Code in a manner that
is materially adverse to the protection of the public health, safety
or welfare of the City.
Upon such determination, the Coordinator shall send written
notice to the street performer at the address set forth in the
application. The street performer shall have the right to a hearing
before the Coordinator. Such hearing shall be set within 15 days
of the written notice to the performer. If after a hearing, the
Coordinator finds that the violation is supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, the permit shall be revoked. The
permit shall be null and void upon the Coordinator sending notice
to the street performer. The street performer shall have the right
to appeal as provided in Section 32-48.
(c) If a written complaint is filed alleging that a performer has violated any
provisions of this article, the Coordinator shall promptly send a copy of
the written complaint to the performer, together with a notice that an
Sec. 32-46 CHARTER Sec. 32-47
C:697
Sec. 32-48. Complaints; appeals. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005; Ord. No.
1441, 2-1-2006]
Sec. 32-49. Appearance tickets. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005]
The Police Chief, the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such
other officials as are designated by the Police Chief, are hereby authorized
to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this
article pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as
amended [MCLA § 764.9c(2)]. Appearance tickets shall be in such form as
investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The
performer shall have the right to respond to the complaint within 10
days of it being sent and present evidence and respond to evidence
produced by the investigation. Such hearing shall be held within 15
days of the complaint being sent to the street performer. If the
Coordinator, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint
to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint
shall be certified and prosecuted by the City Attorney's office.
(a) If an applicant for a street performer permit is denied or if a permit is
revoked by the Coordinator or an officer of the Police Department, the
applicant or holder of a permit may appeal to and have a hearing before
the Director of Community and Neighborhood Services. The appeal
must be filed within 10 days of the denial or the revocation. The hearing
shall be held within 15 days of the denial of the application or the
revocation of the permit. The Director of Community and Neighborhood
Services shall make a written determination, after presentation by the
applicant, as to whether or not the grounds for denial, revocation or
complaint are true. If the Director of Community and Neighborhood
Services determines that such grounds are supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, the initial determination shall be
sustained. If the denial is affirmed, the Director of Community and
Neighborhood Services' decision may be promptly reviewed by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(b) If an applicant for an amplification device permit is denied by the
Coordinator, the City Manager, or the Chief of Police or if a permit is
revoked by the Coordinator or an officer of the Police Department, the
applicant or holder of a permit may appeal to and have a hearing before
the City Council. The appeal must be filed within 10 days of the denial
or the revocation. The hearing shall be held within 15 days of the denial
of the application or the revocation of the permit. The City Council shall
make a written determination, after presentation by the applicant, as to
whether or not the grounds for denial, revocation or complaint are true.
If the City Council determines that such grounds are supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, the initial determination shall be
sustained. If the denial is affirmed, the City Council's decision may be
promptly reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 32-47 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-49
C:698
determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory
requirements.
Sec. 32-50. Civil infraction. [Ord. No. 1403, 2-2-2005; amended
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1720]
Separately from any other remedies of the City, a person who violates this
article is responsible for a Class I Municipal Civil Infraction and subject to
the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in Section 2-111 of this
Code and any other relief that may be imposed by the court.
Sec. 32-49 CHARTER Sec. 32-50
C:699

ARTICLE VII
Fire Dock
Sec. 32-51. Fire dock regulations. [Ord. No. 1457, 7-5-200679]
Sec. 32-52. through Sec. 32-60. (Reserved)
(a) For purposes of this section, the fire dock shall be that portion of Lake
Avenue extending from the Lake Avenue road end at Lake Macatawa,
Holland, Michigan, on which the City of Holland has constructed a dock
extending north from the Lake Avenue road end at Lake Macatawa. The
fire dock shall not be available for use and occupancy by the public from
12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. The hours that the fire dock is not available for
use and occupancy by the public shall be delineated on signage to be
posted on the fire dock.
(b) No activity shall be conducted in, on, or over the fire dock which would
violate any other provisions of the Ordinance Code of the City of
Holland, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 20
defining a disorderly person.
(c) A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to
Section 1-10 of the Ordinance Code of the City of Holland.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally added a new Section 32-49 to this chapter. As the
chapter already contained Sections 32-49 and 32-50, the section was redesignated as
Section 32-51.
Sec. 32-51 CHARTER Sec. 32-52
C:701

ARTICLE VIII
Horse-Drawn Carriages
Sec. 32-61. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
The following words and phrases in this article shall be interpreted and
construed in accordance with the following definitions:
CARRIAGE — A vehicle for transporting the operator and passenger.
COORDINATOR — The Coordinator of the Mainstreet/Street Downtown
Development Authority.
HORSE-DRAWN — Propelled by a horse that is controlled by the operator.
HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE BOUNDARY — The area in which a horsedrawn
carriage may operate, and is the Downtown Development District as
defined in Section 2-98 of the Code.
OPERATOR — The person who is in control of the horse.
PASSENGER — A person who is being transported on the carriage and who
is the not the operator.
STOP — A location for picking up and dropping off carriage passengers.
VEHICLE — A trailer towed by a vehicle or a vehicle designed for the
transport of a horse or horses and used to transport horses.
Sec. 32-62. Business license. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
No person shall operate or cause to operate a horse-drawn carriage in the
horse-drawn carriage boundary without obtaining a license and complying
with the provisions of Chapter 17, and any other applicable provisions of
the Ordinance Code.
Sec. 32-63. Application. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
The City Clerk shall issue horse-drawn carriage licenses. Every person
desiring to operate a horse-drawn carriage is required to make written
application for a license to the City Clerk and accompanied by a fee
established by resolution of the City Council. The application form will be
provided by the City Clerk. The applicant shall truthfully and fully state the
information requested on the application such as:
(a) The applicant's name, address, and telephone number. In the event the
applicant is a business entity (i.e., copartnership, limited liability
company, corporation, etc.), or using a name for the business, the
applicant shall submit the applicable formation documents (i.e.,
certificate of assumed name, certificate of copartnership, articles of
organization, Articles of Incorporation, etc.) and the names and
addresses of the owners of the business entity (i.e., shareholders,
members, partners, etc.);
(b) Whether the applicant is 18 years or older;
Sec. 32-61 CHARTER Sec. 32-63
C:703
Sec. 32-64. Review of application. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
(c) Carriage type, including a photo/image of each carriage;
(d) Operator's name, address, and telephone number;
(e) The proposed stops for pickup of passengers;
(f) The date of the last license that was issued to the applicant under this
article;
(g) A copy of the insurance covering the carriages proposed to be licensed
and requiring that the insurer will not cancel such policies without at
least 30 days' prior written notice to the City;
(h) A statement as to whether or not any City permit or license issued to
the applicant (or any related organization or entity) has ever been
revoked, and if so, the reason for the revocation;
(i) Applicants driver's license or personal identification number;
(j) Fees charged;
(k) Certification that carriages will satisfy the provision of this article and
the Ordinance Code; and
(l) Such other information the City Clerk deems necessary to review the
application.
(a) Upon filing of the application for a horse-drawn carriage license, the
City Clerk shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police who shall
cause an investigation to be made regarding the character, fitness, and
qualification of the applicant, the individual owners of a business entity
applicant, and the proposed operators.
(b) The Chief of Police shall inspect the proposed carriages for cleanliness,
appearance, and safety considerations to determine that such carriages
comply with the provision of this article.
(c) Upon the completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall
transmit the written recommendations and the reasons underlying the
recommendations to the City Clerk's office as to whether a license shall
be issued, denied, or issued with conditions.
(d) Upon issuance of a horse-drawn carriage license the City Clerk will
confirm that the horse-drawn carriage complies with all of the articles
of this article and Code, will involve safe use of the streets, whether the
applicant has not previously violated two or more provisions of this
article or Code.
(e) Upon receipt of the written recommendations from the Chief of Police
and review of the requirements under this article and any other
provisions of the Ordinance Code, the City Clerk shall either issue,
deny, or issue the license with conditions.
Sec. 32-63 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-64
C:704
Sec. 32-65. Conditions for issuance. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
Sec. 32-66. License expiration. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
Unless otherwise provided in the provision of this Code requiring a license,
the license term shall begin on May 1 in each year and shall terminate
on April 30 of the following calendar year. Each license granted under the
provisions of this Code shall expire on the next year succeeding April 30;
provided, that any annual license issued between March 30 and April 30
of any year shall expire on April 30 of the calendar year next following the
issuance thereof. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the
issuance of licenses for a period of less than one year, any license so issued
shall become effective on the date of the issuance thereof.
Sec. 32-67. License renewals. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
Upon application to the City Clerk, a license may be renewed for the
ensuing year; provided, the applicant has complied with all the provisions
of this chapter and the carriages for which the license is to be renewed
have been found, after investigation and inspection by the Chief of Police
determines that such carriages comply with all requirements of this
chapter. If the license is not renewed, the applicant may file an appeal as
provided in Section 17-20.
Sec. 32-68. Carriage standards. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
The licensee shall have all horse-drawn carriages comply with the following:
(f) If the license is not approved, the applicant may file an appeal as
provided in Section 17-20.
(a) Upon approval by the City Clerk, the license shall be issued. If the
approval by the City Clerk includes conditions of the applicant, all
conditions shall be met prior to the issuance of the permit by the City
Clerk.
(b) Licenses granted by the City Clerk shall be issued upon payment of the
fees required and compliance with the requirements of this article and
any other applicable provisions of the Code.
(c) The license shall bear the name and address of the horse-drawn
carriage applicant, and its term.
(d) The applicant will provide a certificate of insurance for general liability
insurance in an amount determined by the Coordinator and name the
City of Holland, the Mainstreet/Downtown Development Authority, the
Downtown Principal Shopping District, their officials, employees, and
agents as additional insureds.
(a) Display at least two headlights with at least one on each side of the
carriage and two taillights with at least one on each side of the vehicle
Sec. 32-64 CHARTER Sec. 32-68
C:705
Sec. 32-69. Horse care standards. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
The licensee and the operator of each horse-drawn carriage shall comply
with the following:
Sec. 32-70. Operator standards. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
The licensee and the operator of the horse-drawn carriage shall comply with
the following:
which shall comply with the requirements of Section 257.695 of the
Michigan Vehicle Code;
(b) Display a reflectorized slow-moving-vehicle emblem and other
reflectors and in compliance with Section 257.688 of the Motor Vehicle
Code;
(c) Display, to each side of the carriage a light that is visible at night;
(d) Be equipped with sufficient seats for the operator and all passengers;
(e) Seat not more than six adult occupants, or not more than six children
under the age of 12 and one adult occupant, or not to exceed
manufacturer's recommended safe seating capacity for the vehicle
being used, in addition to the operator;
(f) Maintain a rubber surface on the wheel traction surface;
(g) Not be wider than eight feet, including fenders, running boards and
safety mirrors and devices; and
(h) Display the horse-drawn carriage license in the carriage at all times.
(a) Horses must be fitted with a device to catch all manure or solid waste
and dispose of it and any urine in an approved manner except when
inside the transport vehicle;
(b) Horses are attended at all times, including when loading and
discharging passengers;
(c) Horses have received a valid certificate of health or veterinarian
certificate which shall be filed with the Coordinator annually; and
(d) Horses are not subject to any cruel or harassing treatment.
(a) Be subject to all state and City traffic laws applicable to motor vehicles,
in addition to all other applicable laws;
(b) Operators possess a valid state driver's license;
(c) Require all passengers to be seated except when boarding or
discharging;
Sec. 32-68 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-70
C:706
Sec. 32-71. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
(d) Not operate during those days and times of day nor operate upon those
streets, public places and quasi-public places prohibited by the City
Clerk;
(e) Flush all liquid waste from the horse immediately with water and spray
with the appropriate chemical to eliminate all noxious odors and
bacteria;
(f) Not be required to give a person a ride in the carriage on demand of
such person;
(g) Not operate a vehicle when a passenger is in possession of alcoholic
liquor in a container which is open or uncapped or which has a broken
seal;
(h) Be in control of the horse at all times;
(i) Have in their possession, and produce upon request, their horse-drawn
carriage and state driver's licenses; and
(j) Maintain a log that substantiates that the carriage has been inspected
by the operator, and meets all operating standards, at the beginning of
every shift.
(a) There shall be no more than teams of two horses for each individual
carriage, and the carriage must be designed to be pulled by a team of
two horses or less.
(b) Each operator must have signage for their carriage stop. One sign per
stop is required and such signs shall comply with requirements of the
Coordinator. Sign size requirements will be set by the Coordinator. Fees
for carriage rides will be noted on their carriage stop signs. Fees for
carriage rides will be noted on their carriage stop signs.
(c) No alcoholic beverages are allowed in carriages.
(d) Horse-drawn carriage stops shall be as approved and listed on the
application. Any recommendations for revisions to these stops shall be
submitted to and approved by Coordinator and the Chief of Police.
Approved stops are the only locations where the carriage operators can
pick up and drop off passengers.
(e) Horse-drawn carriages will be allowed to operate from 8:30 a.m. to
11:00 p.m. seven days a week year-round. The Chief of Police shall from
time to time set operating times that are most acceptable in terms of
public health and safety, but no operation of carriage service shall be
allowed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m.
(f) No horse-drawn carriages will be allowed to operate during the annual
Tulip Time festival dates.
Sec. 32-70 CHARTER Sec. 32-71
C:707
Sec. 32-72. Revocation and suspension. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended by the Chief
of Police for "good cause" as set forth in Section 17-18. If the Chief of Police
finds that "good cause" under Section 17-18 has been established, he or she
may institute revocation proceedings under Section 17-19.
Upon suspension or revocation of a license, operations shall cease with such
carriages associated with such license. No person shall permit continued
operation of such carriages. The operators shall cease to drive the carriages
and no person shall employ or permit any individual to drive the carriages.
After the notice and hearing have been provided as set for in Section 17-19,
the City Council may take action against the business entity, individual
owners or any employee of the business entity or the individual owner.
Sec. 32-73. Civil infractions. [Ord. No. 1534, 6-3-2009]
Separately from any other remedies of the City, a person who violates this
article is responsible for a Class I civil infraction and subject to a fine under
Section 2-118.
Sec. 32-74. Effective date/emergency ordinance. [Ord. No. 1534,
6-3-2009]
This article was adopted as an emergency ordinance by the City Council of
the City of Holland pursuant to Section 5.4 of the Holland City Charter, and
shall be effective upon the date of adoption.
(g) While carriages are in use, and for purposes of loading and unloading
horses, the operator is required to park vehicles in the northernmost
sections of public parking lot 7C, Window on the Waterfront parking lot,
or along the north side of 6th Street between College Avenue and
Columbia Avenue.
(h) Operators may operate carriages on any streets within the Downtown
Development District as defined in Section 2-98 of the Code, with the
exception of 7th Street, 9th Street, River Avenue and Pine Avenue. Any
recommendations for revisions to these routes shall be submitted to
and approved by the Coordinator and the Chief of Police.
Sec. 32-71 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32-74
C:708
Chapter 32A
STREETS&MDASH;SEMCO GAS FRANCHISE
Sec. 32A-1. Grant of gas franchise. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
Subject to all the terms and conditions of Sections 12.1 and 12.2 of the
Charter of the City of Holland, except as otherwise provided herein, the
City of Holland grants to the SEMCO Energy Gas Company, a division of
SEMCO Energy, Inc., a corporation organized under the laws of the State
of Michigan ("Grantee"), a franchise to transact local business in the City of
Holland for the purposes of conveying gas into and through and supplying
and selling gas in the City of Holland and all other incidental matters
including a franchise to lay, maintain, operate, and use gas pipes, mains,
conductors, service pipes, and other necessary equipment (hereinafter "gas
distribution system") in the highways, streets, alleys, and other public
places in the City of Holland, Ottawa and Allegan Counties, Michigan.
Notwithstanding this grant, the grantee must comply with the permit
requirements of Section 32A-4 and must comply with all provisions of the
Code and rules and regulations of the City which regulate the use of public
ways in the City of Holland.
Sec. 32A-2. Term of franchise. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
The term of the franchise granted by these Sections 32A-1 through 32A-14
is for 30 years after it takes effect, subject to revocation at the will of the
City at any time during the thirty-year period upon 60 days' written notice
by the City.
Sec. 32A-3. Gas service and extension of system. [Ord. No. 1582,
5-16-2012]
If the provisions and conditions of these Sections 32A-1 through 32A-14 are
accepted by the grantee, then the grantee shall furnish gas to applicants
residing in the City in accordance with applicable laws, rules and
regulations; and provided further that the initial installation and any
extensions shall be subject to the main extension provisions, the area
expansion program provisions (if and where applicable), and other
applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the
grantee's rules and regulations for gas service as filed with the Michigan
Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction.
Sec. 32A-4. Use of streets and other public places. [Ord. No. 1582,
5-16-2012]
Except in cases of emergency, notwithstanding any implied or explicit rights
granted by this franchise, no road, street, alley, or highway shall be opened
for the laying of trunk lines, lateral mains, or other gas pipes, mains,
conduits, service pipes, or other equipment, except upon application to
the City of Holland or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises,
Sec. 32-74 CHARTER Sec. 32A-4
C:709
stating the nature of the proposed work and the route and issuance of all
necessary permits to the grantee to do the work proposed. In all situations,
the grantee shall minimize the disturbance to all infrastructures while
working within the right-of-way. Prior to issuing a permit for work within
the right-of-way, the City may direct the grantee to revise its application
in order to minimize the disturbance to infrastructure within the right-ofway
and minimize the need for future maintenance. Ongoing work being
performed under the permit to grantee may be immediately halted by the
City of Holland until such time as the grantee can demonstrate to the City
that the work will be conducted in a manner that minimizes the disturbance
to infrastructure within the right-of-way to the greatest extent possible.
The grantee shall, within a reasonable time after making an opening or
excavation, repair the same and leave it in as good condition as before
the opening or excavation was made. For maintenance and inspections not
requiring an opening or excavation the grantee shall not unnecessarily
obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys, or other public
places within the City of Holland. For maintenance and inspections, the
grantee may not occupy any right-of-way of the City until it has obtained
all permits required for occupancy, except in cases of emergency. In cases
of emergency, the grantee shall notify the City of the emergency, and the
nature of the work performed, in writing as soon as reasonably practical.
The grantee shall use due care in exercising the privileges herein contained.
Sec. 32A-5. Street vacation. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
If the City vacates or consents to the vacation of a street or alley within
its jurisdiction and such vacation necessitates the removal and relocation of
grantee's facilities in the vacated right-of-way, grantee agrees to consent to
the vacation and to move its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, when
asked to do so by City. Grantee shall relocate its facilities to such alternative
route as the City, acting reasonably and in good faith, designates after first
consulting with the grantee.
Sec. 32A-6. Relocation. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
If the City requests grantee to relocate its facilities because of street, utility
work, or otherwise in the exercise of its governmental functions, grantee
shall promptly relocate its facilities within the time specified by the City, at
its sole expense to such alternate route as City, acting reasonably and in
good faith, designates after first consulting with the grantee.
Sec. 32A-7. Public emergency. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
The City shall have the right to address emergencies in accordance with Act
53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, MCLA § 460.701 et seq. Grantee
shall be responsible for repair, at its sole expense, of any of its facilities
damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the City that was reasonably
necessary to respond to the emergency.
Sec. 32A-8. Identification of system. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
Sec. 32A-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32A-8
C:710
Sec. 32A-9. Indemnity. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
(a) MISS DIG. Grantee shall subscribe to and be a member of "MISS DIG,"
the association of underground utilities formed pursuant to Act 53 of
the Public Acts of 1974, as amended from time to time, MCLA § 460.701
et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory
provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(b) Marking. Grantee shall mark both the above-ground and underground
portions of its gas distribution system in accordance with Act 53 of the
Public Acts of 1974, as amended from time to time, MCLA § 460.701 et
seq., and applicable gas safety standards.
(c) Request for information. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City from
requesting, and the grantee from providing, information on the location
of its existing facilities in a designated area, including maps and asbuilt/
record drawings depicting such locations, on terms that protect
such confidential information from public disclosure. Upon request by
the City pursuant to this subparagraph, the grantee shall promptly
provide the requested information to the City and in no case shall the
grantee take longer than one week to fulfill the request.
(a) Disclaimer of liability. The City shall not at any time be liable for injury
or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause
whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use,
operation, condition or dismantling of grantee's gas distribution system
and due to the act or omission of any person or entity other than injury
or damage solely caused by the City and its employees.
(b) Indemnification. Grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the City, all associated, affiliated allied
and subsidiary entities of the City now existing or hereinafter created,
and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, and
attorneys (hereinafter referred to as "indemnities"), from and against
any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens,
limitations, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert
witnesses and consultants, which may be imposed upon, incurred by or
be asserted against the indemnities by reason of any negligent act or
omission of grantee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractor or
subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness,
disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of
property which may arise out of or be connected with the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the gas distribution
system or grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local
statute, ordinance or regulation.
(c) Assumption of risk. Grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers,
agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees, all risk of
dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any City-owned or controlled
property, including public ways, and grantee hereby agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the indemnities for personal injury or
Sec. 32A-8 CHARTER Sec. 32A-9
C:711
Sec. 32A-10. Standards and conditions of service; rules,
regulations, and rates. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
Grantee shall charge for gas furnished the rates, charges and special taxes
as approved from time to time by the Michigan Public Service Commission,
or its successors having authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas
rates and charges, or as otherwise permitted or required by applicable
law or tariff, for the term of this franchise. Such rates shall be subject to
Commission review and change at any time upon petition therefore being
made by either said City, acting by its City Council, or by said grantee.
Grantee shall, as to all conditions and elements of service, be and remain
subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public
Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas service in said City
and shall provide service in accordance with the terms and conditions set
forth in its applicable tariff as approved from time to time by the Michigan
Public Service Commission or its successors.
Sec. 32A-11. City jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
Except as otherwise provided in Section 32A-10, grantee shall be and
remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the City now in
effect or which may be subsequently adopted for the regulation of land uses
property damage to any person arising out of the installation,
operation, maintenance or condition of the gas distribution system or
grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute,
ordinance or regulation. This subsection shall not apply to personal
injury or property damages arising from acts or omissions solely caused
by the City or its employees.
(d) Notice, cooperation, and expenses.
(1) The City shall give grantee prompt notice of the making of any
claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding
covered by the provisions of this Section 32A-9.
(2) Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the City from
cooperating with grantee and participating in the defense of any
litigation by the City's own counsel.
(3) Grantee shall pay all reasonably necessary expenses incurred by
the City defending itself with regard to any such actions, suits or
proceedings. These expenses shall include all reasonably necessary
out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney fees, and the reasonably
necessary actual expenses of the City's agents, employees or expert
witnesses, and reasonably necessary disbursements and liability
assumed by the City in connection with such suits, actions or
proceedings.
(e) Survival of terms. The terms and conditions of Section 32A-9 shall
survive termination or assignment of this franchise.
Sec. 32A-9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 32A-11
C:712
or for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of residents of the
City.
Sec. 32A-12. Successors and assigns. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
Sec. 32A-13. Franchise not exclusive. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
The rights, power and authority granted by these Sections 32A-1 through
32A-14 are not exclusive. The City may grant other franchises for the
same purpose or purposes after the date hereof. Nothing in this franchise
shall transfer or delegate any authority which the City may have under its
Charter or state law relating to the subject matter of this franchise.
Sec. 32A-14. Effective date. [Ord. No. 1582, 5-16-2012]
This ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] shall take effect upon
the day after the publication thereof; provided, however, it shall cease and
be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period
the grantee shall accept the same, in writing, filed with the City Clerk.
Upon acceptance and publication, the ordinance shall constitute a contract
between the City and said grantee.
Chapter 33
SUBDIVISIONS
(a) Grantee shall not assign this franchise to any other person, firm or
corporation without the prior written approval of the City Council
except in those cases where the Michigan Public Service Commission
has granted any required approval of the acquisition, transfer of
control, merger or encumbrance transaction underlying the assignment
of this franchise, and the grantee has provided notice to the City of its
request for approval and the City is given an opportunity to participate
in the proceeding before the Michigan Public Service Commission. The
City shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to an assignment if the
assignee is financially able to carry out the grantee's obligations under
this franchise. The assignment of this franchise to a subsidiary, division,
or affiliated corporation of grantee or its parent corporation shall not be
considered an assignment requiring the consent of the City Council.
(b) Subject to the provisions of the City Charter and Sections 32A-1
through 32A-14, the words "SEMCO Energy Gas Company" and
"grantee", are intended and shall be held and construed to mean and
include both SEMCO Energy Gas Company and its successors and
assigns, as approved in writing by the City, whether so expressed or
not.
Sec. 32A-11 CHARTER Sec. 33-1
C:713
Sec. 33-1. Purpose of chapter. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.1]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and minimum
standards for the orderly and reasonable development and subdivision of
land designed to protect and promote public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare, to adequately provide for and control traffic movement
and the installation of needed utilities, thereby encouraging the most
appropriate use of land in the City.
Sec. 33-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.2; amended 1-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 1721]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMPLETE UTILITY SUBDIVISIONS — A subdivision located in the
primary service area in which arrangements have been made for both public
water service and sewage disposal by a public utility system and for the
improvements required by this chapter.
FINAL PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart which the applicant submits
pursuant to the Land Division Act, MCLA § 560.101 et seq., as amended, for
the approval of the Council of the City.
LOCAL STREET — A street intended primarily to serve adjacent
neighborhood properties.
MAJOR STREET — A street designated as such in the Major Street Plan
for Holland, Michigan, contained within the proposed Master Plan dated
April, 1953, or by subsequent action of the Planning Commission, which
is intended to serve a relatively large volume of traffic not originating or
terminating in the particular neighborhood.
PARTIAL UTILITY SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which arrangements
have been made for either public water service or sewage disposal by a
public utility system, but not both, and for the other improvements required
by this chapter.
POTENTIAL UTILITY SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which neither
public water nor sewage disposal by a public utility system can be obtained
at the time of platting, but where the other improvements required by this
chapter are provided.
PRIVATE SERVICE SUBDIVISION — A subdivision located in an area in
which neither public water nor sewage disposal by a public utility system is
furnished or contemplated.
SUBDIVIDE — "Subdivide" shall be given the same meaning as appears in
MCLA § 560.102.
Sec. 33-3. Sketch plat. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.3]
It is recommended that a sketch plat of each subdivision be submitted
for preliminary discussion before the preliminary or final plat is prepared.
Sec. 33-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33-3
C:714
The purpose of the sketch plat is to enable the Planning Commission and
the applicant to discuss the principles and standards involved before the
applicant has incurred major expenses. The Planning Commission shall
consider a sketch plat and, if it is satisfactory, shall give its tentative
approval to such plat. Such approval is subject to change but is intended to
furnish a reasonable basis for the applicant to proceed. The sketch plat and
accompanying data shall provide the following information:
Sec. 33-4. Preliminary plat. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.4; Ord. No. 1519,
11-5-2008]
The applicant shall submit the following preliminary plat information to
the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services for review and
consideration by the Planning Commission:
(a) A rough topographical sketch showing approximate ground elevations,
watercourses, wooded areas, improvements, boundaries, public ways
and utilities.
(b) A simple sketch of the proposed layout of streets, lots and public areas.
(c) Proposed uses and protective covenants, if any.
(d) Relationship of the tract to existing streets and surrounding areas.
(e) Such additional pertinent data as the Planning Commission may
request.
(a) A completed preliminary plat application form.
(b) Application fee.
(c) The number of paper copies of the preliminary plat as indicated on the
application form, and one digital copy in a PDF file format that
accurately and completely depicts the scope of the project. The
preliminary plat shall be designed to meet the general requirements for
all subdivisions listed in Sections 33-8 to 33-13, and shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information:
(1) Existing topographical features of the tract, including ground
elevations, watercourses, wooded areas, isolated trees of more
than one foot in diameter, improvements, boundaries, public ways
and utilities, and any other special or significant terrain features.
(2) The proposed layout, dimensions and form of dedication of streets,
lots, utility easements and public places.
(3) The proposed use of individual lots and protective covenants, if any.
(4) Proposed utility layouts; if private water sources or sewage
disposal is proposed, percolation tests shall be made and the
results submitted with the preliminary plat.
Sec. 33-3 CHARTER Sec. 33-4
C:715
Sec. 33-5. Final plat. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.5; Ord. No. 955, 7-6-1988;
Ord. No. 1519, 11-5-2008]
(5) Other subsurface conditions if requested by the City Sanitarian, or
surface condition information if requested by the City Engineer.
(6) Such additional pertinent data as the Planning Commission may
request.
(d) The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
preliminary plat before taking action. Notice of the public hearing shall
comply with Section 39-4.1 of the City Code.
(a) The applicant shall submit the following final plat information to the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services for review and
consideration by the Planning Commission:
(1) A completed final plat application form.
(2) Application fee in addition to any county and state filing fees.
(3) The number of paper copies of the final plat as indicated on the
application form, one digital copy in a PDF file format that
accurately and completely depicts the scope of the project, and one
Mylar copy. The final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
a. All information required by Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of
1967, as amended (MSA 26.430(101) et seq.).
b. Satisfactory written evidence of arrangements for the
installation of services and improvements as required by
Section 33-7.
c. An abstract of title, certified to date, or a title insurance policy
with respect to the area within the proposed plat.
d. The data specified in Sections 33-3 and 33-4, unless previously
filed with the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services.
e. The proprietor's name and address shall be stated on the plat.
(b) The City Planning Commission shall recommend approval, approval
with conditions, or disapproval of a plat within 63 days after the final
plat is submitted to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed plat before
taking action. Notice of the public hearing shall comply with Section
39-4.1 of the City Code.
(c) If the applicable standards under the Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288,
MCLA § 560.101 to 560.293, and Chapters 33 and 39 are met, the
Planning Commission shall recommend approval of the final plat. If the
Sec. 33-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33-5
C:716
Sec. 33-6. Lot area requirements. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.6; Ord. No.
1221, 8-19-1998]
For the purposes of this chapter, subdivisions shall be classified as complete
utility, partial utility or private service subdivisions. For reasons of health
and sanitation, the minimum required area of each lot shall vary according
to the type of subdivision, the minimum requirements increasing as the
availability of the various public services decreases.
Planning Commission fails to act within the required period, the plat
shall be considered to have been recommended for approval, and a
certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission
upon request of the proprietor, except that the proprietor may waive
this requirement and consent to an extension of the sixty-three-day
period. The grounds for any recommendation of disapproval of a plat
shall be stated upon the records of the Planning Commission.
(d) City Council shall proceed to consider the final plat within 30 days after
the final plat approval by the Planning Commission. City Council shall
either give approval to the final plat, or authorize the City Clerk to
certify the Council's approval on the plat copies, or reject the final plat,
stating in writing its reasons for such rejection and its comments with
respect to requirements for final approval.
(a) Lots located in a complete utility subdivision situated within a primary
service area shall have a minimum frontage at building line of 60 feet
and a minimum lot area of 7,200 square feet.
(b) Lots located in a partial utility subdivision situated within a primary
service area shall have a minimum frontage at building line of 75 feet
and a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
(c) Lots located in a potential utility subdivision situated within a primary
service area shall have a minimum frontage at building line of 90 feet
and a minimum lot area of 13,500 square feet.
(d) Lots located in a potential utility subdivision situated in a secondary
service area shall have a minimum frontage at building line of 110 feet
and a minimum lot area of 18,000 square feet.
(e) Lots located within a private service division situated within a private
service area shall have a minimum frontage at building line of 165 feet
and a minimum lot area of 35,000 square feet.
(f) For lots located within a complete utility subdivision within the WIND
zone district, required lot frontages and lot areas shall be established at
the time of preliminary plat approval.
Sec. 33-5 CHARTER Sec. 33-7
C:717
Sec. 33-7. Required improvements. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.7; Ord. No.
484; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 1184, 10-16-1996; Ord. No. 1221,
8-19-1998]
The public improvements required for a particular class of subdivision shall
be assured by the subdivider prior to final approval of the plat, either by
actual installation of the same prior to such approval or by the posting of a
cash deposit, certified check or surety bond, conditioned upon making the
required improvements within three years, in an amount estimated by the
City Engineer to be sufficient to complete such improvements.
(a) Complete utility subdivisions. The following improvements, constructed
in accordance with City specifications, are required in a complete utility
subdivision:
(1) Thirty-foot wide graded streets, with concrete curbs and gutters,
surfaced with asphalt or by a surfacing determined to be equally
satisfactory by the City Engineer.
(2) Street signs shall be erected at each street intersection.
(3) A public water supply shall be made available to each lot.
(4) A public sanitary sewer shall be made available to each lot.
(5) Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, fire hydrants,
bridges, drains, catch basins and storm sewers.
(6) Concrete sidewalks six feet in width shall be placed on both sides of
the street. For commercial and industrial subdivisions, sidewalks
shall be required along frontages of public and private streets in
association with commercial and industrial development where the
Planning Commission determines such sidewalks are appropriate
and where deemed necessary to assure one or more of the
following:
a. Public safety;
b. Continuity of existing or planned future pedestrian and/or
bicycle circulation;
c. Consistency with sidewalk programs or policies adopted by the
City Council. Sidewalks shall be six feet wide concrete
constructed to City specification unless an alternative is
specifically reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission and City Engineer. Waiver of sidewalks during the
course of site plan review does not prevent the City from
requiring said sidewalks at some future date and assessing
property owners for the cost thereof, as appropriate.
(7) Topsoil shall not be removed from the site or used as spoil but shall
be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the
Sec. 33-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33-7
C:718
lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs,
and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
(b) Partial utility subdivisions. The requirements of Subsection (a) of this
section shall apply to a partial utility subdivision; except, that, in the
alternative:
(1) If a public water system is not available, individual wells may be
used, provided that all other requirements are met; or
(2) If a public sanitary sewer system is not available, individual septic
tanks may be used, provided that all other requirements are met.
(c) Potential utility subdivisions. The following improvements, constructed
in accordance with City specifications, are required in a potential utility
subdivision:
(1) Thirty-foot wide graded streets, with concrete curbs and gutters,
surfaced with asphalt or by a surfacing determined to be equally
satisfactory by the City Engineer.
(2) Street signs shall be erected at each street intersection.
(3) Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, bridges, drains and
catch basins.
(4) Asphalt or concrete sidewalks six feet in width shall be placed on
one side of each street; except, that if the average width of all lots
exceeds 150 feet and if the average lot area exceeds 30,000 square
feet, and if the City Council determines that a sidewalk is not
needed to provide access to a school or to continue an existing
walk, no sidewalks will be required.
(5) Topsoil shall not be removed from the site or used as spoil but shall
be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the
lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs,
and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
(d) Private service subdivisions. Streets not less than 24 feet in width, with
concrete curbs and gutters, or in lieu thereof between intersections,
asphalt valley gutters, graded, drained and surfaced in accordance with
City specifications, are required in a private service subdivision.
(e) Exceptions. In the event that a proposed subdivision is bordered by any
existing street shown on the latest street map for the City on file with
the local government division of the State Highway Department
pursuant to Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951, as amended,80 then
the curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street paving otherwise required
herein on or along such existing streets shall not be required by this
chapter.
80.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 247.651 et seq.
Sec. 33-7 CHARTER Sec. 33-7
C:719
Sec. 33-8. General requirements for all subdivisions. [Ord. No. 448,
§ 9-2.8; Ord. No. 1221, 8-19-1998]
Sec. 33-9. Street requirements generally. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.9;
Ord. No. 1221, 8-19-1998]
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the City major street plan, shall be considered in relation
to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
(f) Requirements for public improvements, including but not limited to
such elements as streets and sidewalks, within a complete utility
subdivision within the WIND zone district shall be established at the
time of preliminary plat and development plan approval.
(a) Compliance with Master Plan, Major Street Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Subdivisions shall be designed whenever possible in accordance with
the provisions of the proposed Master Plan of the City, and shall
conform to the major street plan and the provisions of Chapter 39 of
this Code.
(b) Withholding approval on unsuitable lots. If the City Council, after
proper investigation, determines one or more lots to be unsuitable for
the intended use because of topographical or other physical reasons, it
shall withhold approval of such lots.
(c) Commercial and industrial subdivisions. The City Council shall fix
service and improvement requirements for commercial or industrial
subdivisions with reference to the proposed use and density of the
subdivided area and the type of business or industrial activity to be
carried on in such area, applying the complete utility subdivision
requirements wherever applicable.
(d) Public purpose areas. Whenever the Planning Commission determines
that certain defined areas located in whole or in part within a proposed
subdivision are reasonably necessary for park, recreation, school,
public utility or other public purposes, it shall notify the applicant and
public agency involved before approval of the plat is granted.
Thereupon, unless the applicant is willing to dedicate such area without
cost, the public agency involved shall within 30 days advise the
applicant if it desires to acquire the area in question. Any improvements
placed upon such lands by applicant following receipt of such notice of
intent to acquire such premises by any such public agency shall not
increase the compensation to applicant for such public acquisition, if
proceedings to acquire such area are commenced by such public
agency within six months of the date of platting.
(e) Subdivisions within the WIND zone district shall be designed in
accordance with the Windmill Island master plan and the applicable
provisions of Chapter 39 of this Code.
Sec. 33-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33-9
C:720
convenience and safety, in relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such street, and shall conform to the following criteria:
(a) Layout. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(b) Subdivisions abutting or containing major street. Where a subdivision
abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the City Council
may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property
line, deep lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may
be necessary for adequate protection to residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
(c) Subdivisions bordering on or containing railroad or limited access
highway right-of-way. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the City
Council may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side
of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(d) Reserve strips generally. Reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the
City under conditions approved by the City Council.
(e) Visibility requirements for certain streets. When connecting street lines
deflect from each other at any one point by more than 10°, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance
of not less than 300 feet for local streets, and of such greater radii as
the City Council shall determine for major streets.
(f) Intersections—generally. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other
street at less than 60°.
(g) Same—Rounded property corners. Rounded property corners at street
intersections may be required by the City Engineer.
(h) Half-width streets. Half-width streets shall be prohibited except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations; and where
the City Council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of
the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a
half-width street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided the other half of
the street shall be platted within such tract.
(i) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently,
shall not generally be longer than 800 feet and shall be provided at the
Sec. 33-9 CHARTER Sec. 33-9
C:721
Sec. 33-10. Alleys. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.10; Ord. No. 1221,
8-19-1998]
The City Council shall require an alley in commercial and industrial districts
unless definite provision is made and assurances are given for service
access, including off-street parking, loading and unloading space consistent
with and adequate for the proposed uses.
Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts without the special
consent of the City Council.
The minimum width of an alley shall be 20 feet.
Dead-end alleys shall be avoided whenever possible. If such an alley is
unavoidable, provision shall be made for adequate turn-around facilities at
the dead-end.
Requirements of this section shall not apply to development within the
WIND zone district.
Sec. 33-11. Easements. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.11]
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
for utilities where necessary and shall be of such width as may be
closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at
least 86 feet, and a street property line diameter of at least 110 feet.
(j) Street names. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. New streets which are
extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear
the name of the existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council.
(k) Grades. No street grade shall be less than 1/2 of 1%, nor greater than
7%, unless the City Council finds that the topography of the land to be
subdivided is such as to make it impossible to otherwise develop such
land.
(l) Right-of-way widths. Standard right-of-way widths shall be 66 feet for
local streets and 80 feet for major streets unless otherwise indicated on
the major street plan, but the City Council may vary either requirement
upon a determination that the potential traffic volume indicates that
either a greater or lesser width would be appropriate.
(m) Requirements within WIND. Notwithstanding criteria in Subsections (a)
through (1) above, the unique character and conditions of development
within the WIND may necessitate deviations from the general
requirements herein. Deviation from these criteria, consistent with the
Windmill Island master plan, shall be reviewed and approved at the
time of preliminary plat and development plan review.
Sec. 33-9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33-11
C:722
reasonably necessary for the utilities to be benefitted, but in no event shall
any such easement be of less width than that required by state law.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel
or stream there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage rightof-
way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
such additional width as may be necessary.
Sec. 33-12. Blocks. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.12; Ord. No. 1221,
8-19-1998]
Sec. 33-13. Lots generally. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.13]
(a) Generally. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to:
(1) Provision for adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
(4) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(b) Length. The long dimension of a block shall generally not exceed 1,000
feet.
(c) Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways, not less than 15 feet wide,
may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and
other community facilities. Within the WIND zone district, the
dimension of such walkways may vary.
(a) Generally. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the
minimum building setback lines, shall be appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
(b) Area and setback requirements. Lot area and setback requirements
shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(c) Commercial and industrial lots. The depth and width of properties
reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be
adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities
required by the type of use and development contemplated.
(d) Corner lots for residential use. Corner lots for residential use shall have
extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation
to both streets.
Sec. 33-11 CHARTER Sec. 33-13
C:723
Sec. 33-14. Variances. [Ord. No. 448, § 9-2.14]
(e) Access to public streets. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to
provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to
an existing public street.
(f) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide
separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement across which there shall be no right of
vehicular access may be required along the line of lots abutting such a
major traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.
(g) Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to, or
radial to, street lines.
(a) Petition. A petition for a variance may be submitted in writing by the
applicant at the time of filing the proposed plat with the City Clerk,
which petition shall state fully the grounds and reasons for requesting
each such variance.
(b) Granting generally. If the subdivider can clearly demonstrate that
literal enforcement of any provision of this chapter not specifically
required by Act No. 172 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended,81 is
impractical or will impose undue hardship in the use of his land because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the City Council may
permit such variance as it believes to be reasonable and within the
general purposes and policy of this chapter.
(c) Matters for consideration. In making the findings required below, the
City Council shall consider the location and condition of the proposed
subdivision, the nature of the proposed variance as compared with the
existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or
work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision and variance on traffic conditions in the vicinity.
(d) Findings required. No variance shall be granted unless the City Council
finds that:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his
land.
(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant.
81.Editor's Note: Act No. 172 was repealed by Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967. See now
MCLA § 560.101 et seq., the Land Division Act.
Sec. 33-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33-14
C:724
Sec. 33-15. Administration and interpretation of chapter. [Ord. No.
448, § 9-2.15]
This chapter shall be administered by the City Council assisted by the
research, reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and
affected departments of the City, supplemented by such consulting service
as is deemed desirable. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted
to be minimum requirements for the protection of public health, safety and
welfare.
Chapter 33.1
TAXATION
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to public
health, safety or general welfare or be injurious to property in the
area which such property is situated.
(e) Conditions may be imposed. In permitting any such variance, the City
Council may impose such conditions as will secure substantially the
objectives of the standard or requirement so varied.
Sec. 33-14 CHARTER Sec. 33-15
C:725

ARTICLE I
Elderly Housing Tax Exemption
Sec. 33.1-1. Established. [Ord. No. 712; Ord. No. 764]
There is hereby established a service charge in lieu of taxes against projects
for elderly persons of low and moderate income, financed or assisted with
a mortgage loan insured by the United States Government through the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or assisted
pursuant to the provisions of the state Housing Development Act of 1966,
being Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of 1966, as amended (MCLA § 125.1401
et seq.).
Sec. 33.1-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 712; Ord. No. 764]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACT — The state Housing Development Authority Act, being Act No. 346 of
the Public Acts of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended.
AUTHORITY — The State Housing Development Authority.
CONTRACT RENTS — The rent payable to the owner of a qualified housing
project under the owner's contract for the same including the portion of the
rent payable by the tenant as well as that payable under any governmental
subsidy.
ELDERLY — Those persons 62 years of age or older or who otherwise
qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or practices of the HUD or the
Authority for residency in an elderly housing project.
ELDERLY HOUSING PROJECT — A specific parcel of property, or divisible
portion thereof, improved for rental to a low or moderate income individual
which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and
regulations or standard practices of HUD or the Authority to the extent it is
occupied by the elderly or held for rental exclusively to the elderly. The unit
occupied by a development manager or caretaker shall be excluded from
the tax abatement granted herein unless the manager or caretaker would
otherwise qualify as a low or moderate income individual under the rules
and regulations or standard practices of HUD or the Authority.
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan made by the Authority or insured by HUD
to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of an elderly
housing project.
SPONSOR — Persons or entities which have applied to the Authority or
HUD for a mortgage loan to finance an elderly housing project.
UTILITY — Fuel, public water, public sanitary sewer service and electrical
service.
Sec. 33.1-1 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-3
C:727
Sec. 33.1-3. Class of housing projects. [Ord. No. 712]
It is hereby determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be senior citizens' housing for elderly persons as defined in
Section 33.1-2 above.
Sec. 33.1-4. Payment in lieu of taxes. [Ord. No. 712; Ord. No. 764]
That portion of an elderly housing project exclusively and especially
designated for and occupied by elderly persons of low and moderate income
developed and constructed upon a parcel of land within the City sufficient
for the operation of such project (but no larger) shall be exempt from
all property taxation beginning in the year following commencement of
construction and continuing as long as the mortgaged loan insured by HUD
or assisted or financed by the Authority remains outstanding and unpaid
and as long as HUD or the Authority has an interest in such property,
and shall be subject to a service charge in lieu of such property taxes in
an amount equal to 4% of contract rents of the preceding calendar year,
exclusive of utility charges paid by tenants or the project.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at any
time, be less than the property taxes upon the subject property for the tax
year prior to the date when construction was commenced.
Sec. 33.1-5. Collection procedures.
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the
City; except, that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1
of each year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the General
Property Tax Act82 shall be effective with respect to such payment including,
but not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and
penalties on late payments, return of delinquent taxes and the sale of lands
for delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-6. Contractual effect of article.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act83 to the
contrary, the City shall adopt a resolution between the City and a sponsor of
an elderly housing project establishing a contract to provide tax exemption
and accept payments in lieu thereof naming HUD or the Authority as a thirdparty
beneficiary to such contract.
Sec. 33.1-7. through Sec. 33.1-20. (Reserved)
82.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 211.1 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
Sec. 33.1-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-7
C:728
ARTICLE II
Tax Exemption for Elderly Dwelling Projects Established After
December 1, 1991
Sec. 33.1-21. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991]
It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly
persons of low and moderate income and to encourage the development
of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes
in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966
(1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.) ("Act"). The City is
authorized by said Act to establish or charge a service charge to be paid in
lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the
Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but
for the Act.
It is further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low or
moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City will be benefited and
improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing
certain real estate tax exemption therefore is a valid public purpose;
further, that the continuation of the provisions of this article for tax
exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period
contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of economic
feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in
reliance on such tax exemption.
Sec. 33.1-22. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991; Ord. No. 1176,
7-17-1996]
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346
of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
CONTRACT RENTS — The rent payable to the owner of a qualified housing
project under the owner's contract for the same including the portion of the
rent payable by the tenant as well as that payable under any governmental
subsidy.
ELDERLY — Those persons 62 years of age or older or who otherwise
qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or practices of the HUD or the
Authority for residency in an elderly housing project.
ELDERLY HOUSING PROJECT — A specific parcel of property, or divisible
portion thereof, improved for rental to a low or moderate income individual
which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and
regulations or standard practices of HUD or the Authority to the extent it is
occupied by the elderly or held for rental exclusively to the elderly.
Sec. 33.1-21 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-22
C:729
HANDICAPPED — A person who has a handicap or disability, as the term is
defined pursuant to the Michigan Handicappers' Civil Rights Act (Act 220 of
the Public Acts of 1976)84 as existing or hereafter amended, or such federal
acts as may define such term, as existing or hereafter amended, including
but not limited to Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1972, the Federal
Fair Housing Act, or the American Disabilities Act.
LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — An elderly person whose household income
does not exceed 80% of area median gross income for Ottawa County,
Michigan.*
MODERATE-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — An elderly person whose household
income does not exceed 95% of median income for Ottawa County,
Michigan.*
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan made by the Authority or insured by HUD
to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of an elderly
housing project.
UTILITIES — Fuel, public water, public sanitary sewer service and/or
electrical service.
* Note—Pursuant to Ord. No. 1176, adopted July 17, 1996, household
income and area median gross income shall be determined in a manner
consistent with the determinations of household income and area median
gross income under Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as
amended (the "program"), and if the program is terminated, under the
program regulations as in effect immediately before termination.
Sec. 33.1-23. Class of project established after December 1, 1991.
[Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991]
It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the exemption
set forth in Section 33.1-24 shall apply, and for which a service charge
shall be paid in lieu of taxes, shall be elderly housing projects, which
are constructed and established pursuant to the Act, after December 1,
1991. Article I of Chapter 33.1 shall apply to all elderly housing projects
constructed prior to December 1, 1991.
Sec. 33.1-24. Payment in lieu of taxes. [Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991]
That portion of an elderly housing project exclusively and especially
designated for and occupied by elderly or handicapped persons of low
and moderate income developed and constructed upon a parcel of land
within the City sufficient for the operation of such project (but no larger)
shall be exempt from all property taxation beginning in the year following
commencement of construction and continuing as long as the mortgage
loan insured by HUD or assisted or financed by the Authority remains
outstanding and unpaid and as long as HUD or the Authority has any
interest in such property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an Elderly
84.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 37.1101 et seq., the Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights Act.
Sec. 33.1-22 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-24
C:730
Housing Project, including units occupied by the handicapped, shall be
subject to a service charge in lieu of property taxes in the amounts
hereinafter set forth which shall be applied against contract rents of the
preceding calendar year, exclusive of utility charges paid by tenants or by
the project;
Years 1—8: 2.0%
Years 9—13: 3.0%
Years 14 — thereafter: 4.5%
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at
any time, be less than the property taxes upon the land only without
improvements for the tax year prior to the date when construction was
commenced.
Sec. 33.1-25. Collection procedures. [Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991]
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the
City; except, that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1
of each year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the General
Property Tax Act shall be effective with respect to such payment including,
but not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and
penalties on late payments, return of delinquent taxes and the sale of lands
for delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-26. Contractual effect of article. [Ord. No. 1033,
12-4-1991]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act85 to the
contrary, the City shall adopt a resolution between the City and a sponsor of
an elderly housing project establishing a contract to provide tax exemption
and accept payments in lieu thereof naming HUD or the Authority as a third
party beneficiary to such contract.
Sec. 33.1-27. Severability. [Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991]
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any section
or provision hereof other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
85.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
Sec. 33.1-24 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-28
C:731
Sec. 33.1-28. Effective date. [Ord. No. 1033, 12-4-1991]
This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption and
publication by the City Council. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Sec. 33.1-29. through Sec. 33.1-30. (Reserved)
Sec. 33.1-28 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-29
C:732
ARTICLE III
Tax Exemption for Elderly Dwelling Projects Established After
January 1, 2005
Sec. 33.1-31. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005]
It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly
persons of low and moderate income and to encourage the development
of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes
in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966
(1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.) ("Act"). The City is
authorized by the Act to establish or charge a service charge to be paid in
lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the
Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but
for the Act.
It is further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low or
moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City will be benefited and
improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing
certain real estate tax exemption therefore is a valid public purpose, further,
that the continuation of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and
the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this
article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing
developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax
exemption.
Sec. 33.1-32. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005; Ord. No. 1472,
4-18-2007]
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346
of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
CONTRACT RENTS — The rent payable to the owner of a qualified housing
project under the owner's contract for the same including the portion of the
rent payable by the tenant as well as that payable under any governmental
subsidy.
DISABLED — A person who has a disability, as the term is defined pursuant
to the Persons with Disabilities Act (Act 220 of the Public Acts of 1976)
as existing or hereafter amended, or such federal acts as may define such
term, as existing or hereafter amended, including but not limited to Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1972, the Federal Fair Housing Act, or the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
ELDERLY — Those persons: (i) 62 years of age or older; or (ii) who
otherwise qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or practices of the
HUD or the Authority for residency in an elderly housing project and are
Sec. 33.1-31 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-32
C:733
subject to a resolution of the City Council approving a project under (ii) of
this section.
ELDERLY HOUSING PROJECT — A specific parcel of property, or divisible
portion thereof, improved for rental to a low or moderate income individual
which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and
regulations or standard practices of HUD or the Authority to the extent it is
occupied by the elderly or held for rental exclusively to the elderly.
EXTENDED USE PERIOD — The time period described in the regulatory
agreement entered into between the sponsor of an elderly housing project
and the Authority.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING TAX CREDIT — A tax credit that is established
under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, that is
allocated and administered by the Authority.
LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — An elderly person whose household income
does not exceed the definition of a low-income individual under the statutes,
rules, and regulations or standard practices of HUD or the Authority.
MODERATE-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — An elderly person whose household
income does not exceed the definition of a moderate-income individual
under the statutes, rules, and regulations or standard practices of HUD or
the Authority.
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan made by the Authority or insured by HUD
to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of an elderly
housing project.
UTILITIES — Fuel, public water, public sanitary sewer service and/or
electrical service.
Sec. 33.1-33. Class of project established after January 1, 2005.
[Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005]
It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the exemption
set forth in Section 33.1-34 shall apply, and for which a service charge
shall be paid in lieu of taxes, shall be elderly housing projects, which are
constructed and established pursuant to the Act, after January 1, 2005.
Article I of Chapter 33.1 shall apply to all elderly housing projects
constructed prior to December 1, 1991. Article II of Chapter 33.1 shall apply
to all elderly housing projects constructed prior to January 1, 2005.
Sec. 33.1-34. Payment in lieu of taxes. [Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005;
Ord. No. 1472, 4-18-2007]
That portion of an elderly housing projects exclusively and especially
designated for and occupied by elderly or disabled persons of low and
moderate income developed and constructed upon a parcel of land within
the City sufficient for the operation of such project (but no larger) shall
be exempt from all property taxation beginning in the year following
commencement of construction and continuing as long as:
Sec. 33.1-32 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-34
C:734
Sec. 33.1-35. Collection procedures. [Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005]
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the
City; except, that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1
of each year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the General
Property Tax Act shall be effective with respect to such payment including,
but not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and
penalties on late payments, return of delinquent taxes and the sale of lands
for delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-36. Contractual effect of article. [Ord. No. 1405,
2-16-2005]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act86 to the
contrary, the City shall adopt a resolution between the City and a sponsor of
an elderly housing project establishing a contract to provide tax exemption
and accept payments in lieu thereof naming HUD or the Authority as a third
party beneficiary to such contract.
Sec. 33.1-37. Severability. [Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005]
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any section
(1) The mortgage loan insured by HUD or assisted or financed by the
Authority remains outstanding and unpaid; or
(2) The tax credit compliance period or any extended use period for lowincome
housing tax credits remain in effect; or
(3) HUD or the Authority has any interest in such property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an elderly housing project, including
units occupied by the disabled, shall be subject to a service charge
in lieu of property taxes in the amounts hereinafter set forth which
shall be applied against contract rents of the preceding calendar year,
exclusive of utility charges paid by tenants or by the project equal to
4% for the entire life of the loan.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at
any time, be less than the property taxes upon the land only without
improvements for the tax year prior to the date when construction was
commenced. If the land was exempt from property taxes in the tax
year prior to the date when construction was commenced, the service
charge shall be not less than the property taxes upon the land only
without improvements assuming it was assessable and not exempt.
86.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
Sec. 33.1-34 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-37
C:735
or provision hereof other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Sec. 33.1-38. Effective date. [Ord. No. 1405, 2-16-2005]
This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption and
publication by the City Council. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Sec. 33.1-37 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-38
C:736
ARTICLE IIIA
Tax Exemption for Elderly Dwelling Projects Established After
January 1, 2013
Sec. 33.1-38.1. Preamble. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1615; 9-18-2013
by Ord. No. 1617]
It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly
persons of low and moderate income and to encourage the development
of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes
in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966
[1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA 125.1401 et seq. (Act)]. The City is
authorized by the Act to establish or charge a service charge to be paid in
lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the
Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but
for the Act.
It is further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low or
moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City will be benefited and
improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing
certain real estate tax exemption therefor is a valid public purpose; further,
that the continuation of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and
the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this
article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing
developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax
exemption.
Sec. 33.1-38.2. Definitions. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1615; 9-18-2013
by Ord. No. 1617]
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346
of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended.
ANNUAL SHELTER RENT — The total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of a qualified housing project representing rent or
occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electric, or other utilities
furnished the occupants as well as any amount payable under any
governmental subsidy.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
ELDERLY — Those persons:
(a) Sixty-two years of age or older; or
Who otherwise qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or
practices of the Authority for residency in an elderly housing project
and are subject to a resolution of the City Council approving a project
under Section 33.1-36 of this chapter.
(b)
Sec.
33.1-38.1
CHARTER Sec.
33.1-38.2
C:737
ELDERLY HOUSING PROJECT — A specific parcel of property, or divisible
portion thereof, improved for rental to a low- or moderate-income individual
which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and
regulations or standard practices of the Authority to the extent it is
occupied by the elderly or held for rental exclusively to the elderly.
DISABLED — A person who has a disability, as the term is defined pursuant
to the Persons with Disabilities Act (Act 220 of the Public Acts of 1976),87
as existing or hereafter amended, or such federal acts as may define such
term, as existing or hereafter amended, including but not limited to Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1972, the Federal Fair Housing Act,88 or the
Americans with Disabilities Act.89
LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — An elderly person whose household income
does not exceed the definition of a "low-income individual" under the
statutes, rules, and regulations or standard practices of HUD or the
Authority.
MODERATE-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — An elderly person whose household
income does not exceed the definition of a "moderate-income individual"
under the statutes, rules, and regulations or standard practices of HUD or
the Authority.
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan made by the Authority or insured by HUD
to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of an elderly
housing project.
UTILITIES — Fuel, public water, public sanitary sewer service and/or
electrical service.
Sec. 33.1-38.3. Class of project established after January 1, 2013.
[8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1615; 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1617]
It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the exemption
set forth in Section 33.1-24 shall apply, and for which a service charge
shall be paid in lieu of taxes, shall be elderly housing projects, which are
constructed and established pursuant to the Act, after January 1, 2013.
Article I of Chapter 33.1 shall apply to all elderly housing projects
constructed prior to December 1, 1991. Article II of Chapter 33.1 shall apply
to all elderly housing projects constructed prior to January 1, 2005. Article
III of Chapter 33.1 shall apply to all elderly housing projects constructed
after January 1, 2005, and prior to December 31, 2012.
Sec. 33.1-38.4. Payment in lieu of taxes. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No.
1615; 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1617]
(a) That portion of an elderly housing project exclusively and especially
designated for and occupied by elderly or disabled persons of low and
moderate income developed and constructed upon a parcel of land
87.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 37.1101 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
Sec.
33.1-38.2
HOLLAND CODE Sec.
33.1-38.4
C:738
Sec. 33.1-38.5. Collection procedures. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1615;
9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1617]
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the
City, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1 of each
year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the General Property
Tax Act90 shall be effective with respect to such payment, including, but
not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties
on late payments, return of delinquent taxes and the sale of lands for
delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-38.6. Contractual effect of article. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No.
1615; 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1617]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act91 to the
contrary, the City shall adopt a resolution between the City and a sponsor of
an elderly housing project establishing a contract to provide tax exemption
and accept payments in lieu thereof naming HUD or the Authority as a thirdparty
beneficiary to such contract.
within the City sufficient for the operation of such project (but no
larger) shall be exempt from all property taxation beginning in the
year following commencement of construction and continuing for the
term specified in Section 33.1-38.7. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an
elderly housing project, including units occupied by the disabled, shall
be subject to a service charge in lieu of property taxes in the amounts
hereinafter set forth which shall be applied against annual shelter rent
of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of utility charges paid by
tenants based upon the following schedule:
(1) Calendar year 1 through 4: 4.0%.
(2) Calendar year 5 through 8: 4.5%.
(3) Calendar year 9 through 12: 5.0%
(4) Calendar year 13 through 15: 5.5%
(5) After calendar year 15: 6.0%.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at
any time, be less than the property taxes upon the land only without
improvements for the tax year prior to the date when construction was
commenced.
90.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 211.1 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
Sec.
33.1-38.4
CHARTER Sec.
33.1-38.7
C:739
Sec. 33.1-38.7. Duration. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1615; 9-18-2013
by Ord. No. 1617]
The duration of the service charge in lieu of taxes and the exemption
established by this article shall continue as long as a mortgage loan remains
outstanding and unpaid, or the Authority has any interest in the property,
but, in no event, later than 37 years after the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the operation of the project.
Sec. 33.1-38.8. Severability. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1615;
9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1617]
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any section
or provision hereof other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Sec. 33.1-38.9. When effective; repealer. [8-21-2013 by Ord. No.
1615; 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1617]
This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption as an
emergency ordinance pursuant to Section 5.4 and 5.5 of the Holland City
Charter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
Sec.
33.1-38.7
HOLLAND CODE Sec.
33.1-38.9
C:740
ARTICLE IV
Windscape Apartments Tax Exemption
Sec. 33.1-39. Title. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
This article shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Windscape
Apartments Tax Exemption Ordinance".
Sec. 33.1-40. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low-income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing
for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State
Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 [1966 PA 346, as amended,
MCLA § 125.1401 et seq. (the "Act")]. The City is authorized by this Act
to establish or charge the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by
any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any
amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the
Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income
is a public necessity, and as the City will be benefited and improved by
such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real
estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further,
that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and
the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this
article are essential to the determination of the economic feasibility of the
housing development which is constructed and financed in reliance on such
tax exemption.
The City acknowledges that the Windscape Limited Dividend Housing
Association Limited Partnership of 30100 Telegraph Road, Suite #426
Bingham Farms, MI 48025 (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt
of a federally aided mortgage (as defined below), to acquire, rehabilitate
and operate a housing development identified as Windscape Apartments to
serve persons or families of low income, and that the sponsor has offered
to pay the City on account of this housing development an annual service
charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.
The City further acknowledges that the sponsor proposes to acquire
Windscape Apartments; rehabilitate and reconstruct substantial
improvements to Windscape Apartments; seek to maintain and preserve
Section 8 rental benefits; and provide for the affordable housing stock for
the benefit of the residents of the City of Holland. Based upon these public
purposes, the City of Holland adopts this article.
Sec. 33.1-41. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
All terms shall be defined as set forth in the State Housing Development
Authority Act of 1966, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of
Michigan, as amended, except as follows:
Sec. 33.1-39 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-41
C:741
ACT — The State Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966,
of the State of Michigan, as amended.
ANNUAL SHELTER RENTS — The total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or
occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other
utilities furnished to the occupants, including the portion of the rent payable
under any governmental subsidy.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
CALENDAR YEAR — The consecutive twelve-month period which ends on
December 31 of the year immediately preceding the year in which the
service charge is to be paid.
FEDERALLY AIDED MORTGAGE — Any of the following:
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for persons or families of low income and such elements
of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and
educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the
development as it relates to housing for persons or families of low income.
LOW-INCOME PERSONS OR FAMILIES — Shall have the same meaning as
found in Section 15(a)(7) of the Act.93
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for
the construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development.
SPONSOR — Windscape Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited
Partnership, 30100 Telegraph Road, Suite #426, Bingham Farms, MI 48025,
its successors in interest, which has applied to the Authority for a mortgage
loan and an allocation of low-income housing tax credits to finance the
housing development.
A below-market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased, or held by
the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(1)
A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of Housing
and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent
subsidies.
(2)
A mortgage receiving interest rate reduction payments provided by the
Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(3)
A mortgage on a housing development to which the Authority allocates
low-income housing tax credits under Section 22b of the Act.92
(4)
A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law
designated specifically to develop low and moderate-income housing,
consistent with the Act.
(5)
92.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1422b.
93.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(7).
Sec. 33.1-41 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-41
C:742
UTILITIES — Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the housing development.
Sec. 33.1-42. Class of housing developments established after
January 1, 2007. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu
of such taxes shall those housing developments be acquired, rehabilitated
and operated for the benefit of low-income persons or families, which are
financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that
Windscape Apartments is of this class, and this Article IV shall relate solely
to the sponsor of this housing development.
Article IV of this chapter shall only apply to housing developments that
are rehabilitations of existing properties and shall not apply to new
construction. The sponsor of rehabilitation projects must contribute a
significant amount of capital in the rehabilitation process and must meet
the goals and objectives set forth in Section 33.1-40.
Sec. 33.1-43. Establishment of annual service charge. [Ord. No.
1476, 5-2-2007]
Subject to the receipt of a federally aided mortgage, the housing
development identified as Windscape Apartments exclusively and specially
designated for low-income persons and families shall be exempt from all
property taxation beginning in the year following the commencement of
rehabilitation construction and continuing as long as the mortgage loan
insured by HUD or assisted or financed by the Authority remains
outstanding and unpaid and as long as HUD or the Authority has any
interest in such property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Windscape
Apartments shall be subject to a service charge in lieu of property taxes
in the amount hereinafter set forth which shall be applied against annual
shelter rents of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of utility charges
paid by tenants or by the sponsor, equal to 4% for the entire life of the
federally aided mortgage.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at
any time, be less than the property taxes upon the land only (without
improvements) of the housing development for the tax year prior to the date
when rehabilitation was commenced.
Sec. 33.1-44. Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
[Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
Notwithstanding Section 33.1-43, the service charge to be paid each year
in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt
and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or families shall be
equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of
the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt.
Sec. 33.1-41 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-45
C:743
Sec. 33.1-45. Contractual effect of article. [Ord. No. 1476,
5-2-2007]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act94 to the
contrary, a contract between the City and the sponsor with the Authority
as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and
accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by
enactment of this article.
Sec. 33.1-46. Payment of service charge. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the
City of Holland; except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before
July 1 of each year. The entire tax collection procedure including the lien
status for nonpayment provided by the General Property Tax Act of the
State of Michigan, including applicable provisions of the Charter of the City
of Holland, shall be effective with respect to such payment, including, but
not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties
on late payments, return of delinquent taxes, and the sale of lands for
delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-47. Duration. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
federally aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or the Authority
has any interest in the property provided, that the rehabilitation
construction of the housing development commences within one year from
the effective date of this article.
Sec. 33.1-48. Severability. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the
same shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or the section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Sec. 33.1-49. Effective date. [Ord. No. 1476, 5-2-2007]
This article shall become effective upon the adoption by the Council of
the City of Holland, and within 21 days after adoption and publication in
accordance with the Charter of the City of Holland.
94.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
Sec. 33.1-45 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-49
C:744
ARTICLE V
Greenbriar Apartments Tax Exemption
Sec. 33.1-50. Title. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-200995]
This article shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Greenbriar
Apartments Tax Exemption Ordinance."
Sec. 33.1-51. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens
of low-income and elderly persons of low and moderate income and to
encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service
charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority, Act 346 of 1966, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et
seq. (the "Act"). The City is authorized by this Act to establish or charge
the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of
housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses
not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further
acknowledged that such housing for persons of low-income and elderly
persons of low and moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City
will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the
same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a
valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this
article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the
period contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of the
economic feasibility of the housing development which is constructed and
financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
The City acknowledges that the KBJ Greenbriar Limited Dividend Housing
Association Limited Partnership of 1822 W. Milham, Suite 1-A, Portage,
Michigan 49024 (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of a
"federally aided mortgage" (as defined below), to acquire, rehabilitate and
operate 126 apartment units in a housing development identified as
Greenbriar Apartments, which is legally described in Exhibit A [attached
to Ord. No. 1538], (the "Greenbriar Units") to serve persons or families of
low-income and elderly persons of low or moderate income, and that the
sponsor has offered to pay the City on account of this housing development
an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. The sponsor
acknowledges and represents that 66 of the 126 [apartment units] will be
leased to elderly persons of low or moderate income.
The City further acknowledges that the sponsor proposes to acquire
Greenbriar Units; rehabilitate and reconstruct substantial improvements to
Greenbriar Apartments; seek to maintain and preserve Section 8 Rental
benefits; and provide for the affordable housing stock for the benefit of the
95.Editor's Note: This ordinance also rescinded former Art. V, Greenbriar Apartments Tax
Exemption, adopted by Ord. No. 1515.
Sec. 33.1-50 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-51
C:745
residents of the City of Holland. Based upon these public purposes, the City
of Holland adopts this article.
Sec. 33.1-52. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, as amended, except as
follows:
ACT — The State Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966,
of the State of Michigan, as amended.
ANNUAL SHELTER RENTS — The total collections during an agreed annual
period or on behalf of from all occupants of a housing development
representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas,
electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants, including the
portion of the rent payable under any governmental subsidy program.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
CALENDAR YEAR — The consecutive twelve-month period which ends on
December 31 of the year immediately preceding the year in which the
service charge is to be paid.
ELDERLY — A single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household
in which at least one member is 55 years of age or older and all other
members are 50 years of age or older.
FEDERALLY AIDED MORTGAGE — Any of the following:
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for low-income persons or families or elderly persons of
low or moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial,
recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the
Authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates
to housing for low-income persons or families or elderly persons of low or
moderate income.
A below-market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased, or held by
the Secretary of the Department of HUD.
(1)
A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of HUD and
augmented by a program of rent subsidies.
(2)
A mortgage receiving interest rate reduction payments provided by the
Secretary of the Department of HUD.
(3)
A mortgage on a housing development to which the Authority allocates
low-income housing tax credits under Section 22b of the Act.96
(4)
A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law
designated specifically to develop low and moderate-income housing,
consistent with the Act.
(5)
96.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1422b.
Sec. 33.1-51 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-52
C:746
LOW-INCOME OR MODERATE-INCOME PERSONS — Shall have the same
meaning as found in Section 11(g) of the Act.97
LOW-INCOME PERSONS OR FAMILIES — Shall have the same meaning as
found in Section 15(a)(7) of the Act.98
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for
the construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development.
SPONSOR — KBJ Greenbriar Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited
Partnership, 1822 W. Milham, Suite 1-A, Portage, Michigan 49024, its
successors in interest, which has applied to the Authority for a mortgage
loan and an allocation of low-income housing tax credits to finance the
housing development.
UTILITIES — Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by a housing development.
Sec. 33.1-53. Class of housing developments established after
January 1, 2008. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be those housing developments acquired, rehabilitated, and
operated for the benefit of low-income persons and elderly persons of low
income or moderate income, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the
Act. It is further determined that Greenbriar Apartments is of this class, and
this Article V shall relate solely to the sponsor of this housing development.
Article V of this chapter shall only apply to housing developments that
are rehabilitations of existing properties and shall not apply to new
construction. The sponsor of rehabilitation projects must contribute a
significant amount of capital in the rehabilitation process and must meet
the goals and objectives set forth in Section 33.1-51.
Sec. 33.1-54. Establishment of annual service charge. [Ord. No.
1538, 9-16-2009]
Subject to the receipt of a federally aided mortgage, the housing
development identified as Greenbriar Apartments exclusively and specially
designated for low-income persons or elderly persons of low or moderate
income shall be exempt from all property taxation beginning in the year
following the commencement of rehabilitation and continuing as long as
the mortgage loan insured by HUD or assisted or financed by the Authority
remains outstanding and unpaid and as long as HUD or the Authority has
any interest in such property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Greenbriar
Apartments shall be subject to a service charge in lieu of property taxes
in the amount hereinafter set forth which shall be applied against annual
shelter rents of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of utility charges
97.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1411(g).
98.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(7).
Sec. 33.1-52 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-54
C:747
paid by tenants or by the sponsor, equal to 4% for the entire life of the
federally aided mortgage.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at
any time, be less than the property taxes upon the land only (without
improvements) of the housing development for the tax year prior to the date
when rehabilitation was commenced.
Sec. 33.1-55. Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
[Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
Notwithstanding Section 33.1-54, the service charge to be paid each year
in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt
and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or families or
elderly persons of low or moderate income shall be equal to the full amount
of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development
if the housing development were not tax exempt.
Sec. 33.1-56. Contractual effect of ordinance. [Ord. No. 1538,
9-16-2009]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act99 to the
contrary, a contract between the City and the sponsor with the Authority
as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and
accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by
enactment of this ordinance [article].
Sec. 33.1-57. Payment of service charge. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the
City of Holland; except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before
July 1 of each year. The entire tax collection procedure including the lien
status for nonpayment provided by the General Property Tax Act of the
State of Michigan, including applicable provisions of the Charter of the City
of Holland, shall be effective with respect to such payment, including, but
not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties
on late payments, return of delinquent taxes, and the sale of lands for
delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-58. Duration. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
federally aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid and the Authority
or HUD has an interest in the property provided, that the rehabilitation
construction of the housing development commences within one year from
the effective date of this article.
99.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
Sec. 33.1-54 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-59
C:748
Sec. 33.1-59. Severability. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the
same shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or the section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Sec. 33.1-60. Effective date. [Ord. No. 1538, 9-16-2009]
This article shall become effective upon the adoption by the Council of the
City of Holland, and is declared to be an emergency ordinance pursuant to
Section 5.5 of the Holland City Charter authorizing the Council of the City
of Holland to adopt an ordinance upon declaration of emergency.
Sec. 33.1-59 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-60
C:749

ARTICLE VI
Centennial Park Apartments Tax Exemption
Sec. 33.1-61. Title. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
This article shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Centennial Park
Apartments Tax Exemption Ordinance.”
Sec. 33.1-62. Preamble. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens
of low income and elderly persons of low and moderate income and to
encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service
charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority, Act 346 of 1966, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et
seq. (the "Act"). The City is authorized by this Act to establish or charge
the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of
housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses
not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further
acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income and elderly
persons of low and moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City
will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the
same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a
valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this
article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the
period contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of the
economic feasibility of the housing development which is constructed and
financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
The City acknowledges that the sponsor (as defined below) has offered,
subject to receipt of a "federally aided mortgage" (as defined below), to
construct, own, maintain and operate apartment units in a housing
development (defined below) identified as Centennial Park Apartments on
the parcel known as 254 South River Avenue in the City of Holland to
serve low-income persons or families (defined below), and that the sponsor
has offered to pay the City on account of this housing development an
annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. The sponsor
acknowledges and represents that apartment units will be leased to lowincome
persons or families.
The City further acknowledges that the sponsor proposes to construct, own,
maintain and operate the housing development to provide for the affordable
housing stock for the benefit of the residents of the City of Holland. Based
upon these public purposes, the City of Holland adopts this article.
Sec. 33.1-63. Definitions. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, as amended, except as
follows:
Sec. 33.1-61 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-63
C:751
ACT — The State Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966,
of the State of Michigan, as amended.
ANNUAL SHELTER RENTS — The total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of the housing development representing rent or
occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other
utilities furnished to the occupants, including the portion of the rent payable
under any governmental subsidy program.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
CALENDAR YEAR — The consecutive twelve-month period which ends on
December 31 of the year immediately preceding the year in which the
service charge is to be paid.
FEDERALLY AIDED MORTGAGE — Any of the following:
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for low-income persons or Families and such elements
of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and
educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the
development as it relates to housing for low-income persons or families on
property ("property") legally described as:
PART OF LOTS 1 & 2 BLK 47 COM 100 FT S OF NE COR OF LOT 1, TH W
132 FT, S 31.1 FT, E 132 FT, TH N 32 FT TO BEG, ALSO LOTS 17 & 18
BLK 47. ORIGINAL PLAT CITY OF HOLLAND SEC 29 T5N R15W FROM
70-16-29-330-023 7/01
Tax Parcel No. 70-16-29-330-027
LOW-INCOME PERSONS OR FAMILIES — Shall have the same meaning as
found in Section 15a(7) of the Act.
SPONSOR — General Capital Acquisitions, LLC, it successors and assigns,
and any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan, which has applied
to the Authority for a mortgage loan and an allocation of low-income
housing tax credits to finance the housing development.
A below-market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased, or held by
the Secretary of the Department of HUD.
(1)
A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of HUD and
augmented by a program of rent subsidies.
(2)
A mortgage receiving interest rate reduction payments provided by the
Secretary of the Department of HUD.
(3)
A mortgage on a housing development to which the Authority allocates
low-income housing tax credits under Section 22b of the Act.
(4)
A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law
designated specifically to develop low- and moderate-income housing,
consistent with the Act.
(5)
Sec. 33.1-63 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-63
C:752
UTILITIES — Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the housing development.
Sec. 33.1-64. Class of housing developments established after
January 1, 2017. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu
of such taxes shall be those housing developments constructed, maintained
and operated for the benefit of low-income persons or families, which are
financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that
Centennial Park Apartments is of this class, and this Article VI shall relate
solely to the sponsor of this housing development.
Article VI of this chapter shall only apply to housing developments that are
new construction. The sponsor of rehabilitation projects must contribute a
significant amount of capital in the construction process and must meet the
goals and objectives set forth in Section 33.1-62.
Sec. 33.1-65. Establishment of annual service charge. [Added
3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
Subject to the receipt of a federally aided mortgage, the housing
development identified as Centennial Park Apartments, exclusively and
specially designated for low-income persons or families, shall be exempt
from all ad valorem property taxation beginning as of the tax day following
the commencement of construction and continuing for the duration set
forth in Section 33.1-69. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Centennial Park
Apartments shall be subject to a service charge in lieu of ad valorem
property taxes in the amount hereinafter set forth which shall be applied
against annual shelter rents of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of
utility charges paid by tenants or by the sponsor, equal to 4% of annual
shelter rents of the preceding calendar year for 30 years.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at any
time, be less than $13,000 for the housing development.
Sec. 33.1-66. Limitation on payment of annual service charge.
[Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
Notwithstanding Section 33.1-65, the service charge to be paid each year in
lieu of ad valorem property taxes for the part of the housing development
which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low-income
persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which
would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing
development were not tax exempt.
Sec. 33.1-63 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-67
C:753
Sec. 33.1-67. Contractual effect of article. [Added 3-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 1686]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15a(5) of the Act to the contrary,
a contract between the City and the sponsor with the Authority as thirdparty
beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of ad valorem property taxes, as previously described, is
effectuated by enactment of this article and shall be executed by the City
and developer. The contract shall include the following conditions:
Sec. 33.1-68. Payment of service charge. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 1686]
The service charge in lieu of ad valorem property taxes as determined
hereunder and the payment due under the municipal services agreement
shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable
in the City of Holland; except that the annual payment shall be paid on or
before July 1 of each year. The entire tax collection procedure, including the
lien status for nonpayment provided by the General Property Tax Act of the
State of Michigan, including applicable provisions of the Charter of the City
of Holland, shall be effective with respect to such payment, including, but
not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties
on late payments, return of delinquent taxes, and the sale of lands for
delinquent taxes.
Sec. 33.1-69. Duration. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
This article shall remain in effect for 30 years; provided that this article
will not take effect unless the construction of the housing development
commences within two years from the effective date of this article.
Sec. 33.1-70. Severability. [Added 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1686]
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the
same shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or the section or
(1) The developer shall obtain approval of all the landscaping, building and
site plan improvements recommended by the Downtown Development
Authority and required by the Planning Commission prior to
commencement of construction and shall install or construct such
landscaping, building and site plan improvements as part of the course
of construction and shall maintain same thereafter.
(2) The developer shall obtain approval from the City Manager of an
updated resident screening and behavioral safeguards plan prior to
construction to accurately reflect all assertions on management of this
particular property provided in a variety of public meetings (inclusive of
crime free lease requirements) and shall comply with the plan for the
duration of the PILOT exemption.
Sec. 33.1-67 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.1-70
C:754
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Sec. 33.1-71. (Reserved)
Sec. 33.1-70 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-71
C:755

ARTICLE VII
Tax Exemption for Elderly Dwelling Projects Established After
January 1, 2018
Sec. 33.1-72. Class of project to which exemption applies.
[9-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1744]
It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the exemption
set forth in § 33.1-24 shall apply, and for which a service charge shall be
paid in lieu of taxes, shall be elderly low- and moderate-income housing
projects, which are constructed and established pursuant to the Act, after
January 1, 2018. § 33.1-38.1, § 33.1-38.2 and §§ 33.1-38.5 through 33.1-38.9
of Article IIIA of Chapter 33.1 shall apply to all elderly housing projects
constructed after January 1, 2018, except as modified in this Article VII.
Sec. 33.1-73. Payment in lieu of taxes. [9-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1744]
Sec. 33.1-74. Local approvals and agreements. [9-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 1744]
The developer shall enter into a development agreement and municipal
services agreement with the City.
(1) That portion of an elderly housing project exclusively and especially
designated for and occupied by elderly or disabled persons of low and
moderate income developed and constructed upon a parcel of land
within the City sufficient for the operation of such project (but no
larger) which is constructed after January 1, 2018, shall be exempt from
all property taxation beginning in the year following commencement of
construction and continuing for the term of 20 years when approved by
resolution of the City Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an
elderly housing project, including units occupied by the disabled,
constructed after January 1, 2018, shall be subject to a service charge
in lieu of property taxes in the amounts hereinafter set forth which shall
be applied against annual shelter rent of the preceding calendar year,
exclusive of utility charges paid by tenants of 4%.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the service charge, at
any time, be less than the property taxes upon the land only without
improvements for the tax year prior to the date when construction was
commenced.
Sec. 33.1-72 CHARTER Sec. 33.1-74
C:757
Chapter 33.2
PROPERTY TAX ADMINISTRATION FEE
Sec. 33.2-1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1112, 5-18-1994]
Pursuant to Act 399 of the Public Acts of 1984, as amended, MCLA § 211.44
et seq., a property tax administration fee is hereby adopted.
Sec. 33.2-2. Purpose of the property tax administration fee. [Ord.
No. 1112, 5-18-1994]
The property tax administration fee shall be used solely to offset costs
incurred the City in assessing property values; in collecting property tax
levies; in the review and appeal of assessments, and such other purposes
as shall be authorized pursuant to Act 399 of the Public Acts of 1984, as
amended.
Sec. 33.2-3. Adoption of property tax administration fee; effective
date. [Ord. No. 112, 5-18-1994; Ord. No. 1211, 5-20-1998]
Commencing with the real and personal property ad valorem taxes levied
effective July 1, 1998 and December 1, 1998, and on such dates as shall
be hereafter authorized by statute and/or Charter, the City Treasurer shall
add a property tax administration fee of 1% computed on the aggregate
amount of real and personal property taxes collected and due thereafter.
This authorization for the imposition of a property tax administration fee
shall be valid for all levies that become a lien after the adoption of this
ordinance. The amendment of this section shall not affect the collection and
enforceability of a property tax administration fee imposed pursuant to this
section prior to its amendment.
Sec. 33.2-4. Late penalty charge. [Ord. No. 1112, 5-18-1994; Ord.
No. 1211, 5-20-1998]
On real and personal property taxes paid after February 14, 1999, and
after February 14 of each succeeding year thereafter, and prior to March
1, 1999 and prior to March 1 of each succeeding year thereafter, the City
Treasurer shall add an additional 3% late penalty charge on all taxes paid
after February 14 and before March 1. This authorization for the imposition
of a late penalty charge shall be valid for all levies that become a lien
after the adoption of this ordinance. The amendment of this section shall
not affect the collection and enforceability of an additional 1% property tax
administration fee and a 3% late penalty charge imposed pursuant to this
section prior to its amendment.
Sec. 33.2-5. Waiver of interest and penalty charges. [Ord. No. 1112,
5-18-1994; Ord. No. 1491, 2-6-2008]
Sec. 33.1-74 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.2-5
C:758
Sec. 33.2-6. Property tax administration fee and late penalty fee;
lien and collection. [Ord. No. 1112, 5-18-1994]
The property tax administration fees and late penalty fees as established
by this chapter shall become a lien and enforced in the same manner
as delinquent, real and personal property taxes pursuant to statute and
charter.
Sec. 33.2-7. Collection of summer taxes. [Ord. No. 1112, 5-18-1994]
The collection procedure for summer taxes pursuant to Section 10.15 of the
Charter is hereby reaffirmed and shall be collected in accordance with the
provisions set forth therein.
Sec. 33.2-8. Rescission of prior resolution.
The resolution of City Council adopted December 21, 1983 as Council
Action No. 83.685 shall be rescinded upon the effective date of this article
[June 8, 1994]. The rescission of this resolution shall not affect the collection
(1) The City Treasurer may waive interest accruing on the delinquent
summer property tax as defined by Section 10.15 of the Charter,
interest on taxes from February 15 to March 1, and late penalty charges
for the homestead property of a senior citizen, paraplegic, quadriplegic,
eligible service man, eligible veteran, eligible widow, totally and
permanently disabled person, or blind person, as those persons are
defined in Chapter 9 of Act 281 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended,
being MCLA § 206.501 to 206.532, if such person makes a claim before
February 15 for a credit for that property provided by Chapter 9 of Act
281 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, presents a copy of the form
filed for that credit with the City Treasurer, and if such person has not
received the credit before February 15.
(2) The City Council may waive interest on delinquent personal property
taxes, in whole or in part, if the taxpayer executes and complies with an
acceptable written tax payment agreement setting forth a plan to cure
the delinquency.
(3) The City Treasurer may waive interest on delinquent personal property
taxes:
(a) To the extent of $200 per tax year, per personal property tax parcel
number and without City Council approval, if the taxpayer executes
and complies with an acceptable written tax payment agreement to
cure the delinquency; or
(b) To the extent of $500 per tax year, to allow collection of delinquent
personal property taxes in an action within the jurisdiction of the
small claims division of the district court.
(4) A waiver may be revoked if the taxpayer fails to pay as agreed.
Sec. 33.2-5 CHARTER Sec. 33.2-8
C:759
and enforceability of delinquent taxes which became delinquent prior to the
adoption of this ordinance.
Sec. 33.2-9. Validity. [Ord. No. 1112, 5-18-1994]
Chapter 34
TAXICABS AND BUSES
(a) Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
(b) Savings clause. This chapter shall not effect violations of any other
ordinance, code, resolution, or regulation of the City existing prior to
the effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and
shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes, resolutions, or regulations in
effect at the time the violation was committed.
Sec. 33.2-8 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 33.2-9
C:760
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)100
Sec. 34-1. through Sec. 34-26. (Reserved)101
100. Editor's Note: Former Article I, Taxicabs and Taxi Buses, adopted by Ord. No. 1392, as
amended, was repealed 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1722.
101. Editor's Note: Former Article I, Taxicabs and Taxi Buses, consisting of Sections 34-1
through 34-26, adopted by Ord. No. 1392, as amended, was repealed 1-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 1722.
Sec. 34-1 CHARTER Sec. 34-1
C:761

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)102
Sec. 34-27. through Sec. 34-36. (Reserved)
102. Editor's Note: Former Article II, Motor Buses, from the 1955 Code, consisting of Sections
34-27 through 34-36, as amended, was repealed 1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1722.
Sec. 34-27 CHARTER Sec. 34-27
C:763

ARTICLE III
Pedicabs
Sec. 34-37. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
The transportation of persons by means of pedicabs is a matter closely
affecting the public interest. The public interest requires that pedicab
drivers be properly qualified persons, that the pedicabs be fit for their
intended purpose and that the safety and welfare of passengers be
protected in the operation of pedicabs.
Sec. 34-38. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Sec. 34-39. Prohibition on operation of pedicab. [Ord. No. 1562,
3-23-2011]
No person shall drive or operate a pedicab upon the streets, highways, or
thoroughfares of the City of Holland and no person who owns or controls a
pedicab shall permit it to be so driven or operated unless the pedicab is in
compliance with all of the requirements of this article.
Sec. 34-40. Application for operating permit. [Ord. No. 1562,
3-23-2011]
(a) PEDICAB — A multiwheeled passenger vehicle that is moved by human
power that is pulled, pushed, or otherwise propelled by a person, which
is used in the movement of passengers on public rights-of-way and shall
include vehicles pulled or pushed directly by human power and vehicles
propelled through a cycle or other mechanical means. Pedicab shall
include, but not be limited to, cycle rickshaws, cyclos, geotaxis,
trishaws, bike taxis and any other pushcart or rickshaw-type vehicle.
(b) PEDICAB OWNER — A person who is the owner of a pedicab or a
proprietor of a pedicab business who supplies pedicabs to others to
operate as independent contractors or employees.
(c) PEDICAB DRIVER — A person who operates a pedicab.
(d) OPERATING PERMIT — A written permit issued by the City authorizing
a person to operate a pedicab.
(a) The City Clerk shall issue operating permits for pedicabs. Every person
desiring to obtain an operating permit is required to make written
application for a permit to the City Clerk and accompanied by a fee
established by resolution of the City Council. The applicant shall
truthfully and fully state the information requested on the application
such as:
(1) The applicant's full name and residence address;
Sec. 34-37 CHARTER Sec. 34-40
C:765
Sec. 34-41. Review of application. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
(2) The applicant's date of birth;
(3) The applicant's drivers license and number;
(4) The names and residence address of any shareholders, members,
or partners of any entity applying for the operating permit;
(5) The name of the business;
(6) A certificate of insurance satisfying the requirements of Section
34-46;
(7) The proposed fare to be charged per ride;
(8) A list of each authorized pedicab driver, including name, address,
the length of time such driver has been a resident of Michigan, date
of birth, and certification that the driver has completed the
required training program established in this article;
(9) If a proposed pedicab driver does not have a valid current Michigan
driver's license, the applicant shall provide a background check
(showing traffic citations as well as criminal history) for such driver
and the background check shall be current within 30 days of the
filing of the application;
(10) A description of the pedicab, including trade name, if any, serial
number and body style; and
(11) Such other material as the City Clerk may require.
(b) If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company,
copartnership, or other such business entity, the person who will act as
the principal in charge of the business to be licensed shall sign the
application and all of the owners of the business entity shall meet all of
the requirements for individual applicants.
(a) Upon the filing of the application for an operating permit, the City Clerk
shall review and evaluate the application. In determining whether a
permit should be issued, the City Clerk shall evaluate whether the
application and the applicant meet all of the following:
(1) Whether the proposed activities comply with all of the provisions of
this article and the code;
(2) Whether the proposed activities involve the safe use of the streets
by the public for vehicles and pedestrians;
(3) Whether the applicant has not previously violated two or more
provisions of this article or the code.
(b) The Department of Public Safety shall review the application to
determine if it satisfies the requirements in this article.
Sec. 34-40 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 34-41
C:766
Sec. 34-42. Validity of operating permit. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
Sec. 34-43. Pedicab operating permit and decal fee. [Ord. No. 1562,
3-23-2011]
The City shall charge a nonrefundable fee to recover the cost of activities
associated with the administration, regulation, and issuance of decals and
operating permits. The fee shall be determined annually by resolution of the
City Council.
Sec. 34-44. Pedicab identification number and decal. [Ord. No.
1562, 3-23-2011]
Sec. 34-45. Operating regulations. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
(c) If the permit is not approved, the applicant may file an appeal as
provided in Section 34-48.
(d) The City Clerk shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an
application which is complete for an operating permit within 30 days of
it being filed.
(a) Operating permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date
of issuance.
(b) Operating permits shall become invalid immediately if the operating
permit is defaced, altered, forged or counterfeited.
(a) It is unlawful for any owner to lease, rent, or allow a pedicab to be
operated for hire without first having obtained a decal issued by the
City. The decal shall be affixed in a manner prescribed by the City. Each
pedicab shall have a unique, nontransferable vehicle identification
number, at least four inches in height, visible on both sides of the
vehicle.
(b) Before allowing a pedicab to be operated for hire, owners shall have a
decal and identification number.
(c) The decal form shall be prescribed by the City.
(a) Pedicabs are only permitted to be driven or operated in the City of
Holland on streets, highways or thoroughfares described on a map that
is approved by the City Council.
(b) If a pedicab owner desires that a person drive a pedicab and such
person was not listed in the application described above, the owner will
submit the information provided for in Section 34-40(a)(8) to the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall review the information as provided
previously and approve or deny such request.
(c) No person under the age of 18 shall operate a pedicab.
Sec. 34-41 CHARTER Sec. 34-45
C:767
Sec. 34-46. Vehicle regulations. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
(d) No person shall drive or operate a pedicab unless that person has a
current valid driver's license.
(e) No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a pedicab in an unsafe
condition.
(f) All pedicab drivers are subject to all applicable traffic safety laws, rules,
and regulations of the City of Holland and the State of Michigan.
(g) All pedicab drivers shall wear respectable attire and a shirt that
includes the name of the pedicab owner.
(h) Pedicabs are not permitted to park on streets, highways or
thoroughfares except as follows:
(1) The Public Safety Director or its designee may designate a portion
of streets, highways or thoroughfares as "pedicab stand," for the
parking of pedicabs. The Mainstreet Downtown Development
Authority or the Principal Shopping District may designate pedicab
stands for the 8th Street to Kollen Park Drive areas.
(2) A single pedicab may park temporarily at the curb or on a sidewalk
only as long as necessary for passengers to board and exit the
vehicle.
(3) In all cases, pedicabs shall be parked in a location that does not
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(i) Fares must be established and provided with application and if rates are
changed they must be reported to the City Clerk's office.
(j) No person shall use or allow any pedicab to be used for any illegal
purpose. No person shall use or permit or allow any pedicab to be used
in, or to aid or abet, any illegal act.
(k) No person shall operate or knowingly permit any other person to
operate any pedicab under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any
controlled, exhilarating or stupefying substance or of any combination
of substances mentioned herein.
(l) No person shall operate a pedicab when the number of passengers
exceeds the number of available seats. No person shall operate a
pedicab unless all passengers are seated in a seat designed for that
purpose and using the seatbelt provided for in the seat.
(m) Each pedicab owner shall adopt and operate a system for the collection,
storage and return of personal property left in a pedicab.
(a) All pedicab owners must have each pedicab vehicle inspected by the
Department of Public Safety prior to operation. All pedicab vehicles
must be constructed for and have the structural integrity to support
Sec. 34-45 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 34-46
C:768
pedicab operations. Each pedicab vehicle must be equipped with the
following:
(1) Front and rear turn signals;
(2) Headlights;
(3) Taillights;
(4) Rearview mirror;
(5) A bell or horn;
(6) Seatbelts for passengers;
(7) Reflectors placed on each wheel and at each corner of the body of
the pedicab;
(8) A proper braking system; and
(9) Any other equipment required to comply with all applicable federal
and state laws.
(10) A pedicab must not have any cracks, broken or missing parts, or
other visible damage. All wheels must be firmly attached to the hub
of a vehicle and all springs, axles, and supporting structures of
each pedicab vehicle must be intact.
(b) Each pedicab driver at all times shall keep each pedicab vehicle clean
and free of refuse and in safe operating condition. Prior to the operation
of any pedicab and at the beginning of each shift or each day of
operation, the pedicab driver shall thoroughly inspect the pedicab for
safe operating conditions and shall maintain records of such inspection
if required by the City. For any condition found then or at any other time
that will prevent the safe operation of the pedicab, the pedicab driver
shall immediately remove the pedicab from service and correct the
condition before the pedicab is in operating service.
(c) Each pedicab shall have a unique, nontransferable vehicle identification
number at least four inches in height visible on both sides of the
vehicle.
(d) Each pedicab owner shall prepare a training program for pedicab
drivers covering, at a minimum, the safe operation of pedicab vehicles,
customer service policies, and the requirements of this chapter.
(e) Each pedicab owner shall maintain at all times a policy of liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 for personal injuries,
and property damage. The policy shall directly protect the City of
Holland, its officials, officers, members, volunteers, sponsors, directors,
employees, and agents as additional named insureds, and shall provide
that the insurance be primary insurance and that no other insurance
purchased by the City will be called on to contribute to a loss covered
by said policy. The policy shall further provide 10 days' notice of
Sec. 34-46 CHARTER Sec. 34-46
C:769
Sec. 34-47. Grounds for suspension or revocation of operating
permit or decal. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
cancellation or material change to the City's designated agent.
Evidence of insurance coverage is required before any permit is issued.
Prior approval of the City of Holland is required. Each owner and
pedicab driver shall further agree to hold the City harmless for any
liability or claim arising out of his or her operation that is not covered
by the required insurance.
(f) If a pedicab vehicle is involved in an accident or collision, the pedicab
driver shall immediately notify the pedicab owner and the Department
of Public Safety and remain at the scene until the police investigate the
accident or collision. The pedicab owner shall submit a full written
report on the condition of the pedicab vehicle to the Department of
Public Safety within 72 hours after the occurrence. Before operating
the pedicab vehicle again, the pedicab owner shall have the vehicle
reinspected by the Department of Public Safety for safety.
(g) Each pedicab owner must file a business information card with the
Department of Public Safety prior to operation.
(h) All pedicab drivers must display an identification badge. Each
identification badge must contain the following information:
(1) Name; and
(2) Photograph.
(a) Operating permits or decals may be denied, suspended or revoked by
the City based upon any of the following grounds:
(1) The pedicab owner or a pedicab driver fails or has failed to comply
with any provisions of this chapter.
(2) A pedicab driver has been convicted of any felony; any
misdemeanor or felony reckless driving or driving under the
influence offense; or any crime reasonably related to the
qualifications, functions, or duties of the passenger transport
business or the ability of the pedicab driver to safely transport
passengers; unless five years has elapsed from the successful
completion of the sentence for any such conviction.
(3) A pedicab driver has been convicted of a crime that requires
registration under the Michigan Penal Code as a sex offender.
(4) A pedicab driver or the pedicab owner has knowingly made a false
statement of material fact, or knowingly failed to state a material
fact in the application process for the operating permit or decal.
(5) A pedicab driver's ability to drive lawfully in Michigan or in any
other state is currently expired, suspended or revoked.
Sec. 34-46 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 34-47
C:770
Sec. 34-48. Notification of suspension or revocation of operating
permit; appeals. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
(6) A pedicab driver has engaged in activity that, in the judgment of
the City Clerk, constitutes a serious threat to public health, safety,
or welfare. Such threat may be indicated by, but is not limited to:
(i) An arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol or a
controlled substance while operating a pedicab;
(ii) An arrest for a crime that, if convicted, would require
registration as a sex offender, and where a pedicab was used in
the planning of, perpetration of, or fleeing from the offense;
(iii) A report from a law enforcement agency that the pedicab or
pedicab driver was involved in a vehicle accident involving a
pedicab, where the pedicab passengers were injured.
(a) Any operating permit issued by the City may be suspended or revoked
by the issuing officer for cause as herein defined. In either case, a
hearing shall be scheduled to be held by the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee. Depending upon the necessity for prompt action,
the hearing shall be held in accordance with one of the following
provisions:
(1) If there is no immediate threat to the public health, safety or
welfare, the hearing shall be held to determine whether the
operating permit should be suspended or revoked. The holder of
the operating permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of
the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the
proposed suspension or revocation. The operating permit holder
shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence,
to cross-examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments
concerning the factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body
shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision.
(2) If there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety or
welfare, the operating permit may be suspended prior to the
hearing. If an operating permit is suspended prior to the hearing,
the hearing shall be commenced as soon as it is practical, but in no
case more than 10 days after the suspension. The hearing shall be
held to determine whether to terminate or extend the suspension
or whether the suspension should be converted into a revocation of
the operating permit. The holder of the operating permit shall be
notified of the time, date, and place of the hearing and shall be
notified of the reason or reasons for the already-imposed
suspension and for any contemplated future action. The operating
permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to
submit evidence, to cross-examine testifying witnesses, and to
make arguments on factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or
Sec. 34-47 CHARTER Sec. 34-48
C:771
Sec. 34-49. Preliminary breath test. [Ord. No. 1562, 3-23-2011]
A Public Safety Department officer who has reasonable cause to believe
that a person is or was operating a pedicab upon a public highway or other
place open to the public or generally accessible to a pedicab, including
an area designated for the parking of vehicles, and that the person by
the consumption of alcoholic liquor may have affected his or her ability
to operate a pedicab may require the person to submit to a preliminary
chemical breath analysis. A pedicab driver's refusal to take or failure to
properly take a preliminary chemical breath analysis as required by this
section is a violation of this Code.
Sec. 34-50. Violation is a civil infraction. [Ord. No. 1562,
3-23-2011]
Any violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction as provided
for in Chapter 2 of this Code.
Sec. 34-51. Effective date/emergency ordinance. [Ord. No. 1562,
3-23-2011]
This article was adopted as an emergency ordinance by the City Council of
the City of Holland pursuant to Section 5.4 of the Holland City Charter, and
shall be effective upon the date of adoption.
body shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the
decision.
(b) In any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this article, the rules
of evidence shall be followed as far as practicable, but a hearing officer
or body may admit and give probative effect to evidence of a type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent people in the conduct of
their affairs. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may
be excluded. Notice may be taken of facts within the general knowledge
of the community.
(c) Any person seeking to appeal the decision of the City Manager or other
appropriate hearing officer or body may appeal to the City Council,
provided that a written request for such an appeal shall be filed within
seven days of the date of the decision to be appealed. The City Council
shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 14 days of the receipt of
the request for appeal by the City Clerk. The hearing shall be scheduled
and held before the entire City Council, as the City Council shall
determine. The factual record made in the hearing below shall
constitute the basic record for the appeal. The City Council may, but
need not, allow the presentation of additional evidence by a majority
vote. Argument as to relevant factual and legal issues shall be
permitted. The decision of the City Council shall be by majority vote.
The Council may affirm, reverse or modify any action taken relative to a
license. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
Sec. 34-48 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 34-51
C:772
Chapter 35
TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
Sec. 35-1. "Trailer coach" defined. [Code 1955, § 4-8.1]
The term "trailer coach," as used in this chapter, shall mean any vehicle
used, or so constructed as to permit its being used, as a dwelling or sleeping
place, which is or may be mounted on wheels, and is or may be propelled
either by its own power or by another vehicle to which it may be attached.
Sec. 35-2. Prohibited parking and use of trailers—parking overnight
on street, etc. [Code 1955, § 4-8.2]
No person shall park or cause to be parked any trailer coach overnight on
any street, alley, highway or other public place.
Sec. 35-3. Same—Parking between setback line and curb. [Code
1955, § 4-8.2]
No trailer coach shall at any time be parked between the established
setback line and the curbline of any lot.
Sec. 35-4. Same—Parking or occupancy outside trailer park. [Code
1955, § 4-8.2]
No person shall park or permit the parking of any occupied trailer coach or
use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any trailer coach on any
site, lot, field or tract of land not specifically licensed as a trailer coach park,
except as provided in this code.
Sec. 35-5. Same—Parking occupied trailer in residence district.
[Code 1955, § 4-8.2]
No person shall park or cause or permit to be parked any occupied trailer
in any residence district, for more than three weeks in any twelve-month
period unless the same be housed within a building.
Sec. 35-6. Limitations on parking on dwelling premises, etc. [Code
1955, § 4-8.3]
Not more than one trailer coach may be parked, used or occupied on
the premises of any dwelling or on any premises adjacent to a dwelling;
provided, that no trailer coach shall be used or occupied on any such
premises unless the occupants of the trailer coach have free access to and
the unlimited use of the sanitary facilities of such dwelling and the operator
of such trailer coach secures a permit as provided in this chapter.
Sec. 34-51 CHARTER Sec. 35-7
C:773
Sec. 35-7. Permits generally. [Code 1955, § 4-8.4; Ord. No. 1069,
10-7-1992]
Application for a permit to use or occupy a trailer coach on the premises of
a dwelling or of any vacant lot adjacent thereto shall be made to the City
Clerk and shall state the address of the dwelling, the name of the owner or
occupant in control thereof, the name and address of the owner or operator
and license number of such trailer coach. The consent in writing of the
owner or occupant in control of the dwelling on or adjacent to the premises
where such parking is to take place, to the use of the sanitary facilities of
such dwelling as provided by this chapter shall accompany the application
or be endorsed thereon.
Upon the filing of such application the City Clerk shall cause an inspection
to be made of such dwelling premises and trailer coach and if he finds that
adequate sanitary facilities are available and that the use or occupancy of
such trailer coach complies with the statutes of the state and the provisions
of this code, he shall approve such application and, upon payment of the fee
as established by a resolution adopted by City Council, the City Clerk shall
issue a permit, which permit shall limit the time of such use or occupancy to
a period not longer than one week from the date of the application therefor,
or, with the approval of the enforcing officer, to a period not exceeding three
weeks.
No person shall be issued a permit under the provisions of this chapter for
the use or occupancy of a trailer coach for more than three weeks in any
twelve-month period. Every permit shall be displayed in or on the trailer
coach for which it is issued on the side nearest to a public street in such
manner as to be readily noticeable at all times.
Sec. 35-8. Removal of wheels or tires; occupancy limit. [Code 1955,
§ 4-8.5]
No person shall remove or cause to be removed the wheels or tires from any
occupied trailer coach except for the purpose of repair, nor shall any person
elevate, block or stabilize any occupied trailer coach other than with jacks
designed, provided and intended for that purpose. No parked trailer coach
shall be occupied for sleeping purposes by a greater number of persons
than such vehicle is designed and arranged to accommodate.
Sec. 35-9. Sanitary facilities. [Code 1955, § 4-8.6]
The occupants of all trailer coaches parked on private premises shall use
the sanitary facilities of the adjacent premises, exclusively, and shall not use
any other sanitary facilities.
Sec. 35-10. Right of entry of enforcing officer and police;
inspections. [Code 1955, § 4-8.7]
The enforcing officer or any member of the Police Department of the City
shall have the authority to enter and inspect at any reasonable time any
Sec. 35-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 35-10
C:774
premises upon which a trailer coach is parked, used or occupied for the
purpose of ascertaining that the owner, operator or occupant thereof is
complying with all statutes, ordinances and rules and regulations governing
the same.
Chapter 36
TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec. 36-1. Planting by City personnel only. [Code 1955, § 5-1.15]
No person other than designated City personnel shall plant any shade or
ornamental tree, plant or shrub in any public highway or park.
Sec. 36-2. Minimum height of branches over sidewalks; removal of
dead branches, etc. [Code 1955, § 5-1.15.]
No person shall maintain upon any lot of which he is the owner, either
individually or as one of two or more tenants in common, joint tenants
or tenants by the entireties, any tree which is so located as to extend its
branches over a public alley or highway, unless the same shall be kept so
trimmed that there shall be a clear height of not less than 12 feet above that
portion of the surface of sidewalks, unobstructed by branches; and no such
person shall fail to remove all dead branches or stubs on such trees which
are, or may become, a menace to persons on the street.
Sec. 36-3. Permit and precautions required for removal, trimming,
etc., trees. [Code 1955, § 5-1.15; amended 1-17-2018 by Ord. No.
1723]
No person shall remove, destroy, break, cut, deface or trim any tree growing
in any highway or park in the City without first obtaining a permit from the
Director of Parks and Recreation, which permit shall state the work to be
done under it and the time within which it is to be done; and no person
shall remove, destroy or trim any such tree under any permit unless proper
precautions, approved by the Parks and Recreation Director, are taken to
insure the safety of the public while such tree is being removed, destroyed
or trimmed.
Sec. 36-4. Climbing, etc., trees while wearing spurs. [Code 1955,
§ 5-1.15]
No person shall climb any tree growing in any highway or park in the City,
or walk upon the branches thereof, while wearing spurs, unless such person
is in the act of removing such trees.
Sec. 35-10 CHARTER Sec. 36-5
C:775
Sec. 36-5. Protection of trees during erection, repair, etc., of
buildings. [Code 1955, § 5-1.15]
In the erection, alteration, repair or removal of any building or structure,
the owner thereof shall place, or cause to be placed, such guards around all
nearby trees on the public highway as will effectually prevent injury to such
trees.
Sec. 36-6. Connecting, etc., wires to trees. [Code 1955, § 5-1.15]
No person shall attach or connect any electric or other wire to any tree in a
highway or park in the City, or permit any such wire to come in contact with
any such tree.
Sec. 36-7. Attaching signs, posters, etc., to trees. [Code 1955,
§ 5-1.15]
No person shall attach any sign, placard or poster to any tree growing in
any highway or park.
Chapter 37
WATER
Sec. 36-5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 36-7
C:776
ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 37-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 457]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall,
except as otherwise expressly provided, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
APPROVED BASEMENT — Any basement with walls and floor constructed
of concrete or equivalent, reasonably watertight, properly drained, and in
ordinary daily use.
DWELLING — Any house, building, structure, tent shelter, trailer (other
than those in licensed trailer coach parks) or vehicle or portion thereof
(except railroad cars on tracks or rights-of-way) which is occupied in whole
or in any part as a home, residence or living or sleeping place for one or
more human beings.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Director of the Department of Environmental
Health or his authorized representative.
HABITABLE BUILDING — Any structure where persons reside, are
employed or congregate.
PNEUMATIC STORAGE TANKS — Closed water storage containers
constructed so as to operate under normal water system pressures.
PREMISE — Any tract of land containing a habitable building.
PUMP — Any manufactured device designed to either raise the ground
water from the well, or to discharge the water through a distribution
system, or both.
PUMP ROOM or WELL ROOM — Any enclosed structure, either above or
below grade, that houses the pump, top of the well, any suction line, or any
combination thereof.
SEWAGE — The liquid wastes from all habitable buildings and such term
shall include, but not be limited to, human excreta and wastes from sink,
lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry, and any other water-carried wastes
of an organic nature, either singly or in any combination thereof.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit which carries sewage, or into which sewage
may back up.
SPRING — Any uncased flow of water discharging naturally from the
ground.
SUCTION LINE — Any closed conduit carrying, or intended to carry, water
to the inlet side of a pump.
WELL — A pipe or conduit installed in the ground for the purposes of
providing a method of collection of ground water.
WELL SEAL — A device or method used to protect a well casing or water
system from the entrance of any external contaminant at the point of
Sec. 37-1 CHARTER Sec. 37-1
C:777
entrance into the casing of any one or more pipes, electric conduits or water
level measuring equipment necessary to the proper functioning of the water
system.
Sec. 37-2. Applicability of chapter. [Ord. No. 457]
This chapter shall apply but not be limited in application to such water
systems as are used to supply private dwellings, schools, trailer coach
parks, motels, resorts, hospitals, convalescent homes, homes for the aged,
eating and drinking establishments, places of public assembly and the like.
This chapter shall not apply to water systems:
Sec. 37-3. Permit, etc., required for private systems. [Ord. No. 457;
Ord. No. 1069, 10-7-1992]
No water supply system, other than municipal, shall hereafter be
constructed, reconstructed or replaced without first paying the permit fee
as established by a resolution adopted by City Council and securing a
written permit and approval of plans and specifications from the enforcing
officer.
Sec. 37-4. Notice of construction, etc.; design and construction
generally. [Ord. No. 457103]
After the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, every
owner or person engaged for the construction or installation of any water
supply (other than municipal) shall give written notice to the Department
of Environmental Health, before construction is started, of the location or
address of the proposed construction and the type of system to be installed.
A permit for the construction shall be required, and the system shall be
designed and constructed to meet the specifications and performance
requirements of this chapter.
Sec. 37-5. Installation by homeowner. [Ord. No. 457; Ord. No. 613]
(a) Used exclusively for purposes not requiring a quality of water
substantially equivalent to that of water to be used for human
consumption.
(b) Providing, or intended to provide, water service to properties generally
without respect to the ownership thereof.
(a) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a property owner
from installing a water supply system or well in his own property;
provided, that it meets the location and performance requirements of
this chapter.
(b) No person shall refuse to permit the enforcing officer or any authorized
representative of the City from installing or placing upon such water
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance took effect 5-25-1960.
Sec. 37-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-5
C:778
Sec. 37-5.1. Reconstruction of water main; new service; lien for
charges. [Ord. No. 946, 6-1-1988]
Sec. 37-6. Inspections and sampling. [Ord. No. 457]
All premises affected by this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the
enforcing officer, and the enforcing officer may collect such samples for
laboratory examination as he deems necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter.
Sec. 37-7. Right of entry of enforcing officer; molesting or resisting
enforcing officer. [Ord. No. 457]
No person shall refuse to permit the enforcing officer to inspect any
premises nor shall any person molest or resist the enforcing officer in the
discharge of his duty and the protection of the public health.
supply system or well a meter or other measuring device to record
water consumption from such supply system or well for purposes of
determining charges for sewer services furnished by the City to or
with respect to the property upon which such supply system or well is
located.
(c) The City shall be entitled to recover from such property owner a fee to
be determined by the Board of Public Works for installing or placing
such meter or device on such supply system or well. If such
reimbursement is not paid within 60 days after demand therefor has
been made by the City, the amount demanded shall be deemed to be a
lien on the property for sewer service furnished to the property.
(a) In the event the City repairs, restores, or reconstructs a water main and
the City determines that the water supply system of the property owner
is defective, violates the provisions of this chapter, or is otherwise
functionally inoperable or incompatible with the newly installed water
main, the property owner shall be responsible to install a new water
service to the public main. All costs incurred for the new water service
connection shall be paid by the property owner.
(b) The City shall be permitted to construct the new water service and
enter on private property for such installation if a property owner fails
to construct a new water service pursuant to Subparagraph (a) hereof.
The City shall recover from the property owner a fee determined by the
Board of Public Works for installing such service or device. If
reimbursement is not paid within 60 days after demand has been made
by the City, the amount demanded shall be deemed a lien on the
property for water service furnished to the property and shall be
subject to foreclosure and enforcement in accordance with the statutes
of this state.
Sec. 37-5 CHARTER Sec. 37-8
C:779
Sec. 37-8. Interference with notices. [Ord. No. 457]
No person shall remove, mutilate or conceal any notice or placard posted by
the enforcing officer except by permission of the enforcing officer.
Sec. 37-9. Location of wells, etc. [Ord. No. 457]
Sec. 37-10. Well casings generally. [Ord. No. 457104]
(a) All wells shall be located at least 75 feet from any source of possible
contamination such as sink drains, seepage pits, cesspools, outhouses,
septic tanks, disposal fields and any sewage or liquid wastes draining
into the soil; except, that for private dwellings, the distance shall be at
least 50 feet from any course of possible contamination.
(b) All wells shall be located at least 10 feet from any buried sewer or sump
pit carrying sewage. Such buried sewers within the isolation distances
as specified above shall be constructed of service weight, or heavier,
cast iron soil pipe or cast iron water pipe with watertight joints, or
other material and joints given written approval by the State Health
Commissioner. Such sump pits shall be watertight and constructed of
cast iron or other material given written approval by the enforcing
officer.
(c) The enforcing officer responsible for the enforcement of this chapter
may make modification of the required isolation distance in certain
instances. Such modifications shall be made in writing to the owner,
either increasing or decreasing the minimum isolation distance, and
shall state for each case the reason for such exception based on the
type of soil, maximum pumping rate or other factors affecting the
movement of contamination.
(d) Water suction lines of the type approved under Section 37-12 shall be
located at least five feet laterally from any buried sewer, drain or
conduit carrying sewage or through which sewage may back up, or
other possible sources of contamination listed above. Suction lines fully
exposed above grade or in approved basements, as defined in this
chapter, may be located within the five-foot area. No water pump may
be located directly below any sewer.
(e) Wells shall not be located in areas subject to flooding unless protected
as prescribed in writing by the enforcing officer. The ground surface
immediately adjacent to all well casings shall be graded so that surface
water is diverted away from the casing.
(a) All drilled and driven well casings shall be of at least standard weight
steel or iron pipe casing, watertight throughout its length, with
threaded or welded joints or other types of joints given written approval
by the enforcing officer after adoption of this regulation. Well casings
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance took effect 5-25-1960.
Sec. 37-8 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-10
C:780
Sec. 37-11. Well depth. [Ord. No. 457]
No wells less than 25 feet in depth shall be used without written approval of
the enforcing officer. If wells greater than 25 feet in depth are not available,
the enforcing officer may, at his discretion, approve of the use of wells of
lesser depth; provided, that adequate protection can be afforded by means
of a layer of impervious soil, or by so locating the well screen as to keep the
water level in the well at least two feet above the top of the screen while the
pump is in operation.
Sec. 37-12. Water suction lines, etc. [Ord. No. 457]
shall extend at least 12 inches above the finished grade and at least
six inches above the platform or floor. For below grade installations,
all well casings shall extend at least 12 inches above the floor of any
approved basement, pump or well room. All drilled and driven well
casings shall extend to a depth of at least 25 feet below finished grade,
except as provided in Section 37-11. Standards for casings and pipe
threads shall be equal to those adopted by the American Standards
Association.
(b) When the well is drilled into rock, the casing shall be bedded in solid
rock making a watertight joint.
(c) Dug wells shall not be permitted without written approval of the
enforcing officer. Such approval shall cover the details of construction
to be used.
(a) All water suction lines shall be constructed of the same material as the
well casing, copper or other material approved in writing by the
enforcing officer prior to such construction.
(b) No water suction line outside the well casing may be used unless
protected by one or more of the following methods:
(1) Fully exposed in an approved basement and at least 12 inches
above the basement floor.
(2) Fully exposed above grade.
(3) Surrounded by an air space in a conduit open at both ends which
has positive drainage by gravity to the ground surface or to an
approved basement.
(4) Lying within an outer casing with the annular space filled with
water from the system and maintained at system pressure.
(5) Unexposed, but at least 12 inches above the surrounding ground
surface and protected against flooding.
(c) The discharge line between the well casing and the check valve shall be
protected the same as suction lines in all installations, including deep
well, turbine and submersible pumps.
Sec. 37-10 CHARTER Sec. 37-13
C:781
Sec. 37-13. Well casing seals and connections. [Ord. No. 457]
Sec. 37-14. Pump or well rooms. [Ord. No. 457]
Rooms housing pumping equipment or the top of the well casing shall be
above grade unless special permission is granted in writing by the enforcing
officer for below grade installation. Such special permission may be granted
for below grade installation only if the containing room is located in, or
attached to, an approved basement, or is of watertight construction and
drained by gravity to the ground surface within 100 yards.
Sec. 37-15. Pumps generally. [Ord. No. 457]
(a) All connections into the top or side of a well casing that are above
grade, or in an approved basement, shall be constructed so as to
exclude water, dirt or other foreign matter, by such of the following
methods as may be applicable:
(1) An approved threaded connection.
(2) Welded connection.
(3) Lead, asphalt or rubber expansion sealer.
(4) Bolted flanges with rubber gaskets.
(5) A casing that extends at least one inch into the base of a power
pump mounted on a concrete pedestal and at least 12 inches above
the floor of an approved basement or pump room.
(b) All below grade connections, except for those in approved basements,
shall be protected by approved metal-to-metal threaded or welded
joints.
(c) Electric power cables to submersible pumps, water level measuring
devices and all other devices shall enter the well casing through
watertight connections.
(d) Any other method of connection to a well casing shall be specifically
approved in writing by the enforcing officer before installation.
(a) All pumps shall be so constructed that no unprotected opening into the
interior of the pump or well casing exists.
(b) A hand pump shall have a closed spout, directed downward, and a pump
rod that operates through a stuffing box.
(c) Power pumps shall be attached to the casing or approved suction or
discharge line by a watertight connection, including flange connections,
hose clamp type connections or other flexible couplings, or shall have a
base plate meeting the requirements of Paragraph (5) of Subsection (a)
of Section 37-13.
Sec. 37-13 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-15
C:782
Sec. 37-16. Vents. [Ord. No. 457]
All casing vents shall be of standard gauge pipe, terminating at least 12
inches above the floor of the pump room or approved basement, screened,
and pointing downward. They shall be so constructed that water will not
reenter the well or water system.
Sec. 37-17. Platforms, pump room floors, approved basement floors
or slabs. [Ord. No. 457]
The well shall be protected by a durable, watertight concrete (or equal)
slab, platform or floor, at least six inches thick, extending horizontally at
least two feet in every direction from the well casing, and sloped to divert
water away from the casing. A watertight seal shall be provided between
the casing and the platform, pump room or approved basement floor or slab.
Sec. 37-18. General provisions and requirements. [Ord. No. 457]
(d) Pumps shall be designed, installed and maintained so that priming is
not required for ordinary use.
(a) Use of springs, lakes or streams; installation of water treatment
facilities. In special cases, permission may be granted by the enforcing
officer, following consultation with the State Health Commissioner, to
use springs, lakes or streams as a source of water supply, or to install
water treatment facilities. Plans and specifications for such facilities,
together with the operating procedures, shall be submitted through the
enforcing officer to the State Health Commissioner for approval.
(b) Return of water used for air conditioning, etc. Water used for cooling
parts of engines, air compressors or other equipment or water used for
air conditioning shall not be returned to any part of the water system.
(c) Pneumatic storage tanks not to be buried, etc. Pneumatic storage tanks
shall not be buried in the ground unless the tank projects horizontally
above the ground, or into an approved basement, or into a room or pit
drained by gravity to the ground surface; provided, however, that
pneumatic storage tanks of a type approved by the enforcing officer
may be used in private dwelling systems.
(d) Cross-connections.105 There shall be no physical connection between a
water supply meeting the requirement of this chapter and any other
water supply which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
Connections between approved supplies may be permitted only upon
written approval of the enforcing officer.
(e) Filling abandoned wells. When a well is abandoned, it shall be filled, in
accordance with instructions from the enforcing officer, in such a
manner as to protect the water bearing formation against
105. Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Cross-Connections, of this chapter.
Sec. 37-15 CHARTER Sec. 37-18
C:783
Sec. 37-19. Compliance with chapter. [Ord. No. 457]
Every water supply system, other than municipal, which is hereafter
constructed, reconstructed or replaced within the City shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
Sec. 37-20. Violations and penalty. [Ord. No. 457]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, on conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
contamination, and also to prevent the vertical movement of water
between formations.
(f) Faucet for sampling. In all pressure water systems, provision shall be
made for collecting water samples by installing a faucet near the
discharge side of the pump.
(g) Flushing, disinfecting, etc., new, etc., systems. Every new, repaired or
reconditioned well or pump shall be thoroughly pumped to waste until
the water is clear. Thereafter, the well, pumping equipment and water
distribution shall be disinfected with a solution having a concentration
of at least 50 parts per million of chlorine. After a contact period of 12
hours, the chlorine solution shall be thoroughly flushed out. Prior to
placing the supply in service, at least two consecutive representative
water samples, collected at least 12 hours apart, shall show the absence
of organisms of the coliform group.
(h) Storage reservoirs. Storage reservoirs shall be constructed of
impervious material and be watertight. All openings into the reservoir
shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of contamination,
such as from birds, insects, animals, surface water and other foreign
matter. Open top reservoirs will not be approved. Overflow pipes and
drains from reservoirs shall not be directly connected to any sewer. If
reservoirs are used, plans shall be submitted to the enforcing officer for
approval.
(i) Contaminated water supplies to be posted, etc. Contaminated water
supplies and those which, in the judgment of the enforcing officer,
represent an immediate health hazard shall be posted with suitable
signs at each outlet, or the outlets shall be made inoperative.
(j) Protection against contamination of system. The water distribution
system between the pump and all outlets shall be designed, maintained
and operated in such a manner as to protect the water from becoming
contaminated.
(k) Drinking fountains. When drinking fountains are provided, they shall be
of the angle jet type with the nozzle at least one inch above the rim of
the bowl.
Sec. 37-18 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-20
C:784
in the discretion of the court, and such violations shall be subject to the
nuisance proceedings referred to in Section 1-10, where applicable.
Sec. 37-20 CHARTER Sec. 37-20
C:785

ARTICLE II
Cross-Connections
Sec. 37-21. Definitions. [Ord. No. 663, § 1; amended 4-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 1688]
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BACKFLOW — Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
CROSS-CONNECTIONS — A connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which a backflow could occur.
SAFE AIR GAP — The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above
the maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or
container to which public water is furnished which shall be at least two
times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than
one inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY — A water supply system maintained in
addition to a public water supply, including, but not limited to, water
systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of
Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCLA § 325.1001 et
seq.), and Sections 3, 6, and 10 of Act No. 98 of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 1913 (MCLA § 325.201 et seq.106), as amended, and Sections 9 and 427 of
Act No. 380 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 (MCLA § 16.101 et seq.),
as amended, or water from a public water supply which in any way has
been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored
in other than an approved storage facility.
SUBMERGED INLET — A water pipe or extension thereto from a public
water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may
contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and
which is unprotected against backflow.
WATER UTILITY — The City of Holland, acting by and through its Holland
Board of Public Works, Water Department.
Sec. 37-22. Compliance with existing laws. [Ord. No. 663, § 2;
amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the
existing laws and rules, including Act No. 407 of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 2016, as amended, and the provisions of this Code.
106. Editor's Note: MCLA § 325.201 et. seq. were repealed by P.A.1994, No. 451, § 90101,
effective March 30, 1995.
Sec. 37-21 CHARTER Sec. 37-23
C:787
Sec. 37-23. Cross-connections prohibited. [Ord. No. 663, § 3;
amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
Cross-connections of the public water supply system or source, including,
but not limited to, the following are prohibited:
Sec. 37-24. Elimination of existing cross-connections. [Ord. No.
663, § 4; amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
The expenses of eliminating cross-connections shall be paid and charged to
the owner of the property on which such cross-connection exists; provided
however, that any existing cross-connection which creates an immediate
and substantial hazard to the public health of the community shall be
corrected, upon notice to the property owner by the Water Utility, in such
amount of time as determined necessary by the Water Utility. If the
correction has not been made in such time as ordered, the Water Utility
shall physically separate the public water supply from such piping system
in such a manner that the two systems cannot again be connected by any
unauthorized person, and the Water Utility shall charge all fees, expenses,
and charges (including administrative charges) to the owner of the property.
The Water Utility shall be permitted to file a lien for such charges, if the
amount is not paid by the property owner, as may be permitted by law.
Sec. 37-25. Local cross-connection control program. [Ord. No. 663,
§ 5; amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
The Water Utility shall maintain a comprehensive control program for the
elimination and prevention of all cross-connections meeting the approval of
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
Sec. 37-26. Correction and protective devices. [Ord. No. 663, § 6;
amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
Upon notification of a violation of this division, the owner of the property in
question shall promptly correct such violations. Prior to using or installing
any protective device or taking any proposed corrective action, users of
City water shall first obtain written approval of the Water Utility. The total
time allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall be contingent
upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time required to obtain
and install equipment. If the cross-connection has not been removed within
(a) Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
(b) By submerged inlet.
(c) Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
(d) Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or a chemical contaminant.
(e) Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or
vessel which may contain a contaminant.
Sec. 37-23 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-26
C:788
the time specified, the Water Utility may discontinue water service or may
require correction pursuant to Section 37-24.
Sec. 37-27. Piping identification. [Ord. No. 663, § 7; amended
4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
When a secondary water service is used in addition to the Holland water
supply, exposed Holland water and secondary water piping shall be
identified by distinguishing colors or metal tags and so maintained that each
pipe may be traced readily in its entirety. It will be necessary to protect the
Holland water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to
the Water Utility.
Sec. 37-28. Inspection and backflow device testing. [Ord. No. 663,
§ 8; amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
The Water Utility or any representative thereof shall have the authority
to inspect any premises to determine the presence of an existing crossconnection.
All backflow devices shall be tested according to the
requirements of Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCLA
§ 325.1001 et seq.). All new devices shall be tested upon installation prior
to being placed into service. Testing shall be performed by an individual
meeting the requirements of Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1976 (MCLA § 325.1001 et seq.).
Sec. 37-28.1. Facility fire protection system upgrade requirement.
[Added 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
If a facility extends its current fire protection system, or makes other
significant changes to existing fire protection system piping, the division,
extension, or change may require the fire protection system to be upgraded
up to the latest Michigan plumbing backflow protection standards. Any fire
protection system which contains any additives will require to be protected
by a reduced pressure zone assembly.
Sec. 37-29. Discontinuance of water service. [Ord. No. 663, § 9;
amended 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1688]
In addition to the other remedies specified in this chapter, the Water Utility
is hereby authorized to discontinue water service after reasonable notice
to any person owning any property where a cross-connection in violation
of this Code exists or for delinquent testing of a backflow device. The
Water Utility may take such other precautionary measures as necessary
to eliminate any danger of the contamination of the Holland water supply
system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
cross-connection has been eliminated.
Sec. 37-26 CHARTER Sec. 37-29
C:789

ARTICLE II.1
Charges For Water
Sec. 37-29.1. Charges for water. [Ord. No. 1318, 10-3-2001; Ord.
No. 1418, 6-15-2005; Ord. No. 1430, 11-2-2005]
The following charges and fees shall apply to all connections to the water
system of the City of Holland:
(a) Lateral fee. If a lateral fee has not been paid or assessed against the
premises to be served, a lateral fee, in an amount to be established and
adjusted from time to time by a resolution of the City Council, for the
installation and use of a water lateral line from the water line to the
property line, shall be payable by each premises connecting to the
system provided that no lateral fee shall be payable where the water
lateral to be utilized was constructed as a part of the development or
project in which private parties or the City on behalf of or at the
expense of private parties have constructed the water lateral. The
terms of the payment of the water lateral fee shall be established and
adjusted from time to time by a resolution of the City Council. This
resolution shall specify whether the lateral fee is payable in cash in full
at the time application to connect is made or in installments. If the
lateral fee is payable in installments, such resolution shall specify the
number of installments, the amount of each installment, the date on
which each installment is due and payable, the interest rate, if any, on
the unpaid balance of the lateral fee, when interest begins, and the date
on which interest on the unpaid balance is due and payable. If paid in
installments, the unpaid balance of the lateral fee and all interest
thereon shall constitute a lien on the premises served.
(b) Special assessment. The special assessment procedure as prescribed in
Chapter 15 of the City Charter will be followed for the construction of
water main improvements and assessment for water. A special
assessment for water may be authorized by the City; may be accepted
upon petition of the property owners; or may be initiated by such other
method as specified by City Charter or authorized by law. Following a
public hearing and adoption of a resolution of necessity, the project may
be authorized by the City Council to proceed. The special assessment
placed on the premises shall include the frontage fee and the lateral
fee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the amount of the special
assessment shall not exceed the cost of the public improvement as
specified by Section 15.9 of the Holland City Charter. The special
assessment shall be payable in full or in equal installments as
authorized and specified in Chapter 15 of the City Charter. To the extent
that an assessment for water does not exceed the cost of the public
improvement as required by Chapter 15 of the Charter of the City of
Holland, the water special assessment shall be established annually by
resolution of the Board of Directors of the Holland Board of Public
Works and approved by the City Council. The resolution shall specify
whether the frontage charge is payable in cash in full at the time
Sec. 37-29.1 CHARTER Sec. 37-29.1
C:791
application to connect is made or in installments. If the frontage charge
is payable in installments, such resolution shall specify the number of
installments, the amount of each installment, the date on which each
installment is due and payable, the interest rate, if any, on the unpaid
balance of the frontage charge, when interest begins, and the date on
which interest on the unpaid balance is due and payable. If paid in
installments, the unpaid balance of the frontage charge and all interest
and penalties thereon shall constitute a lien on the premises served.
(c) Trunkage charge:
(1) [Provisions regarding charge.] All premises which have not been
included in a special assessment district which included a trunkage
charge as a part of the assessment shall pay a trunkage charge.
Those premises which have previously paid a trunkage charge as a
part of a special assessment on a cash or installment basis as
provided in this article but later are expanded and the use of the
premises is altered so as to increase the amount and intensity of
water use, shall pay an additional trunkage charge for such
increase in water use. Those premises which were assessed for
trunkage as an unimproved parcel but which are later improved or
expanded resulting in an increase in water use shall pay a trunkage
charge for such improvements. The trunkage unit rate shall be
calculated based on general system extension costs, which may
include, but are not limited to, such items as oversizing, extra
depth, nonassessable frontage, lift station, force mains, pump
stations, and other costs not included in the special assessment and
frontage calculation. The trunkage unit rate shall be established
and adjusted from time to time by a resolution adopted by the
Holland Board of Public Works and approved by the City Council.
The trunkage fee shall be based upon a residential equivalent unit
("REU factor") and applied against the meter size for the proposed
or expanded use of the premises. An REU factor will be established
for a single-family residential unit. All other types of uses will be
calculated based on a schedule of unit factors based upon meter
size and using the basic REU rate as the base cost. After initial
adoption of the REU rates and factors, the REU rates will be
adjusted annually based on the construction cost index as
published by the Engineering News Record or such other nationally
recognized publication recording costs and inflationary
adjustments to costs. The trunkage unit rate shall be the rate in
effect on the date the meter is installed to connect to the water
system. If the premises are already connected to the water system,
the trunkage unit rate shall be the rate at the time the meter
change is made for the expansion or alteration of use.
(2) Private development. Water trunkage fees will be the only fee
required to be paid for building connections made within the
proposed private development. The private party must pay in full
all existing assessments and any other charges or assessments
Sec. 37-29.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-29.1
C:792
prior to water system extensions or connections. Costs incurred
by the developer which are normally included in the trunkage
fee calculation may be credited against the calculated fees in
accordance with the resolution adopted by the Holland Board of
Public Works and approved by the City Council.
(3) Single connections. For premises which have not been specially
assessed or were not a part of a private development for which
assessments, trunkage, and lateral fees have been charged, the
cost of such connection will be determined based upon the rate
formula established in the resolution adopted by the Holland Board
of Public Works and approved by the City Council. Any premises
which were previously charged under the alternate assessment
procedure of the City shall be charged consistent with the terms
and conditions of this article. Any previously charged and levied
alternate assessments, including any ordinances or resolutions
thereto, are hereby rescinded, revoked, and vacated and, in lieu
thereof, all premises will be charged and assessed in accordance
with this article. The City Council may choose to permit installment
payments of an assessment under those conditions as specified in
the resolution adopted by the Holland Board of Public Works and
approved by the City Council. The owner of the premises to be
served shall sign an agreement with the City stating the amount
owed, the interest rate and other payment terms, and that the
unpaid charges and all interest and penalties thereon shall
constitute a lien on the premises served. If any installment of a
lateral fee, frontage charge, trunkage charge, or any interest or
penalty thereon is not paid in a timely manner, the City shall have
the right to discontinue utility service to the premises and also, if
the premises are connected to a public water supply, the right to
turn off the water service to the premises. Water service and/or
water service [sic] shall not be restored to the premises until all
amounts then due and payable are paid in full.
(4) Installment payment of trunkage. The City Council may choose to
permit installment payments of trunkage charges under those
conditions as specified in a resolution adopted by the Holland
Board of Public Works and approved by the City Council. This
resolution shall specify whether the trunkage charge may be
payable in cash in full when the obligation is incurred, or in
installments. The resolution shall specify the number of
installments, the amount of each installment, the date on which
each installment is due and payable, the interest rate, if any, on the
unpaid balance of the trunkage charge, when interest begins, the
date on which interest on the unpaid balance is due and payable,
and the amount of any administrative fee to be charged by the City
for the installment payment agreement. If paid in installments, the
unpaid balance of the trunkage charge and all interest and
penalties thereon shall constitute a lien on the premises served in
Sec. 37-29.1 CHARTER Sec. 37-29.1
C:793
Sec. 37-29.2. Effective date for charges for water. [Ord. No. 1321,
11-7-2001]
The charges and fees for water as set forth in Section 37-29.1 shall not
apply to connections, expanded uses, or other conditions relating to
outstanding building permits issued, reissued, or renewed by the City of
Holland prior to October 24, 2001.
accordance with the Charter of the City of Holland and the
applicable provisions of state law.
(5) Agreement. At the time of each application to connect to the water
system of the City, and also at the time any additional trunkage
charges become payable as provided in Subsection (c)(1) of this
section, if any portion of the trunkage charge will be paid over
time, as a condition precedent to connection and/or use of the
water system, the owner of the premises to be served shall sign an
agreement with the City stating the amount owed, the interest rate,
and other payment terms, and that the unpaid charges and all
interest and penalties thereon shall constitute a lien on the
premises served. If any installment of any trunkage charge or any
interest or penalties thereon is not paid in a timely manner, the City
shall have the right to discontinue water service to the premises.
Water service shall not be restored to the premises until all
amounts then due and payable are payable in full.
(6) Tax bill collection. If any lateral fee, frontage charge, or trunkage
charge, or any interest or penalties thereon is delinquent for three
months or more, then on or before November 1 of each year, it shall
be certified to the City Treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the
next tax roll against the premises to which water service has been
provided, and the charges shall then be collected and the lien shall
be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of
taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for
taxes.
(7) Lien for payment of charges. If an installment of a trunkage charge
is not paid, with all interest, on or before its due date, then such
delinquent installment shall be treated and have the same status as
a delinquent installment of a special assessment pursuant to Public
Act No. 188 of 1954 (MCLA § 41.721 et seq.), as amended, or any
similar statute, and such delinquent installment shall be collected
by the City in the same manner as provided in Public Act 188 or
similar successor statute for delinquent installment payments of
special assessments in addition to any other remedy provided for in
the Ordinance Code of the City of Holland or in an agreement
executed by the owner of the premises served and the City.
Sec. 37-29.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-29.2
C:794
ARTICLE III
Lien as Security for Collection of Service Charges
Sec. 37-30. Created. [Ord. No. 1161, 3-6-1996]
Except as otherwise provided or limited by state law, the City shall have as
security for the collection of all charges for water services as authorized by
the Collection of Water Charges Act, a lien upon the premises to which such
water services were supplied. Such lien shall become effective immediately
upon the distribution or supplying of such water service or services to such
premises, but shall not be enforceable for more than three years. The term
"charges for water services" shall mean the rates, any assessments, fees,
or rentals due or to become due, respectively, and all other charges for
furnishing such service, and all repairs, maintenance and alterations of such
service, which the City determines to be the responsibility of the service
customer.
Sec. 37-31. Placement on tax rolls. [Ord. No. 1161, 3-6-1996]
Those charges which are delinquent for three months or more on June 30
of each year shall be reported by the City Auditor to the Council at the first
meeting thereof in the month of July. The Council thereupon shall order the
publication in a newspaper published in the City of notice to all owners of
property within the City that all unpaid water charges which have remained
unpaid for a period of three months or more prior to June 30, which have
not been paid by October 1, shall be assessed upon the City's tax roll against
the premises to which the water services were supplied or furnished and
that such charges shall be collected in the same manner as the City taxes
on such tax roll.
Sec. 37-32. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1161, 3-6-1996]
All such water charges which remain unpaid on October 1 shall be
transferred to the City's tax roll and assessed against the premises to
which the water service was supplied or furnished. This assessment shall
be collected with, and in the same manner as, City taxes. If the same have
remained delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in
the Treasurer's warrant for the collection of taxes levied in such tax roll,
such charges shall be returned to the County Treasurer to be collected in
the same manner as the lien created by City taxes on the delinquent tax roll
of the City.
Sec. 37-33. Protection of landlord, notice of lease and security
deposit. [Ord. No. 1161, 3-6-1996; amended 10-1-2014 by Ord. No.
1639]
If the owner of a premises which receives water services provided by the
Holland Board of Public Works shall lease such premises to a tenant who
is responsible under the lease for the payment of the charges for water
services, and such property owner notifies the HBPW, in writing, of such
Sec. 37-30 CHARTER Sec. 37-33
C:795
fact, the notice to include a true copy of the lease of the affected premises
executed by the owner or his/her designated agent and the tenant, then
the charges for water services provided to such leased premises shall not
become a lien against the premises after the date such notice is received
by the HBPW. Immediately after the filing of such notice, the HBPW shall
render no further service to the premises until it receives from the tenant,
or an individual or entity acting on behalf of the tenant, a security deposit
as security for the payment of the water charges. Deposits shall be refunded
to the tenant, or to the individual or entity that paid the deposit on behalf of
the tenant, upon a customer's completion of 12 consecutive months of good
credit history or upon the termination of utility service with the account in
good standing.
Sec. 37-33 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-33
C:796
ARTICLE IV
Lead and Copper Rule
Sec. 37-34. Water System Advisory Council. [12-5-2018 by Ord. No.
1754]
Pursuant to R 325.10410 of 2018 MR 11 (effective June 14, 2018), adopted
by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to § 5 of
Public Act 399 of 1976, MCL 325.1005, the Water System Advisory Council
("Council") is created, subject to the following terms and conditions.
(a) The Council shall have at least five members recommended by the
Holland Board of Public Works and appointed by the Holland City
Council. To be eligible for an appointment to the Council, an individual
shall have a demonstrated interest in or knowledge about lead in
drinking water and its effects. At least one member of the Council must
be a local resident who does not formally represent the interests of any
incorporated organization.
(b) The business that the Council performs shall be conducted at a public
meeting of the Council and held in compliance with the Open Meetings
Act, 1976 PA 267, MCLA §§ 15.261 to 15.275.
(c) The first meeting of the Council shall be called by the Holland Board of
Public Works. At the first meeting, the Council shall elect from its
members a Chairperson and other officers as it considers necessary or
appropriate, and may adopt bylaws for its operation. After the first
meeting, the Council shall meet at least annually.
(d) A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
the Council in the performance of an official function is subject to the
Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246.
(e) The Council shall do the following and shall perform such duties by
advising and reporting to the Board of Directors of the Holland Board of
Public Works:
(1) Develop plans for continuing public awareness about lead in
drinking water, even when the action level is not exceeded.
(2) Review public awareness campaign materials provided by the
Statewide Drinking Water Advisory Council to ensure the needs
and interests of the community, considering the economic and
cultural diversity of its residents, are addressed.
(3) Advise and consult with the Holland Board of Public Works on the
development of appropriate plans for remediation and public
education to be implemented if a lead action level is exceeded.
(4) Advise and consult with the Holland Board of Public Works on
efforts to replace private lead service lines at locations where the
owner declined service line replacement.
Sec. 37-34 CHARTER Sec. 37-34
C:797
Sec. 37-35. Water Service Line Replacement. [Added 4-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 1765]
(5) Assist in promoting transparency of all data and documents related
to lead in drinking water within the Holland Board of Public Works
service area.
(6) Collaborate with local community groups to ensure that residents
have the opportunity to be involved in efforts to educate the
community about lead in drinking water.
(f) The Council may independently seek advice, direction, and assistance
from the Department or the Statewide Advisory Council.
(a) For purposes of this section, a lead service line means either a service
line which is made of lead or any lead pigtail, lead gooseneck, or other
lead fitting that is connected to the service line, or both. A service line
shall mean the pipe from the discharge of the corporation fitting to the
customer site piping or to the building plumbing at the first shut-off
valve inside the building, or 18 inches inside the building, whichever is
shorter.
(b) Pursuant to R 325.10410 of 2018 MR 11 (effective June 14, 2018),
adopted by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
pursuant to § 5 of the Public Act 399 of 1976, MCLA § 325.1005 (LCR),
the City of Holland, acting by and through its Holland Board of Public
Works (HBPW), shall adopt a schedule for the replacement of lead
service lines based upon scheduled repair and replacement water
projects, community resources, availability of contractors and licensed
plumbers, and water utility resources to complete lead service line
replacements as required by the LCR.
(c) The HBPW, pursuant to the LCR, shall be responsible to install a new
nonlead service line at the HBPW's expense, from the curb box in the
public right-of-way way to the water meter on the owner's property; to
set a meter; and make any necessary connections to reset the water
meter. The existing water lead service line will be disconnected and
capped off inside or outside the building.
(d) The HBPW shall require that the owner/service customer (customer)
execute an access agreement allowing the HBPW, its employees,
agents, or contractors to enter on the property to construct and install
the new nonhead service line; and to conduct a preinspection of the
water service line as it enters inside the building and connects to the
meter to determine if the meter setting is correct, and if the meter
should be replaced.
(e) The customer's failure to execute the HPBW's access agreement, allow
access and permit installation of a new nonlead service line shall
constitute a violation of this section, and the HBPW may elect one of the
following enforcement options:
Sec. 37-34 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-35
C:798
(1) Upon 15 days' written notice to the customer, discontinue water
service to the customer;
(2) Permit the customer to execute a declination of service line
replacement which advises the customer that such declination
could result in required service line replacement at the end of the
schedule for replacement (January 1, 2041). The declination of
service shall not be effective unless the customer permits the
HBPW to conduct sampling and testing pursuant to the
requirements of the LCR and the testing and sampling by the
HBPW is acceptable.
(f) After installation of the new, nonlead service line, the responsibility of
the customer and the HBPW shall be as shown on the diagram below.
After the expiration of any warranty period, the customer shall hold the
City harmless and free from any claim or liability of damage done in the
performance of the water service line replacement work.
Holland BPW Water System
Water Service Line Responsibilities:
Sec. 37-35 CHARTER Sec. 37-35
C:799
Chapter 38
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 38, Weights and Measures, adopted by Ord. No. 463, as
amended, was repealed 10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1661.]
Chapter 39
ZONING
Sec. 37-35 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 37-35
C:800
ARTICLE I
In General
Sec. 39-1. Short title. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.1; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997107]
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Holland."
Sec. 39-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.2; Ord. No. 587; Ord. No.
601; Ord. No. 609; Ord. No. 617; Ord. No. 1007, 10-17-1992; Ord.
No. 1091, 6-2-1993; Ord. No. 1185, 9-6-1996; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1260, 8-18-1999; Ord. No. 1282, 7-5-2000; Ord.
No. 1366, § 1, 8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1526, 2-4-2009; Ord. No. 1576,
1-18-2012; amended 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 1622; 6-5-2013 by Ord.
No. 1606; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 1609; 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1630;
10-1-2014 by Ord. No. 1640; 8-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1674; 3-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 1727; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1730; 4-18-2018 by Ord. No.
1734]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS — A subordinate building or structure on the
same premises with a main building, or a portion of a main building or
structure, occupied or devoted to an accessory use. Where an accessory
building is attached to a main building by a wall higher than six feet above
finished grade, or by a roof, such accessory building shall be considered
part of the main building for purposes of establishing height, area and yard
requirements.
ACCESSORY USE — A use naturally and normally incidental to a principal
use on the same premises.
AMBIENT — The sound pressure level exceeded 90% of the time or L90.
ANEMOMETER TOWER — A freestanding tower containing
instrumentation such as anemometers that is designed to provide present
moment wind data for use by the supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA) system which is an accessory land use to a utility grid wind energy
system.
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An area used for the display,
sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition
and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE — The dismantling or disassembling of used motor
vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended Ch. 39 in its entirety.
Sec. 39-1 CHARTER Sec. 39-2
C:801
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS — An owner-occupied singlefamily
residence licensed to provide overnight sleeping accommodations
and to serve breakfast to paying guests in accordance with regulations
governing such activity.
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling with one kitchen
and used for the purpose of providing meals or lodging, or both meals
and lodging, for pay or compensation of any kind, computed by day, week
or month, to more than two persons other than members of the family
occupying such dwelling.
CENTRAL NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT — The area bounded by properties
with frontage on the following: 8th Street on the north; Fairbanks Avenue
north of 16th Street and Lincoln Avenue south of 16th Street on the east;
16th Street between Fairbanks Avenue and Lincoln Avenue, and 24th Street
extended on the south; and Ottawa Avenue on the west.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — That portion of a site condominium project
designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in
the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential,
commercial, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share
unit, or any other type of use.
dB(A) — The sound pressure level in decibels. It refers to the A-weighted
scale defined by ANSI; a method for weighting the frequency spectrum to
mimic the human ear.
DECIBEL — The unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound
pressure and sound intensity.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan for a project requiring review under Article
II of this chapter for properties located in a PUD or PRD District or a site
condominium project. (See also the definition of "site plan" in this section.)
DURABLE SURFACE — A surface consisting of asphalt, concrete, pavers,
permeable pavement, grass pavers or another similar durable surface.
DWELLING or APARTMENT — A building or portion thereof designed or
used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons,
including one-family, two-family and multiple dwellings, apartment-hotels,
hotels, boarding- and lodging houses, but not including motels, tourist
cabins or trailers.
DWELLING UNIT — One room or a suite of two or more rooms designed
for or occupied by not more than one family with substantially all of the
following characteristics: one mailbox, entrances enter common living
space(s), full and equal access to all of the home, no separate independent
access to only part of the home, single utility connection for water, sewer
and electric, interconnected smoke detectors throughout the home on all
floors, only one lease for the entire unit, occupants form a single
housekeeping group.
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE — Wherever the provisions of
this chapter refer to the effective date or the date of enactment of a
section, such reference shall be to the effective date or date of enactment
Sec. 39-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-2
C:802
of the ordinance adopting such section and not to the effective date of the
recodification of this chapter.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of
a power station, generating station or power plant of unrestricted height
for the production of electricity, light, heat, hot water or other discharge
products, and underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution system, communication, supply or disposal
system, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers,
electric substations, telephone exchange buildings, gas regulator stations
and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of utility service by such public
utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health
or safety or general welfare.
FAMILY —
FENCE — A barrier, railing, buffer or other upright structure, typically of
wood, metal or vinyl, enclosing an area of ground, marking a boundary,
screening an activity, or creating a visual or physical barrier.
FRATERNITY and SORORITY — A group of enrolled students associated or
formally organized and attending a college, university, or other institution of
higher education customarily living together as a single housekeeping unit.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building used primarily for the storage of passenger vehicles and for not
more than one truck of a rated capacity not exceeding 1 1/2 tons, or both.
GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS — That portion of a site condominium
project, other than the condominium units, and other than the limited
common elements.
(a) A person living alone;
Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship customarily living together as a single housekeeping unit
in a dwelling unit using common cooking facilities as distinguished
from a group occupying a hotel, club, religious or institutional building,
boarding- or lodging house, or fraternity or sorority house;
(b)
Two persons living together with their children by birth, adoption or
guardianship as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit using
common cooking facilities as distinguished from a group occupying
a hotel, club, religious or institutional building, boarding- or lodging
house, or fraternity or sorority house; or
(c)
Up to four unrelated persons (including roomers or boarders) living
together as a single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit using
common cooking facilities.
(d)
Sec. 39-2 CHARTER Sec. 39-2
C:803
HOME BUSINESS — A home-based business, occupation, or profession that
results in a product or service that is clearly an accessory, incidental, and
secondary use of a residential dwelling unit that may exhibit evidence that
a business is being conducted from the premises.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, occupation, or profession that results in
a product or service that is clearly an accessory, incidental, and secondary
use of a residential dwelling unit with no exterior evidence that a business
is being conducted from the premises, except those typically residential
activities noted in § 39-192(c). Music instruction in the home shall be
deemed a home occupation.
HOPE NEIGHBORHOOD AREA — The area bounded by 10th Street on
the north between River and Lincoln and 11th Street between Lincoln
and Fairbanks; Fairbanks between 11th and 16th and then Hazel Avenue
between 16th Street and 17th Street on the east; a portion of 16th Street
between Fairbanks and Hazel and 17th Street on the south; and River
Avenue on the west.
IEC — The International Electrotechnical Commission.
ISO — The International Organization for Standardization.
JUNKYARDS — A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or
handled, including house wreck yards, used lumber yards and places or
yards for use of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials
and equipment, but excluding such uses when conducted entirely within a
completely enclosed building and excluding pawn shops and establishments
for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars in operable condition,
salvaged machinery, used furniture and household equipment, and the
processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of
manufacturing operations.
LEASE UNIT BOUNDARY — The boundary around property leased for
purposes of a wind energy system, including adjacent parcels to the parcel
on which the wind energy system tower or equipment is located. For
purposes of setback, the lease unit boundary shall not cross road rights-ofway.
LIGHT ASSEMBLY — Putting together small mechanical or fabricated parts
that have been manufactured elsewhere into a value-added or final product.
Testing and calibrating of the parts and final product to meet product
specifications may also be included in the process. Light assembly is also
characterized by the use of small hand-held tools and residential scale
tabletop/workshop machinery.
LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS — That portion of a site condominium
project, other than the condominium units, reserved in the master deed for
the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
LOT — A parcel of land which is or may be occupied wholly or in part by one
principal building or use and its accessories, and having either immediate
Sec. 39-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-2
C:804
frontage upon a public street or a permanent, exclusive, nonobstructed
deeded access to a public street.
MASTER DEED — The condominium document establishing the site
condominium project and to which are attached as exhibits and
incorporated by reference the bylaws for the site condominium project
and the condominium subdivision plan for the site condominium project,
containing all information required by Michigan Act 59 of 1978, as
amended, or any similar successor statute.
MOTELS — Groups of furnished rooms or separate structures providing
sleeping and parking accommodations for transient tourist trade, commonly
known as tourist cabins or motor courts, as distinguished from furnished
rooms in an existing residential building.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure lawfully existing at the
time of adoption of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, and which does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which lawfully occupied a structure or
land at the time of adoption of this chapter, or any amendment thereto,
and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
ON-SITE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A land use for generating electric
power from wind that is accessory to a legal principal use and intended to
primarily serve the needs of the electric power consumer at that site.
ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A building designed for
or exclusively occupied by one family.
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or other public way,
used for the parking of three or more motor vehicles and available for
public use, whether for a fee or as an accommodation for clients, customers,
residents or members.
PETROLEUM BULK PLANTS — An establishment for the storage of
petroleum products in bulk and in packages for distribution by tank car,
tank vehicle, or motor truck.
PRINCIPAL OR PRIMARY USE — The predominant use of the premises.
ROOFLINE — The eaveline of a roof or building parapet, whichever is
higher, but excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projections.
ROTOR — An element of a wind energy system that acts as a multibladed
airfoil assembly, thereby extracting, through rotation, kinetic energy
directly from the wind.
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring an abutting
or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, gates,
building features, or plantings of sufficient height, length, and opacity to
form a visual barrier.
Sec. 39-2 CHARTER Sec. 39-2
C:805
SHADOW FLICKER — Alternating changes in light intensity caused by the
moving blades of a wind energy system casting shadows on the ground and
stationary objects, such as but not limited to a window at a dwelling.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — A dwelling unit offered for rent in part or its
entirety for less than 30 consecutive days per occupant.
SIGN — A device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols
and/or written copy, designed specifically for the purpose of identifying an
establishment, product, service or activity.
SIGN FACE — The area of a sign that displays a message, including the
extreme limits of writing, emblem, logo and similar representation.
SIGN TYPES —
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A dwelling unit where owners reside and rent or
offers for rent one room up to 365 days per calendar year or the entire
dwelling unit for up to 60 days while all owners are away.
(a)
NONOWNER-OCCUPIED — A dwelling unit that is not an individual
owner's residence, and is rented or offered for rent in its entirety for
less than 30 consecutive days per occupant and permitted by Chapter
39.
(b)
TULIP TIME — A dwelling unit offered for rent in part or in its entirety
for not more than 10 days during the designated Tulip Time Festival in
May.
(c)
AWNING or CANOPY — A sign fixed to or integral with the surface of
an awning or canopy.
(a)
(b) BALLOON — An object composed of an inflatable, nonporous bag.
BANNER — A fabric, plastic, or other object made of nonridged
material without an enclosing structural framework.
(c)
BILLBOARD AND OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING — A sign which
contains a message or advertises an establishment, product, service,
space or activity not available on the lot on which the sign is located.
For purposes of this article, a movable freestanding sign is not
considered a billboard or off-premises advertising sign.
(d)
DIRECTIONAL — A sign that provides directions or instructions for the
use on the lot on which the sign is located, such as parking or exit and
entrance signs.
(e)
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Signs that provide directions to or notices
of equipment and accessories reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of utility service or for the public health, safety, or general welfare by
public utilities or municipal departments and commissions.
(f)
FLAG — A piece of fabric with a distinctive design, logo, emblem or
words.
(g)
Sec. 39-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-2
C:806
FEATHER FLAG/FEATHER BANNER — A piece of fabric, typically taller
than it is wide, with a distinctive design, logo, emblem or words,
specifically designed and used to draw attention to a product, service
or location.
(h)
FREESTANDING — A permanent sign not anchored or secured to a
building or the ground and designed to be placed during business hours
and moved inside when not in use.
(i)
GOVERNMENT — A temporary or permanent sign erected by the City
of Holland, Allegan or Ottawa County, or the state or federal
government including temporary signs as necessary in conjunction with
the improvement of public infrastructure.
(j)
(k) MARQUEE — A sign affixed flat against the surface of the marquee.
MOVEABLE FREESTANDING — A freestanding sign not anchored or
secured to a building or the ground.
(l)
MURALS —
TYPE 1 — A design or representation which does not contain
promotional or commercial advertising painted or drawn on a wall.
(1)
TYPE 2 — An original, one-of-a-kind unique design or
representation which contains limited references to the
establishment, product, or service provided on the site which is
painted or drawn on a wall on that site.
(2)
(m)
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT IDENTIFIER — A sign
located at, near, or within the boundary of an established neighborhood
commercial area (excluding the C-3 Downtown Commercial District)
and solely identifying the name and/or logo of the neighborhood
commercial area.
(n)
NONCONFORMING — A permanently installed sign, legally existing at
the original installation, which does not conform to the current height,
size, area or location requirements of this article as of the date of the
adoption of this section.
(o)
PLACARD — A sign which provides notices of a public nature, i.e., "No
Trespassing" or "No Hunting."
(p)
PERMANENT — A sign which has a permanent location on the ground
or which is attached to a structure having a permanent location and
which meets the structural requirements for signs as established in the
Building Code.
(q)
(r) PROJECTING — A double-faced sign attached to a building or wall.
READER BOARD — A portion of a sign on which copy is changed
periodically either manually or electronically.
(s)
(t) ROOF SIGN — A sign erected above the roofline of a building.
Sec. 39-2 CHARTER Sec. 39-2
C:807
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — A lot of record on or before August 16, 1961,
in separate and distinct ownership from adjacent lot or lots where such
adjacent lot or lots were not at that date owned by the same owner or by the
same owner by the entireties, in joint tenancy or tenancy in common with
any other person or persons.
SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT — The term "site condominium" and
"condominium" shall be synonymous unless the specific context of the
ordinance would indicate otherwise.
SITE PLAN — A plan for projects requiring review by the Planning
Commission pursuant to Article II of this chapter. (See also the definition of
"development plan" in this section.)
SOUND PRESSURE — An average rate at which sound energy is
transmitted through a unit area in a specified direction. The pressure of the
sound measured at a receiver.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic
scale and reported in decibels (dB).
STRUCTURAL CHANGES OR ALTERATIONS — Any change in the
supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams
or girders, or any substantial change in the roof.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected that has a permanent
location on the ground or is attached to something having such location.
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A building designed for or used for two
dwelling units.
UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A land use for generating
electric power by use of wind at one or multiple tower locations in a
community, including accessory uses, such as but not limited to a SCADA
tower and an electric substation. A utility grid wind energy system is
designed and built to provide electric power to the electric utility grid
rather than the electric power consumer on site.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A land use for generating power by use of wind,
utilizing wind turbine generators, including the turbine, blades, and tower
as well as related electrical equipment. This does not include wiring to
TEMPORARY — A sign intended for a limited period of display, typically
less than 30 days.
(u)
WALL SIGN — A single-faced sign painted or attached directly to and
parallel to the exterior wall of a building.
(v)
WINDOW SIGN — A sign placed on the glass of a window or door that
is used for advertising or identification, and intended to be viewed from
the outside of the building.
(w)
WAYFINDING SIGN — A temporary or permanent information system
installed or erected by the City of Holland or the Downtown
Development Authority, for the purpose of guiding citizens and tourists
and identifying specific places and parking areas.
(x)
Sec. 39-2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-2
C:808
connect the wind energy system to the electric utility grid. See also "on-site
wind energy system" and "utility grid wind energy system."
WIND SITE ASSESSMENT — An assessment to determine the wind speeds
at a specific site and the feasibility of using that site for construction of a
wind energy system.
YARDS —
Sec. 39-3. Interpretation and purposes; conflicting regulations.
[Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.1; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
FRONT YARD IN R-TRN TRADITIONAL RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE DISTRICT — The open, unoccupied space
between the front line of the building, excluding steps and unenclosed
porches, and the street line, and extending for the full width of the
lot. On a corner lot, the lot dimension along both street lines shall be
deemed to be the front lot line. Front yards shall be measured to the
front property line less any area taken for public right-of-way purposes.
(a)
FRONT YARD — The open, unoccupied space between the front line of
the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches, and the street
line, and extending for the full width of the lot. On a corner lot, the
narrowest lot dimension along a street line shall be deemed to be the
front lot line. Front yards shall be measured to the front property line
less any area taken for public right-of-way purposes.
(b)
REAR YARD — A space unoccupied, except by an accessory building or
use as permitted by this chapter, extending for the full width of the lot
between any building other than a building of accessory use and the
rear lot line.
(c)
SIDE YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, between the building and the side lot line, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. On a corner lot, the widest lot dimension
along a street line shall be deemed to be a side lot line. In the R-TRN
Traditional Residential Neighborhood Zone District, on a corner lot,
the lot dimension along a public alley or a common property line with
another lot shall be considered the side lot line.
(d)
THROUGH LOT — When a lot has two front yards, the side of the
property abutting a street with the higher speed limit shall be
considered the rear yard.
(e)
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare. Among other purposes, such provisions are
intended to provide for adequate light, air and convenience of access to
secure safety from fire and other dangers and to avoid undue
concentration of population by regulating and limiting the height and
bulk of buildings wherever erected, limiting and determining the size of
yards, courts and other open spaces, regulating the density of
Sec. 39-2 CHARTER Sec. 39-3
C:809
Sec. 39-4. Districts established and enumerated. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.3; Ord. No. 551; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1222,
8-19-1998; Ord. No. 1274, 3-1-2000; Ord. No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001;
Ord. No. 1415, § 2, 6-1-2005; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
For the purposes of this chapter, the City is hereby divided into the following
classes of zone districts known as:
I-1 Industrial District
I-2 Industrial District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
C-3 Central Business District
C-4 Regional Shopping Center District
C-5 Professional Office Service District
R-1 One-Family Residential District
R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential
District
R-3 Residential District
R-4 Mobile Home Development and
Residential District
R-5 Apartment District
R-6 Central Apartment District
R-TRN Traditional Residential
Neighborhood District
AG Agricultural District
PRD Planned Residential Development
District
ED Education District
population, and regulating and restricting the location of uses, trades,
industries and buildings in relation to traffic and parking needs.
(b) Adoption of this chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of this Code or
other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this
chapter or of any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,
deed or other private agreement. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of
buildings or lot coverage, or requires greater lot areas, or larger yards,
courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such
existing provisions of this Code or other law or ordinance, or by such
rules, regulations or permits, or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
Sec. 39-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-4
C:810
PUD Planned Unit Development District
WIND Windmill Island Neighborhood
Business District
M-40 Corridor/South End Overlay Zone
District
I-196 Overlay Zone District
Sec. 39-4.1. Consolidated public notice requirements. [Ord. No.
1461, 9-6-2006; amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
(a) Public notification. All applications for development approval in the City
requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006,108 and other provisions of this section
with regard to public notification. All matters appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals pursuant to Article XII shall comply with the notice
provisions set forth in such article.
(b) Responsibility. When the provisions of this section or the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the City Clerk or
his/her designee shall be responsible for preparing the content of the
notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City of Holland, and mailed or delivered as provided in this section.
(c) Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings
shall include the following:
(1) Description of request: describe nature of the request; identify
whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special land
use, planned unit development, variance appeal, site or
development plan review, ordinance interpretation, or other
purpose.
(2) Location: indicate the property that is the subject of the request.
The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses
within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the
property. If there are no street addresses, other means of
identification may be used, such as a tax parcel identification
number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map
showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be
listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for
rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not
involving a specific property.
(3) Hearing location: when and where the request will be considered
and indicate the date, time, and place of the public hearing(s).
108. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3209.
Sec. 39-4 CHARTER Sec. 39-4.1
C:811
(4) Written comments: include a statement describing when and where
written comments will be received concerning the request. Include
a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in
person or by counsel.
(5) Handicap access: information concerning how handicap access will
be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible.
(d) Publication/personal and mailed notice:
(1) General. When the provisions of this section or state law require
that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided
to:
a. The owners of property for which approval is being considered,
and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property.
b. For rezoning requests or zoning ordinance amendments
involving 10 or fewer adjacent properties, or an ordinance
interpretation that does involve a specific property; to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of
the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless
of whether the property or occupant is located within the
boundaries of the City. If the name of the occupant is not
known, the term "occupant" may be used in making
notification. Notification need not be given to more than one
occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains
more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or
organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall
receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing
more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas
owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the
manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to
post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. In
addition, notice of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City.
c. For rezoning requests or zoning ordinance amendments
involving 11 or more adjacent properties, or an ordinance
interpretation that does not involve a specific property, the City
shall provide notice of hearing by publication of notice of the
request in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The
notice of publication shall not require the listing of individual
addresses of property as required in Subsection (c)(2) of this
section.
d. All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies,
railroads, and other persons which have requested to receive
notice pursuant to this section under Subsection (e)(3),
registration to receive notice by mail.
Sec. 39-4.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-4.1
C:812
(2) Notice by mail/affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its
deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed,
and postage paid. The City Clerk, or his/her designee, shall prepare
a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was
mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was
delivered.
(e) Timing of notice. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006,109 or this section where applicable,
notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows:
(1) For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning, text
amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance
appeal, site or development plan review, ordinance interpretation,
or other purpose: not less than 15 days before the date the
application will be considered for approval.
(2) For any other public hearing required by this section: not less than
15 days before the application will be considered for approval.
(3) Registration to receive notice by mail; general. Any neighborhood
organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person
may register with the City Clerk or his/her designee to receive
written notice of all applications for development approval
pursuant to this section, personal and mailed notice, or written
notice of all applications for development approval within the
zoning district in which they are located. The City Clerk, or his/her
designee, shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees
may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by
the City Council.
(4) Requirements. The requesting party must provide the City Clerk or
his/her designee information on an official form to ensure
notification can be made. All registered persons must reregister
annually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this section.
(5) Effective date of ordinance amendment. Following adoption of a
zoning ordinance and any subsequent amendments to the zoning
ordinance, the zoning ordinance or subsequent amendments shall
be filed with the City Clerk, and a notice of ordinance adoption
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
in conformance with Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as
amended, within 15 days after adoption. A zoning ordinance shall
take effect upon the expiration of seven days after publication or at
such later date after publication as may be specified by the City at
the time of the adoption of the zoning ordinance or any subsequent
amendments.
109. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3209.
Sec. 39-4.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-5
C:813
Sec. 39-5. District boundaries; Zoning Map; lots divided by
boundary lines. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.3; Ord. No. 1182, 9-11-1996;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Sec. 39-6. Classification of annexed areas. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.3;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1543, 3-17-2010]
Whenever any area is annexed to the City, if such area was subject to zoning
regulations at the time of such annexation, the following classifications shall
be applied, pending an overall analysis and adoption of new City zoning
regulations with respect to such area:
(a) The boundaries of the districts enumerated in Section 39-4 are hereby
established as shown on a map entitled "The Zoning Map of the City of
Holland, Michigan," adopted July 26, 1961 and as amended from time to
time by action of the City Council, which accompanies this chapter and
is made a part of this section. Except where referenced on such map to
a street line or other designated line by dimensions shown on such map,
the district boundary lines follow lot lines or the center lines of streets
or alleys as they existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter; but
where a district line does not coincide with such lot lines or such street
center lines or where it is not designated by dimensions, it shall be
deemed to be 132 feet back from the nearest parallel street line. The
reference on the Zoning Map to D-1 shall be deemed I-1, D-2 shall be
deemed I-2, A-1 shall be deemed R-1, A-2 shall be deemed R-2, A-3 shall
be deemed R-3, A-4 shall be deemed R-4, B-1 shall be deemed R-5 and
B-3 shall be deemed R-6.
(b) Where a district boundary line, as established in this section or as
shown on the Zoning Map, divides a lot or lots in common ownership
and of record at the time of enactment of this chapter, the least
restricted use shall be considered as extending to the entire lot, if the
more restricted portion of such lot is entirely within 25 feet of such
dividing district boundary line. The use so extended shall be deemed to
be conforming.
(a) Areas previously zoned for industrial uses shall become an I-2 Industrial
District.
(b) Areas previously zoned for commercial uses shall become a C-2
Highway Commercial District;
(c) Areas previously zoned for residential uses shall become an R-1 One-
Family Residential District; and
(d) Areas previously zoned for agricultural uses shall become an AG
Agricultural District.
Sec. 39-5 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-6
C:814
Sec. 39-7. Compliance with district regulations. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.4; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or premises shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be erected, razed, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged or altered, except subject to and in conformity with the regulations
set forth in this chapter for the district in which it is located.
Sec. 39-8. Restoring unsafe buildings. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.4; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by
the Building Official.
Sec. 39-9. Special requirements relative to mixed occupancy. [Ord.
No. 464, § 9-1.4; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Before issuing a building permit for any construction for any premises
intended for a combination of dwelling and commercial or dwelling and
industrial occupancy, or which would result in an increased number of
dwelling units within a building partly occupied by business or industrial
usage, or which would result in an increased area devoted to business
or industrial usage within a building partly occupied as a dwelling, the
Building Official shall refer the plans to a Fire Chief and City Sanitarian
and request their reports as to any fire or health hazards that exist or may
be expected to exist and their recommendations as to desirable additional
provisions or changes in the interest of safety or health shall be complied
with before issuance of a permit.
Sec. 39-10. Substandard residential lots. [Ord. No. 761; Ord. No.
1150, 8-16-1995; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1222,
8-19-1998; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
No lot or lots in common ownership, and no yard, court, parking area
or other space, shall be divided, altered or reduced to make such area
or dimension less than the minimum required under this chapter.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, any lot located in a subdivision
platted and recorded in accordance with the Land Division Act, MCLA
§ 560.101 et seq., as amended, and located within an existing zoned district
allowing and permitting residential development, may be used for the
construction of a single-family residence if constructed within the front,
rear, or side yards and height limitations of the zone district in which such
The Zoning Maps in effect at the time of annexation shall be utilized
to delineate new district boundaries pending revision thereof by the
City. Whenever any unzoned area is annexed to the City, such area
shall become an AG Agricultural District pending an overall analysis
and adoption of City zoning regulations with respect to such area.
Sec. 39-6 CHARTER Sec. 39-10
C:815
lot is situated. Upon demonstration by the owner of a lot that 60% or more
of the lots within 300 feet of the property line along the same side of the
street have developed at lesser front, rear, or side yards, lot width and
lot area requirements than required in the zone district, the Zoning Board
may reduce the setback, side yard, lot width and lot area requirements
as a special exception, upon the findings that such encroachment is in
character with and will not be detrimental to the adjoining neighborhood.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no dwelling shall be erected, built
or constructed less than 10 feet from adjoining dwellings. In addition,
previously platted and property subdivided under the Subdivision Control
Act which is zoned to Planned Residential Development or Planned Unit
Development is not eligible for development as under this section. Property
so zoned shall be developed according to the development plan, subdivision,
or site condominium approved by the City at the time of, or subsequent
to, the adoption of the PRD or PUD zoning designation for that property.
Requirements of this section shall not apply to development within the
WIND zone district.
Sec. 39-11. Fences in Residential Zone Districts; traffic visibility.
[Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.4; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1728]
(a) General fence standards.
(1) A permit is required prior to construction or installation of any
fence.
(2) The fence shall be constructed at least one foot off a property line
when a sidewalk exists.
(3) Fence gates shall not swing over public sidewalks.
(4) A twenty-foot clear vision area, measured 20 feet on each street
side, shall be maintained on any corner lot whereby no fence or
planting over three feet in height is permitted, except deciduous
trees.
(5) No fence is permitted within a floodway.
(6) Only chain link fence is permitted within a drainage easement.
(7) Nonresidential uses in residential zone district: Fences up to eight
feet in height are permitted. A special exception can be requested
for a height increase for these uses per the regulations in Section
39-197(b).
(8) Free-standing fence sections up to a total length of 16 feet are
considered landscaping and not a fence.
(9) When requesting a permit for fences that serve as enclosures for
swimming pools, the applicant must comply with State of Michigan
Building Code.
Sec. 39-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-11
C:816
(10) Through lots are permitted a six-foot-tall fence on the property line
designated as the rear yard.
(b) Measuring fence height. The fence body determines the fence height
and is measured from grade to the top of the fence body. Posts may be
up to 12 inches above the fence body. There will be an additional
tolerance permitted of up to three inches due to grade changes along
the fence.
(c) Fence types:
(1) Open fence. A fence that is more than 50% open when viewed from
an angle perpendicular to the fence. Examples: dog-eared, wrought
iron, gothic, board, round, split-rail.
SPLIT RAIL
(2) Solid fence. A freestanding and rigid fence made of wood, concrete,
PVC, or other similar fence materials providing 50% or less visual
and reasonable sound blocking properties. Examples: ornamental
metal, rot-resistant wood, brick, block.
(d) Prohibited fences. Slats in chain link fence, barbed, razor, concertina,
electrified or similar wire, fabric, tarp, materials not traditionally used
for fencing or screening.
(e) Fence maintenance. All fences must be kept in good repair, safety, and
appearance on both sides of the fence by its owner. Fences must be
constructed of wood, metal, bricks, masonry, plastic or other materials
designed for permanent outdoor fencing. Wood fences must be
constructed of cedar, redwood, or other decay-resistant wood. Peeling,
Sec. 39-11 CHARTER Sec. 39-11
C:817
flacking and chipped coating must be eliminated and surfaces recoated.
The property owner is responsible for maintaining the area between the
property line and the owner's fence.
(f) Residential fence height maximums.
Open Solid Restrictions
Front yard 4 feet 3 feet Clear vision area
on corner lots;
special approval
required if in
historic district
Side yard in
front of principal
structure
4 feet 3 feet Clear vision area
on corner lots;
special approval
required if in
historic district
Side and rear
yard on a side
street (corner
lots)
6 feet 6 feet To half of the
required side
yard
requirement, but
not less than 5
feet from the
property line.
Rear yard 6 feet 6 feet Special approval
required if in
historic district
Side yard behind
principal
structure
6 feet 6 feet Special approval
required if in
historic district
Sec. 39-11 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-11
C:818
Clear Vision Fence Height
Corner Lot
Sec. 39-11 CHARTER Sec. 39-12
C:819
Sec. 39-12. Height exceptions. [Ord. No. 494, 9-1.4; Ord. No. 985,
9-6-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1199, 9-3-1997; Ord.
No. 1222, 8-19-1998; 9-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1746]
Sec. 39-13. Building height benchmarks. [Ord. No. 778; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1529, 3-4-2009]
The height of the building shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the grade plane to the average height of the highest roof
surface. The grade plane is a reference plane representing the average
finished ground level adjoining the building and exterior walls. Where the
finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference
plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the
building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the
building, between the building point and a point six feet from the building.
Sec. 39-14. Essential services generally. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.4; Ord.
No. 617; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1199, 9-3-1997;
amended 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 1622]
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special exception to exceed
the height limitations of all zones, up to a maximum height of 80 feet if:
(1) It is for parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height, chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, gas tanks, grain elevators,
silos, penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, television
antennas, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental towers,
monuments, cupolas, domes and spires, or other necessary
mechanical appurtenances; and
(2) Approval is received from West Michigan Airport Authority, State of
Michigan and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
(b) For properties within the WIND Zone District, the height of windmills
and spires shall be allowed up to a height of 140 feet, provided that
necessary approvals are received from the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(c) Structures that receive conditional use approval per Section 39-17.
(a) Essential services, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted in all
zone districts. This section shall not be deemed to authorize services or
uses that are also conditional uses described in Section 39-17 without
compliance with Section 39-17.
(b) Any power station, generating plant, or power plant, as defined in
Section 39-2 as an essential service, which is proposed for erection,
construction, enlargement, or substantial modification, shall be subject
to site plan review by the Planning Commission pursuant to Article II. In
applying the standards and requirements applicable to site plan review
in this chapter, the Planning Commission shall apply those standards
Sec. 39-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-14
C:820
Sec. 39-15. Oil and gas drilling. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.4; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Drilling for, and the extraction of, oil, gas, petroleum and hydrocarbons
shall be permitted in all zone districts upon compliance with the provisions
of Chapter 21; provided, however, that every application pertaining to
premises located in a residential zone district shall be referred to the
Zoning Board which, after public notice and hearing, shall have the power
to impose additional conditions reasonably designed to prevent the creation
of a nuisance in the particular zone district.
Sec. 39-16. Access to a public right-of-way. [Ord. No. 587; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1222, 8-19-1998]
No building permit shall be issued for any structure, other than in a planned
residential development or the WIND zone district, unless the lot on which
the structure is to be erected fronts on a public street or has access thereto
by means of a deeded access not less than 20 feet wide. Such access area
shall be appurtenant to such lot and shall not be alienable apart from the
base fee. No portion of any such access less than 40 feet in width shall be
considered as contributing to the lot size or area requirements of the lot to
which access is provided, or to lots which such access abuts.
Sec. 39-17. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 606; Ord. No. 618; Ord. No.
636; Ord. No. 872; Ord. No. 986, 9-6-1989; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1195, 6-4-1997; Ord. No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001;
Ord. No. 1502, 4-23-2008; Ord. No. 1527, 2-4-2009; 3-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 1727]
Conditional uses, as defined in this section, shall be permitted in all zone
districts (except as restricted below) following a hearing by the Zoning
Board and subject to such reasonable restrictions as such Board may
impose as hereinafter provided. Site or development plan review under
Article II of this chapter is not required for conditional uses.
Recommendations from the Planning Commission or Community Services
and Development Department regarding site planning concerns may be
included as recommended proposed conditions in the report to the Zoning
Board concerning the proposed conditional use as is currently provided by
§ 39-17(b).
and requirements applicable to the zone district where the majority of
the essential service is located.
(c) All other essential services in residential zone districts shall be subject
to special exception review by the Zoning Board pursuant to this
chapter. In applying the standards and requirements applicable to
special exception review in this chapter, the Zoning Board shall apply
those standards and requirements applicable to the zone district where
the majority of the essential service is located, and it may require other
conditions pursuant to Section 39-407.
Sec. 39-14 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:821
(a) "Conditional uses" defined. "Conditional uses" are those uses which are
or could be publicly operated or are traditionally affected with a public
interest. Because of the unique characteristics, they cannot be properly
classified as permitted uses in any particular district without
consideration of the impact of such uses upon adjoining land or public
facilities. Conditional uses may include, but are not limited to, the
following uses:
(1) Railroad spurs, switching yards, maintenance facilities and trafficcontrol
terminals.
(2) Private cemeteries, mausoleums, crematoriums and memorial
gardens.
(3) Private or semipublic nonprofit parks, recreation areas, athletic
clubs, sportsman clubs, etc., including structures essential or
accessory to such uses.
(4) Community service uses including community centers and
administrative, recreational or instructional services, such as Red
Cross, YMCA, scouting or day care.
(5) Private, profit-seeking instructional, tutorial or educational
facilities.
(6) Communications centers, including television, radio stations.
(7) Personal wireless service towers and supporting facilities,
television and radio towers and supporting facilities.
(8) Utility grid wind energy systems, on-site use wind energy systems
of greater than 30 kW, and anemometer towers over 100 feet high.
(9) Small cell wireless facilities (as defined in MCLA § 460.1301, et
seq.) in any zone district subject to the following: [Added
6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1770]
a. Zoning review or zoning approval is not required for any of the
following:
1. Located in the public right-of-way
2. The replacement of a small cell wireless facility with a
small cell wireless facility that is not larger or heavier, in
compliance with applicable codes.
3. Routine maintenance of a small cell wireless facility, utility
pole, or wireless support structure.
4. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of a micro wireless facility that is suspended
on cables strung between utility poles or wireless support
structures in compliance with applicable codes.
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:822
b. For small cell wireless facilities not exempt under Subsection
(a)(9)a, a conditional use permit is required and shall be
reviewed in the same manner as towers and based on the
standards set forth in MCL 460.1317 (2) and (3) and those
standards applicable to towers of such height that are not
inconsistent with MCLA § 460.1317.
c. Review under Subsection (a)(9)b shall be completed within the
time limits imposed by MCLA § 460.1317(2). The Zoning
Administrator shall determine when the application is
complete under MCLA § 460.1317.
d. Conditional use review and approval is in addition to permit
requirements under § 7-62.1.
(b) Application for conditional use. Application for a conditional use shall
be filed with the City Clerk on a form prescribed by the Zoning Board.
The application shall be accompanied by such plans and data and other
information as may be prescribed by the Zoning Board. The City Clerk
shall submit copies of such application to the Planning Commission,
office of the City Engineer, City Manager, Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services, City Assessor, Department of Public Safety
and Board of Public Works for review and recommendation.
(c) Zoning Board hearing. The Zoning Board shall hold a hearing on such
application, such hearing to be held within 90 days of the initial filing
with the City Clerk, and shall, within a reasonable time following such
hearing, grant or deny such application. The Zoning Board shall hold a
formal public hearing on all such applications and shall give notice
thereof as provided in Section 39-408. If the request involves placement
of a tower or antenna on public property, it shall be acted upon within
the time limits imposed by state or federal law.
(d) Standards. If the Zoning Board finds from reasonable evidence that all
of the following facts and conditions exist, it shall authorize the
conditional use:
(1) That the applicant has proven that the proposed use and proposed
location would not result in a violation of the terms of Section
39-74, as the standards therein set forth apply to the applicant's
proposed use at the proposed location.
(2) That the conditional use will not cause substantial damage to the
value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is to be
located.
(3) That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
(4) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other required
site improvements have been or are being provided.
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:823
(5) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in
the public streets.
(6) Except for the conditions and requirements applicable to height,
area and off-street parking, the conditional use shall in all other
respects conform to the applicable regulations of the district in
which it is located.
(e) Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any conditional use,
the Zoning Board shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon
the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of
the conditional use as shall be necessary to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of the City, and to insure compliance with
the standards and requirements specified in Subsection (d) of this
section. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Zoning
Board shall further require such evidence and guarantees as it may
deem necessary and proper as proof that the conditions stipulated in
connection therewith are being and will be met.
(f) Except for the uses listed in Subsection (a)(1) through (7) of this
section, nothing herein shall be deemed to allow approval as a
conditional use for any use which is explicitly permitted in any of the
various existing zone districts.
(g) Additional requirements for towers:
(1) Purpose; goals. The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this
section are to:
a. Strongly encourage the location of towers in nonresidential
areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the
City;
b. Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
c. Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate and
configure them, to the extent possible, in areas where the
adverse impact on the community is minimized;
d. Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively, and efficiently.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic,
radio, or television communications through the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic waves. For purposes of this section,
"antenna" shall not include citizens' band or ham radio
transmission equipment that is used for noncommercial purposes.
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:824
CO-LOCATION — The use of a single tower and/or site by more
than one provider.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE — Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless
exchange access services as defined in the Telecommunications Act
of 1996.
PROVIDER(S) — An entity that provides personal wireless service
and other forms of communication service including, but not
limited to, radio and television.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The
term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular and personal
communication service (PCS) telephone towers, and the like.
(3) Additional conditional use application requirements. In addition to
the information otherwise requested by the Zoning Board for a
conditional use permit application, the following items shall also be
required for an application under this section:
a. A map showing the service area of the proposed tower facility
and an explanation of the need for the facility.
b. A map showing the locations and service areas of other tower
facilities operated by the applicant and those that are proposed
by the applicant which are located within the City or any
adjoining Township.
c. An application shall be signed by the property owner and
applicant and state that:
1. The owner and applicant agree to allow for the potential
co-location of additional communication equipment by
other providers on the applicant's structure or within the
same location; and
2. The owner and applicant agree to comply with all of the
conditions imposed by this ordinance and the conditional
use permit, including but not limited to removal of the
tower and all supporting facilities as required by this
section if use of the site is discontinued.
(4) Additional procedures and required conditions.
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:825
a. Prior to making application, all personal wireless service
providers and other providers shall inquire with the
Community Services and Development Department regarding
the availability of additional antenna equipment capacity on
existing towers.
b. If a provider finds adequate space on an existing tower for
their antenna facilities, the location of such additional antenna
equipment on said tower facility shall be a permitted use,
without further Zoning Board approval.
c. Providers shall locate their antenna equipment on existing
towers unless the Zoning Board determines that existing
towers are at capacity, the equipment is incompatible with
other equipment on the existing towers, or existing towers are
not located so as to meet the provider's reasonable
requirements. If a provider's equipment cannot be co-located
on existing towers, then a provider shall make every effort to
locate their equipment on existing publicly or privately owned
tall structures.
d. If a provider finds a suitable existing tall structure on or within
which it may locate its equipment, the Zoning Board may waive
any required condition of this section if it determines that
waiver will not adversely affect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public at large, with special attention paid to the
adjoining neighborhood thereof.
e. Towers of 100 feet or more in height may only be located [in]
the C-2 Highway Commercial District, C-4 Regional Shopping
Center District, I-1 Industrial District, and the I-2 Industrial
District. Towers of less than 100 feet in height may be located
in any I or C District. All towers that require approval by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be prohibited from the M-40
Corridor/South End Overlay Zone District area as described in
Section 39-341(a).
f. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and
regulations change, all providers must certify that the facility
meets those revised standards. Providers shall certify that they
meet FCC requirements for radiation emissions prior to
receiving the initial facility building permit and shall recertify
annually that they meet all FCC requirements.
g. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a
tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with
standards contained in applicable local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:826
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to
time. If upon inspection, it is determined by the City Building
Inspector that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower,
the owner shall bring such tower into compliance with such
standards within a reasonable time frame determined by said
City Building Inspector.
h. All towers shall be designed such that a minimum of two
additional antenna facilities comparable to that planned by an
applicant provider shall be available to other providers at a
reasonable cost. All providers shall demonstrate they have an
agreement from the property owner to provide adequate
ground area, access, and utility connections for additional
users of the tower, again at reasonable cost.
i. Approval of a conditional use does not authorize a provider to
utilize the public right-of-way for related utility or
communication needs not shown on the plan.
j. Upon the cessation of use of the proposed tower by all
providers for a period exceeding 12 months, the owner of said
tower shall be required to remove the tower and all other
aboveground installations in their entirety within six months.
Failure to remove the improvements is declared unlawful and
shall be deemed a nuisance per se and shall be subject to
enforcement action under Section 1-10 of this Ordinance Code.
The Zoning Board may require the owner to post a bond or
other form of assurance that towers will be promptly removed
in accordance with this section.
k. No signage or logos shall be placed above 10 feet in height on
any tower or any accessory building.
l. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six
feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the Zoning Board
may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
m. The Zoning Board shall have the discretion to choose the type
of tower to be constructed by the applicant. Currently, tower
types are limited to monopole, lattice, and guy-wire supported
structures.
n. The owner of the tower and any accessory buildings shall
comply with the following landscaping requirements:
1. Towers and accessory buildings (the "facilities") shall be
landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively
screens view of the facilities (except for the tower) from
adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:827
landscaped strip at least six feet wide around the
perimeter of the facilities. Landscaping shall consist of
evergreen trees and shrubs, or other suitable landscape
materials planted at intervals sufficient to effectively
screen the facilities.
2. The Zoning Board may reduce or waive the landscaping
requirements only if it determines that the visual impact of
the facilities upon surrounding properties will be minimal
or the lot size and existing natural growth on the property
or adjacent properties is a sufficient buffer.
3. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
4. The Zoning Board may incorporate additional landscaping
and screening requirements, including any recommended
by the Planning Commission, to provide an adequate
screening or buffer.
o. Towers and all accessory buildings shall abide by the
applicable setback requirements for principal buildings in the
zone district in which the tower is located. Additionally, all
towers shall be set back from residentially used property a
minimum distance equal to the height of the tower.
p. Providers shall cooperate in the investigation of complaints
that an antenna system causes interference with other
electronic devices. If deemed responsible for the interference,
a provider shall rectify the interference or provide reasonable
relief for the affected parties.
q. Aesthetics and lighting:
1. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted
a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will
blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built
environment.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:828
4. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the owner shall install lighting as approved by
the Zoning Board based upon a design that will cause the
least disturbance to surrounding views.
(5) Conditional use permit limitations:
a. Any tower structure that does not contain any active antennas
for 365 consecutive days shall receive a written notice by the
Building Official to remove said tower and accessory
equipment from the property. The owner or the owner's agent
shall reply within 30 days of the date of the Building Official's
notice and shall state their schedule to comply with the order
to remove the tower, or otherwise comply with the
requirements of this section. Unless otherwise approved by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the tower and accessory equipment
shall either then be removed from the property or one or more
active antennas shall have been added to the tower within 90
days of the date of the Building Official's notice.
b. A conditional use permit shall terminate if the permitted tower
facility is not constructed and placed into use within one year
of the date of the Zoning Board's approval, provided that the
Zoning Administrator may extend the permit for six months if
construction has commenced before expiration of the initial
year.
c. The owner and operator of a communication tower facility shall
and does, upon approval of this conditional use permit, agree
to indemnify, protect, defend and hold harmless the City, its
Council members, Zoning Board members, officers, employees,
agents and representatives, from and against any and all
liabilities, losses, damages, demands, claims and costs,
including court costs and attorneys' fees (collectively,
"liabilities") incurred by the City arising, directly or indirectly,
from:
1. The City's approval and issuance of this conditional use
permit;
2. The City's approval or issuance of any permit or action,
whether discretionary or nondiscretionary, in connection
with the use contemplated herein;
3. The applicant's installation, maintenance, and operation of
the facility including, without limitation, any and all
liabilities arising from the emission of electromagnetic
fields or other energy waves or emissions.
The owner's and operator's compliance with this section is
an express condition of the conditional use permit and this
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:829
provision shall be binding on the owner and operator and
their successors and assigns.
d. The applicant shall maintain the tower facility to standards
that may be imposed by the City at the time of the granting of a
permit. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be
limited to, maintenance of the paint, structural integrity and
landscaping. If the applicant fails to maintain the facility, the
City may undertake the maintenance at the expense of the
applicant or terminate the conditional use permit, or both, at
its sole option.
e. The applicant shall notify the City of all changes in ownership
or operation of the facility within 60 days of the change.
(h) Utility grid wind energy system, on-site use wind energy system of
greater than 30 kW, and anemometer towers over 100 feet high. A
utility grid wind energy system, on-site use wind energy system of
greater than 30 kW, and anemometer towers over 100 feet high shall
meet the following standards:
(1) Property setbacks.
a. Anemometer tower setbacks shall be the distance equal to the
height of the tower from property lines.
b. Utility grid and on-site use wind energy system setbacks shall
be at least equal to the height of the tower including the top of
the blade in its vertical position from property lines or from the
lease unit boundary, whichever is less.
c. An operations and maintenance office building, a substation, or
ancillary equipment shall comply with the property setback
requirements of the respective zoning district. Overhead
transmission lines and power poles shall comply with the
setback and placement requirements applicable to public
utilities.
(2) Sound pressure level. The sound pressure level shall not exceed 55
dB(A) measured at the property lines or the lease unit boundary,
whichever is farther from the source of the noise. This sound
pressure level shall not be exceeded for more than three minutes in
any hour of the day. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55
dB(A), the standard shall be ambient dB(A) plus five dB(A).
(3) Safety. Shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access to
electrical and mechanical components and shall have access doors
that are kept securely locked at all times when service personnel
are not present. All spent lubricants and cooling fluids shall be
properly and safely removed in a timely manner from the site of the
wind energy system. A sign shall be posted near the tower or
operations and maintenance office building that will contain
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:830
emergency contact information. Signage placed at the access drive
entrance shall warn visitors about the potential danger of falling
ice. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be
30 feet for a wind energy system employing a horizontal axis rotor.
(4) Construction codes, towers, and interconnection standards shall
comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes
and local building permit requirements.
(5) Preapplication permits. Required permits and evidence of
compliance with the following federal, state and local statutes shall
be submitted as required before approval of a conditional use
permit:
a. Utility infrastructure. The infrastructure shall comply with
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, the
Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950 as
amended, MCLA § 259.431 et seq.), the Michigan Tall
Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959 as amended, MCLA
§ 259.481 et seq.), and local jurisdiction airport overlay zone
regulations. The minimum FAA lighting standards shall not be
exceeded. All tower lighting required by the FAA shall be
shielded to the extent possible to reduce glare and visibility
from the ground. The tower shaft shall not be illuminated
unless required by the FAA. Utility grid wind energy systems
shall comply with applicable utility, Michigan Public Service
Commission, and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
interconnection standards.
b. Environment. The site plan and other documents and drawings
shall show:
1. Mitigation measures to minimize potential impacts on the
natural environment including, but not limited to,
wetlands and other fragile ecosystems, historical and
cultural sites, and antiquities, as identified in an
environmental analysis.
2. Compliance with applicable parts of the Michigan Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451 of
1994, MCLA § 324.101 et seq.).
(6) Performance security. The Zoning Board may require security for
the applicant's performance in the form of a letter of credit, deposit
or bond to ensure that the applicant repairs any damage to public
infrastructure or property caused by construction of the wind
energy system.
(7) Utilities. Power lines shall be placed underground, when feasible.
All aboveground lines, transformers, or conductors shall comply
with the Avian Power Line Interaction Committee published
standards to prevent avian mortality.
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:831
(8) The following standards apply only to utility grid wind energy
systems:
a. Visual impact. Utility grid wind energy system projects shall
use tubular towers and all utility grid wind energy systems in a
project shall be finished in a single, nonreflective matte
finished color. A project shall be constructed using wind energy
systems of similar design, size, operation, and appearance
throughout the project. No lettering, company insignia,
advertising, or graphics shall be on any part of the tower, hub,
or blades. Nacelles may have lettering that exhibits the
manufacturer's and/or owner's identification. The applicant
shall avoid state or federal scenic areas and significant visual
resources listed in the local unit of government's plan.
b. Avian and wildlife impact. Site plan and other documents and
drawings shall show mitigation measures to minimize potential
impacts on avian and wildlife.
c. Shadow flicker. Site plan and other documents and drawings
shall show mitigation measures to minimize potential impacts
from shadow flicker.
d. Decommissioning. A Zoning Board approved decommissioning
plan indicating the:
1. Anticipated life of the project;
2. Estimated decommissioning costs net of salvage value in
current dollars;
3. Method of ensuring that funds will be available for
decommissioning and restoration; and
4. Anticipated manner in which the project will be
decommissioned and the site restored.
e. Complaint resolution. A Zoning Board approved process to
resolve complaints from nearby residents concerning the
construction or operation of the project.
f. Electromagnetic interference. No utility grid wind energy
system shall be installed in any location where its proximity to
existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antennae
for radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal
communication systems would produce electromagnetic
interference with signal transmission or reception unless the
applicant provides a replacement signal to the affected party
that will restore reception to at least the level present before
operation of the wind energy system. No utility grid wind
energy system shall be installed in any location within the line
of sight of an existing microwave communications link where
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:832
operation of the wind energy system is likely to produce
electromagnetic interference in the link's operation unless the
interference is insignificant.
(9) Plan requirements.
a. Utility grid wind energy system, on-site use wind energy
system of greater than 30 kW, and anemometer towers over
100 feet high. All plans shall include the following information:
1. Documentation that sound pressure level, construction
code, tower, interconnection (if applicable), and safety
requirements have been reviewed and the submitted site
plan is prepared to show compliance with these issues.
2. Proof of the applicant's public liability insurance for the
project.
3. A copy of that portion of all the applicant's lease(s) with
the landowner(s) granting authority to install the
anemometer tower and/or utility grid wind energy system;
legal description of the property(ies), lease unit(s); and the
site plan shows the boundaries of the leases as well as the
boundaries of the lease unit boundary.
4. The phases, or parts of construction, with a construction
schedule.
5. The project area boundaries.
6. The location, height, and dimensions of all existing and
proposed structures and fencing.
7. The location, grades, and dimensions of all temporary and
permanent on-site and access drives from the nearest
street.
8. All new infrastructure above ground related to the project.
9. A copy of Manufacturers' Material Safety Data Sheet(s)
which shall include the type and quantity of all materials
used in the operation of all equipment including, but not
limited to, all lubricants and coolants.
b. Utility grid wind energy systems only. All plans for utility grid
wind energy systems shall also include the following
information:
1. A copy of a noise modeling and analysis report and the site
plan shall show locations of equipment identified as a
source of noise which is placed, based on the analysis, so
that the wind energy system will not exceed the maximum
permitted sound pressure levels. The noise modeling and
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17
C:833
analysis shall conform to IEC 61400 and ISO 9613. After
installation of the utility grid wind energy system, sound
pressure level measurements shall be done by a third
party, qualified professional according to the procedures
in the most current version of ANSI S12.18. All sound
pressure levels shall be measured with a sound meter that
meets or exceeds the most current version of ANSI S1.4
specifications for a Type II sound meter. Documentation of
the sound pressure level measurements shall be provided
to the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services within 60 days of the commercial operation of the
project.
2. A visual impact simulation showing the completed site as
proposed on the submitted site plan. The visual impact
simulation shall be from four viewable angles.
3. A copy of an environment analysis by a third-party
qualified professional to identify and assess any potential
impacts on the natural environment including, but not
limited to, wetlands and other fragile ecosystems,
historical and cultural sites, and antiquities. The applicant
shall take appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or
mitigate adverse impacts identified in the analysis, and
shall show those measures on the site plan. The applicant
shall identify and evaluate the significance of any net
effects or concerns that will remain after mitigation
efforts.
4. A copy of an avian and wildlife impact analysis by a thirdparty
qualified professional to identify and assess any
potential impacts on wildlife and endangered species. The
applicant shall take appropriate measures to minimize,
eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts identified in the
analysis, and shall show those measures on the site plan.
The applicant shall identify and evaluate the significance
of any net effects or concerns that will remain after
mitigation efforts. (Sites requiring special scrutiny include
wildlife refuges, other areas where birds are highly
concentrated, bat hibernacula, wooded ridge tops that
attract wildlife, sites that are frequented by federally and/
or state-listed endangered species of birds and bats,
significant bird migration pathways, and areas that have
landscape features known to attract large numbers of
raptor. At a minimum, the analysis shall include a thorough
review of existing information regarding species and
potential habitats in the vicinity of the project area. Where
appropriate, surveys for bats, raptors, and general avian
use should be conducted. The analysis shall include the
potential effects on species listed under the federal
Sec. 39-17 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17
C:834
Sec. 39-17.1. Review of special land uses. [Added 5-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 1628]
Endangered Species Act and Michigan's Endangered
Species Protection Law.110 The analysis shall indicate
whether a post-construction wildlife mortality study will be
conducted and, if not, the reasons why such a study does
not need to be conducted.)
5. A copy of a shadow flicker analysis at occupied structures
to identify the locations of shadow flicker that may be
caused by the project and the expected durations of the
flicker at these locations from sunrise to sunset over the
course of a year. The site plan shall identify problem areas
where shadow flicker may affect the occupants of the
structures and show measures that shall be taken to
eliminate or mitigate the problems.
6. A second site plan, which includes all the information
found in Section 39-17(h)(8)(d) of this chapter, and shows
the restoration plan for the site after completion of the
project which includes the following supporting
documentation:
(a) The anticipated life of the project.
(b) The estimated decommissioning costs net of salvage
value in current dollars.
(c) The method of ensuring that funds will be available for
decommissioning and restoration.
(d) The anticipated manner in which the project will be
decommissioned and the site restored.
7. A description of the complaint resolution process
developed by the applicant to resolve complaints from
nearby residents concerning the construction or operation
of the project. The process may use an independent
mediator or arbitrator and shall include a time limit for
acting on a complaint. The process shall not preclude the
local government from acting on a complaint. During
construction the applicant shall maintain and make
available to nearby residents a telephone number where a
project representative can be reached during normal
business hours.
(a) Intent and purpose.
110. Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C.A. § 1531 et seq. and MCLA § 324.36501 et seq., respectively.
Sec. 39-17 CHARTER Sec. 39-17.1
C:835
(1) Unless otherwise designated for review by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, an application for approval of any use designated in this
Chapter 39 as a special land use, special use or special exception
(collectively referred to as a "special land use") shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission because of its unique characteristics
that require special consideration in relation to the welfare of
adjacent properties and the community as a whole. The Planning
Commission shall review an application for a special land use based
on:
a. The criteria set forth in this section; and
b. The criteria set forth in other sections applicable to a specific
special land use.
(2) These standards are designed to allow development and
investment, but at the same time maintain adequate provision for
the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the
community.
(b) Procedures. Notice of hearings on an application for a special land use
and special uses shall be given as provided in Section 39-4.1.
(1) The notice shall indicate that a public hearing on the special land
use request may be requested by any property owner or the
occupant of any structure located within 300 feet of the property
being considered for a special land use, regardless of whether the
property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction.
(2) At the initiative of the Planning Commission or upon the request of
the applicant, a real property owner whose real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the property, or the occupant of a
structure located within 300 feet of the property, the Planning
Commission shall conduct a public hearing before making a
decision on the request.
(3) All special land use review procedures shall concurrently follow the
requirements for a Planning Commission site plan review pursuant
to the requirements of Article II of this Chapter 39.
(c) General approval standards. The applicant shall establish compliance
with the following standards to obtain approval of a special land use
application, in addition to the criteria set forth in other sections
applicable to a specific special land use. The proposed special land use
and its location shall:
(1) Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity and not change the
essential character of the area in which it is proposed.
Sec. 39-17.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17.1
C:836
Sec. 39-17.2. Special land use standards for indoor archery and
firearms ranges. [Added 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1628]
Indoor archery and firearm ranges are allowed in certain zone districts
as special land uses, subject to the provisions of Section 39-17.1 and this
Section 39-17.2.
(2) Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities and, if
applicable, schools.
(3) Not create excessive additional burden upon, or requirements for,
public facilities and services at public cost.
(4) Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, and equipment or
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production
of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, electrical or electromagnetic
interference or odors.
(5) Be compatible and in accordance with the goals, objectives and
policies of the Master Plan and promote the intent and purpose of
the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located.
(6) Comply with all applicable licensing ordinances.
(d) Planning Commission action, conditions and revocation. The Planning
Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions an
application for a special land use.
(1) The request for approval shall be approved if the request is in
compliance with the standards stated in the Zoning Ordinance, the
conditions imposed under the Zoning Ordinance, other applicable
ordinances, and state and federal statutes.
(2) The decision on a special land use shall be incorporated in a
statement of findings and conclusions relative to the special land
use which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions
imposed.
(3) The Planning Commission may impose conditions, restrictions,
safeguards or requirements as necessary to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the community, for the protection of
individual property rights, and for insuring that the intent and
objectives of this section will be observed.
(4) The Planning Commission may revoke a special land use approval
based on a material breach of any condition, restriction, safeguard,
or requirement.
Sec. 39-17.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-17.2
C:837
(1) Application. The application for the special land use and site plan
review shall be on a form available from the City Clerk's office. The
applicant shall attach to the application:
(a) A certification from the indoor range equipment manufacturer that
the equipment meets all applicable federal, state and local
regulations for archery and shooting ranges and indicates the size
or type of weapon the range is designed for. The indoor range
equipment includes all baffles and walls designed to contain arrows
and bullets or other projectiles.
(b) A certification from the project architect and/or professional
engineer that the facility meets the current requirements for all
applicable federal, state and local regulations for archery and
shooting ranges.
(2) Standards for approval. The following standards apply to an indoor
archery and firearms shooting range:
(a) The interior of the archery or firearm range shall be impenetrable
to the discharge of any arrow or bullet or other projectile shot or
discharged in the range.
(b) The audible noise from the discharge of any firearm shall comply
with the requirements of Section 19-5 of the City Code.
(c) The range shall have an on-site lead cleanup system and HVAC
filtration system in compliance with all federal and state
regulations.
(d) There shall be a minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet.
(e) Required yard areas shall be the same as permitted uses in the
district, except where a lot in the I-1 District has an average width
of less than 200 feet, the required side yard shall not be less than
20 feet.
(f) Hours of operation: 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(3) Standards for site plan review. The applicant shall concurrently submit
a site plan for an indoor archery or firearm range which shall comply
with the requirements of Article II of this Chapter 39.
(4) Conditions for occupancy and operation. In addition to compliance with
the Planning Commission's decision on the special land use application
and site plan, the property shall not be used as an indoor archery or
firearm range unless or until:
(a) The applicant provides certification from the contractor or installer
that the equipment described in the application has been installed
and complies with all manufacturer and architectural directions,
requirements and specifications and any required condition from
the Planning Commission.
Sec. 39-17.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17.2
C:838
Sec. 39-17.3. Special land use standards for light assembly uses in
specific commercial zone districts. [Added 6-4-2014 by Ord. No.
1630]
Light assembly uses are allowed in the C-1, C-2 and C-4 Zone Districts
as special land uses, subject to the provisions of Section 39-17.1 and this
Section 39-17.3.
(b) The range operator provides certification that the facility will at all
times comply with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations, will meet or exceed all commonly accepted shooting
range safety and design practices, and will be operated in a manner
that protects the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
(c) The range operator shall only allow weapons of the size or type the
range is designed for as set forth in the manufacturer's certificate.
(d) The applicant or range operator shall not modify the indoor range
equipment, on-site lead collection system or HVAC system without
first obtaining amended special land use approval.
(e) The range owner shall obtain and maintain a license as required by
Chapter 17.
(f) The range owner shall annually, at the time the range owner
applies to renew its license, provide certification that the facility
will at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations, will meet or exceed all commonly accepted shooting
range safety and design practices, and will be operated in a manner
that protects the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
(g) The range shall be subject to inspection upon request by the City to
verify ongoing compliance with the requirements of this section.
(1) Application. The application for the special land use and site plan
review shall be on a form available from the City Clerk's office.
(2) Standards for approval. The following standards apply to light assembly
uses in a specified zone district:
(a) The use shall occur in an existing building.
(b) None of the uses listed in Section 39-72(a) shall be allowed.
(c) The total enclosed area of the use shall not exceed 10,000 square
feet.
(d) The light assembly use must occur at least 25 feet from all public
rights-of-way and/or private pedestrian connected walkways, and
25 feet from all shared property lines with residential zoning
districts; or it shall be demonstrated that the use would not be an
intrusion into the pedestrian/shopping continuity of a commercial
Sec. 39-17.2 CHARTER Sec. 39-17.3
C:839
Sec. 39-17.4. Fair housing accommodation policy.111 [Added
6-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1652]
area and would not create a negative impact on adjacent
residential uses.
(e) All activities, including storage, shall be conducted entirely within
the interior of the building. No outside storage is permitted.
(f) In addition to regular United States postal letter carrier service,
the number of allowable deliveries and pickups per day of goods
and materials used and/or produced in the operation of the
business shall be approved by the Planning Commission. Said
deliveries and pickups of mail and packages shall be completed by
the United States Postal Service and by alternative private delivery
services. Deliveries and pickups shall not require a vehicle larger
than a step-type van.
(g) The light assembly and associated accessory uses shall not produce
any noise, vibrations, odors, or heat that are detectable beyond the
property line.
(h) The intent of these standards is to maintain the character of the
district, and assure visual connectedness and public safety for
those within and outside the business.
(3) Standards for site plan review. The applicant shall concurrently submit
a site plan for a light assembly use which shall comply with the
requirements of Article II of this Chapter 39. In addition, a site plan for
a light assembly use located in the C-1 Commercial District shall
comply with the following additional requirements:
(a) The exterior design of the building shall be compatible with the
character of the Neighborhood Commercial District in which it is
located, as perceived from adjacent public sidewalks and streets.
(b) Traditional storefront design, window area, display windows and
the building character shall be compatible with neighboring
commercial storefronts with no blank facades along the sidewalk
exceeding 25 feet in length. The interior design shall not negate the
traditional exterior storefront appearance.
(c) The intent of these standards is to maintain the character of the
district, and assure visual connectedness and public safety for
those within and outside the business.
(a) Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Holland, pursuant to the Federal
Fair Housing Act and the Michigan Elliot Larsen Civil Rights Act
(hereafter "fair housing laws") to provide individuals with disabilities
reasonable accommodation in rules, practices and procedures to
111. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 14, Art. III, Fair Housing.
Sec. 39-17.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17.4
C:840
ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of
housing for individuals with disabilities. This section is intended to
provide a procedure for individuals with disabilities and developers
of housing for individuals with disabilities to seek relief from the
application of zoning regulations, practices and procedures to further
the City's compliance with fair housing laws and provide greater
opportunities for the development of critically needed housing for
individuals with disabilities.
(b) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
ELIGIBLE PERSON — A person who is an individual with a disability,
his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for
individuals with disabilities.
INDIVIDUAL WITH A DISABILITY — Someone who has a physical or
mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; anyone
who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of
such impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of,
or addiction to, a controlled substance (as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802).
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited-liability company,
corporation or other entity.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION — Providing eligible persons with
flexibility in the application of zoning regulations, practices and
procedures, or even granting variances from certain requirements,
when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to equal housing
opportunities.
REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION — A request by
any individual with a disability, his or her representative, a developer
or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the
application of a zoning regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as
a barrier to fair housing opportunities.
(c) Notice of fair housing accommodations policy, assistance available.
(1) Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be
prominently displayed at public information counters in the
Community and Neighborhood Services Department, advising the
public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals.
Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available
to the public in the Community and Neighborhood Services
Department.
(2) The notice shall indicate that the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services will provide an applicant with assistance in
filing a request for reasonable accommodation or an appeal from a
decision on such request so that the process is accessible.
(d) Requests for reasonable accommodation.
Sec. 39-17.4 CHARTER Sec. 39-17.4
C:841
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the jurisdiction and power
to grant a special exception from the non-use requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance where necessary to provide reasonable
accommodation to allow individuals with disabilities to have
reasonable access to housing in the City of Holland.
(2) A special exemption is not necessary for state-licensed adult foster
care homes to the extent that state law preempts local zoning and
may exist legally without the special exception.
(3) An eligible person may request a reasonable accommodation in
zoning regulations, practices and procedures.
(4) Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in writing,
filed in the Office of the City Clerk and provide the following
information:
a. Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable
accommodation;
b. Name and address of the property owner(s) (if different);
c. Address and parcel number of the property for which
accommodation is requested;
d. Evidence that the request is for an individual with a disability
under fair housing laws;
e. Description of the requested accommodation and the
regulation(s) or procedure for which accommodation is sought;
f. Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary
for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the
dwelling;
g. All alternative accommodations and other options that have
been considered by the applicant;
h. Evidence of whether the property is within 500 feet of another
property granted accommodations for use by five or more
unrelated persons under this section; and
i. The written consent of the property owner.
(5) Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be
retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the
applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection
except as may be required by the Michigan Freedom of Information
Act.
(6) A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, practices
and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation
may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable
accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to
Sec. 39-17.4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-17.4
C:842
comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the
requested accommodation.
(7) Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals using the criteria set forth in Subsection
(e).
(8) Notice of the application and hearing shall be given in accordance
with Section 1-6.
(e) Standards of review. The written decision by the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on some or
all of the following factors:
(1) Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for
reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with
disabilities protected under fair housing laws;
(2) Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make
housing available to an individual with disabilities under the fair
housing laws;
(3) Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the City;
(4) Whether the requested accommodation would require a
fundamental alteration in the nature of the City's zoning program;
(5) Whether there is an alternative accommodation which may provide
an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant;
(6) Whether the recovery residence is state licensed as a substance
use disorder facility;
(7) Whether the recovery residence is a certified member of an
established entity that conducts its own inspections and has its own
standards for the benefit of occupants, e.g., CARF International,
National Alliance for Recovery Residences (NARR) or any
equivalent entity having similar requirements for membership;
(8) Whether the property should be managed by a person living on site;
(9) Whether and how the requested accommodation will benefit the
people in the program; and
(10) Whether the property is within 500 feet of another property
granted accommodations for use by five or more unrelated persons
under this section.
(f) Written decisions, notice to applicant.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue a decision on a request for
reasonable accommodation within 45 days from the date a
complete application has been filed with the Clerk and may either
Sec. 39-17.4 CHARTER Sec. 39-17.4
C:843
Sec. 39-18. Aircraft landing as principal or accessory use. [Ord. No.
821; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
grant, grant with modifications or conditions, or deny a request
for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the criteria in
Subsection (e).
(2) If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable
accommodation, the Zoning Board of Appeals may request further
information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws,
specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event
that a request for additional information is made, the forty-five-day
period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant completely
responds to the request.
(3) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to render a decision on the
request for reasonable accommodation within the 45 days from the
date a complete application has been filed with the Clerk, the
request shall be deemed granted.
(4) The written decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall explain in
detail the basis of the decision, including its findings on the criteria
set forth in Subsection (e). The decision shall give notice of the
applicant's right to appeal and to request reasonable
accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. A copy of
the decision shall be provided to the applicant or sent to the
applicant by first class mail.
(5) The written decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final
unless an applicant appeals it to the circuit court.
(g) Effect of zoning pending a determination. While a request for
reasonable accommodation is pending, all zoning regulations, practices
and procedures otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject
of the request shall remain in full force and effect.
(h) Appeals. An applicant may appeal a decision by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as provided by statute.
(a) For purposes of this section, "aircraft" shall be defined to include, but
shall not be limited to, any airplane, helicopter or similar motorized
craft constructed or designed for the purpose of air travel or
transportation. "Aircraft" shall further include the customary
appurtenances and equipment associated with craft constructed or
designed for purposes of air travel or transportation.
(b) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of any property for
airport purposes and its accessory uses which lawfully existed prior to
February 9, 1983, or uses which are or may be defined as conditional
uses pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 39-17. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent any course of conduct by a pilot or any other
person, either on the ground or in the air, which is calculated to meet
Sec. 39-17.4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-18
C:844
Sec. 39-18.1. On-site use wind energy systems and anemometer
towers of 100 feet or less. [Ord. No. 1528, 2-4-2009]
An on-site use wind energy system is a permitted accessory use in all zone
districts and shall meet the following standards:
emergency conditions and best cope with an imminent danger which
threatens life or property, either on the ground or in the air, when such
emergency has arisen as a result of the operation of any type of aircraft.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit or restrict the use of
aircraft, including landing and takeoff operations, involved in search
and rescue, medical or emergency evacuation, traffic control or similar
uses under direction of governmental law enforcement or military
agencies.
(d) No lot, or any portion thereof, shall be used, designed or constructed
for the purpose of the landing of aircraft, as a principal or accessory
use, in any zone district unless approved by the Zoning Board, as a
special exception, after a public hearing thereon and compliance with
the following criteria:
(1) Evidence by the applicant that the proposed use will not violate the
performance criteria set forth in Subsection (a) of Section 39-84;
(2) Evidence by the applicant that the approach and take-off areas
necessary for the operation of the aircraft comply with federal and
state statutes, including the regulations and administrative rulings
promulgated under said statutes, and that the proposed approach
and take-off areas will not impair the reasonable use and
occupancy of adjacent and adjoining property; and
(3) Evidence by the applicant that the landing site and the immediate
and adjacent area affected by the wind velocity created by
approach or take-off of aircraft will be developed and maintained
with an impervious surface or grass covering so as to prevent the
nuisance of dust or dirt to adjoining premises, and further evidence
that the landing site affords reasonable margins of safety to
persons through fencing, open visibility area or a combination
thereof.
The Zoning Board may attach conditions to the approval of a
special exception requiring the applicant to continue to comply
with the levels of performance represented to the Zoning Board by
the applicant in the written application or in representations given
to the Zoning Board during the hearing process.
(a) Designed to primarily serve the needs of a home, farm, or business
located on the same site as the on-site use wind energy system.
(b) Shall have a maximum power generation of 30 kW.
Sec. 39-18 CHARTER Sec. 39-18.1
C:845
(c) Property setback.
(1) For stand-alone wind energy systems, the distance between an onsite
use wind energy system and the owner's property lines shall be
equal to or greater than the height of the wind energy system tower
including the top of the blade in its vertical position.
(2) For wind energy systems mounted on a principal or accessory
structure, the distance between an on-site use wind energy system
and the owner's property lines shall be equal to or greater than the
height of the wind energy system tower including the top of the
blade in its vertical position as measured from where the system is
attached to the structure.
(3) The distance between an anemometer tower and the owner's
property lines shall be equal to the height of the tower.
(4) No part of the wind energy system structure, including guy wire
anchors, may extend closer than 10 feet to the owner's property
lines.
(d) Sound pressure level. On-site use wind energy systems shall not exceed
55 dB(A) at any property line. This sound pressure level may be
exceeded during short term events such as utility outages and/or severe
wind storms. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55 dB(A), the
standard shall be ambient dB(A) plus five dB(A).
(e) Electromagnetic interference. No on-site wind energy system shall be
installed in any location where its proximity to existing fixed broadcast,
retransmission, or reception antennae for radio, television, or wireless
phone or other personal communication systems would produce
electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception
unless the applicant provides a replacement signal to the affected party
that will restore reception to at least the level present before operation
of the wind energy system. No on-site wind energy system shall be
installed in any location within the line of sight of an existing microwave
communications link where operation of the wind energy system is
likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link's operation
unless the interference is insignificant.
(f) Construction codes, towers, and interconnection standards. On-site use
wind energy systems including towers shall comply with all applicable
state construction and electrical codes and local building permit
requirements. On-site use wind energy systems including towers shall
comply with Federal Aviation Administration requirements, the
Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950, MCLA § 259.431 et
seq.), the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959, MCLA
§ 259.481 et seq.), and local jurisdiction airport overlay zone
regulations. An interconnected on-site use wind energy system shall
comply with Michigan Public Service Commission and Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission standards. Off-grid systems are exempt from
this requirement.
Sec. 39-18.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-18.1
C:846
Sec. 39-19. Changes, amendments, etc.; fees. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.22; Ord. No. 559; Ord. No. 872; Ord. No. 940, 3-16-1988; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727; 12-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 1756]
Sec. 39-19.1. Medical use of marihuana. [Ord. No. 1564, 6-1-2011]
No property in any zone district shall be used for the medical use of
marihuana (as defined in Section 39-192.1 of the Holland City Code). Except
as provided in Section 39-192.1, the Zoning Board of Appeals may not grant
a variance from the requirements of this section.
(g) Safety. An on-site use wind energy system shall have automatic braking,
governing, or a feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or
over speeding. All wind towers shall have lightning protection. If a
tower is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to a
height of at least six feet above the guy wire anchors. The minimum
vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be 20 feet for a wind
energy system employing a horizontal axis rotor.
(a) Changes, amendments, supplements, site plan review or other similar
administrative action to be taken pursuant to this chapter or to the
Zoning Map shall comply with the procedural requirements of Section 4
of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended or revised to the
date of such change, amendment or supplement. Applications for
rezoning shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by
a filing fee. The fee shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the City
Council.
(b) The applicant shall hold one public outreach workshop and submit a
public outreach workshop summary report at the time of Planning
Commission application submittal in accordance with the procedures
and requirements of the City of Holland's Development Guide. These
requirements will apply to the rezoning of property to any zone district,
except R-1 or R-2 Zone Districts, when the property is adjacent to a
residential zone district and/or residential use.
(c) The City Clerk shall refer such applications to the Planning Commission
of the City for a recommendation to the City Council as provided by Act
No. 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended and the applicable rules
of the Planning Commission.
Sec. 39-18.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-19.1
C:847

ARTICLE II
Site And Development Plan Review
Sec. 39-20. Intent. [Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008112]
The intent of this section is to require varying levels of site plan and
development plan review and approval for buildings, structures and uses
that have varying levels of impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, and
character of the community. The intent is to encourage a high degree of
quality development and redevelopment of properties, without undue delay
when the impact is minimal. The regulations are intended to promote:
Sec. 39-21. Site plan, review required. [Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008;
Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 10-20-2010; Ord. No. 1700]
All proposals for development or redevelopment of land in any zoning
district shall be subject to review at one of the following levels before a
building permit is issued:
(a) Growth of the City in a responsible manner which provides the citizens
thereof with a safe, healthy, and beneficial environment;
(b) Safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle traffic movement,
both within a site and in relation to access streets, adjacent and nearby
properties, and adjacent sidewalk network;
(c) Harmonious relationships of buildings, structures and uses, both within
a site and with adjacent sites seeking to draw on the best
characteristics of surrounding properties;
(d) Conservation of natural amenities and resources;
(e) Minimizing any adverse effects of traffic, noise, dust, and other types of
pollution;
(f) Protection and enhancement of property values and thereby secure the
fiscal base for public services;
(g) Compliance with the policies and recommendations from a variety of
City departments as it relates to the deliverance of public services, such
as utilities, police, fire, transportation, and so forth; and
(h) Compliance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable
City, state and federal laws.
(a) Planning Commission review. This review is conducted by the Planning
Commission and is coordinated by the Community and Neighborhood
Services Department (the Department) with review assistance from the
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended Art. II in its entirety. Article II was originally
adopted 6-2-1993 by Ord. No. 1092, as amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1186; 2-19-1997
by Ord. No. 1188; 8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1222; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 1238; 8-4-1999 by
Ord. No. 1255; 2-2-2000 by Ord. No. 1271; 1-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1288; 5-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 1298; 5-1-2002 by Ord. Nos. 1334 and 1335; and 3-30-2005 by Ord. No. 1411.
Sec. 39-20 CHARTER Sec. 39-21
C:849
following City departments: Police, Fire, Transportation Services,
Leisure and Cultural Services, and the Board of Public Works (water/
wastewater, electrical and pollution control), and other departments as
necessary.
(b) Administrative staff review. This review is to be conducted by the
Community and Neighborhood Services Department with review
assistance from the following City departments: Police, Fire,
Transportation Services, Leisure and Cultural Services, and the Board
of Public Works (water/wastewater, electrical and pollution control),
and other departments as necessary.
(c) Standard new construction permit review. This review is to be
conducted by the Zoning Administrator for all other projects not
covered by either a Planning Commission review or an administrative
staff review and is conducted as part of the standard review for a
construction permit, including those uses permitted by Sections
39-69(a)(1) through (13), (15), (16), and 39-197(a)(1) through (15), (17)
through (19).
(d) Site plan review responsibility table. The level of review for a site plan
will be determined by the following table:
Zoning District
Planning
Commission Review
Administrative Staff
Review
ED District Zone All new buildings
exceeding 1,000
square feet
All building expansions
exceeding 10,000
square feet
Amendments to
existing site plan
approvals not
exempted by Section
39-30
I-1 and I-2 Zone
Districts
All new buildings
exceeding 1,000
square feet north and
west of U.S. 31, and
all new buildings east
and south of U.S. 31
that are adjacent to or
across the right-ofway
from residentially
zoned property
All new buildings
exceeding 1,000
square feet and east of
U.S. 31, except for new
buildings east and
south of U.S. 31 that
are adjacent to or
across the right-of-way
from residentially
zoned property
Sec. 39-21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-21
C:850
Zoning District
Planning
Commission Review
Administrative Staff
Review
Any new structure or
change of use to an
auto repair facility or
gasoline service
station
All additions
exceeding 10,000
square feet to
buildings north and
west of U.S. 31
All additions exceeding
10,000 square feet to
buildings south and
east of U.S. 31
Amendments to site
plans north and west
of U.S. 31 not
exempted by Section
39-30
Amendments to site
plans south and east of
U.S. 31 not exempted
by Section 39-30
C-1, C-2, C-4, and C-5
Zone Districts
New structures/uses
greater than 1,000
square feet on
property contiguous
to residentially zoned
property
New structures over
1,000 square feet not
contiguous to
residentially zoned
property
Any new structure or
change of use to an
auto repair facility or
gasoline service
station
Additions exceeding
1,000 square feet to
existing buildings
Amendments to
existing site plan
approvals not
exempted by Section
39-30
C-3 Zone District Any new construction,
additions or
expansions to
buildings
As required by Section
39-128
Any new surface
parking lot, parking
structure, or the
expansion of an
existing parking lot
Sec. 39-21 CHARTER Sec. 39-21
C:851
Zoning District
Planning
Commission Review
Administrative Staff
Review
All residential and
agriculture zone
districts
New apartment or
condominium
development on two
or more acres or
having 12 or more
dwelling units
Multifamily residential
developments of three
to 11 dwelling units,
provided the
development is not
part of a potentially
larger development
The establishment of
new churches, new
hospitals, new nursing
homes, new parks,
new community
centers, new libraries,
new museums, and
new governmental
administrative or
government service
uses
New accessory
structures exceeding
1,000 square feet
Additions to schools,
churches, hospitals or
nursing homes,
parking structures,
community center
structures, libraries,
museums, and
governmental
administrative or
service uses
exceeding 10,000
square feet
Nonresidential
additions between
1,000 and 10,000
square feet
All zones All projects to be
located in a planned
residential
development or a
planned unit
development district.
The uses permitted by
Sections 39-69(a)(14)
and 39-197(a)(16) will
only require Planning
Commission approval
if they are larger than
100 square feet in size
As required by other
sections of this article,
i.e., airport per Article
VIII, Division 3, Airport
Zoning Regulations
Sec. 39-21 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-21
C:852
Sec. 39-22. Standard new construction plan review. [Ord. No. 1504,
6-18-2008]
Zoning District
Planning
Commission Review
Administrative Staff
Review
All projects to be
located in the
Windmill Island
Neighborhood
Business District
All site condominium
projects
When requested by
the applicant
All appeals to site
plan reviews
Any site plan or
development plan in
conjunction with a
rezoning request
(a) Filing requirements. The applicant shall submit to the Community and
Neighborhood Services Department two legible copies of construction
plans accurately depicting the scope of the project that include at a
minimum, the following information:
(1) The complete address or parcel number;
(2) All buildings on the site and all proposed construction;
(3) Dimensions and distances to property lines;
(4) Driveways and parking areas;
(5) Other details that may be required to determine compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance (additional details are required to determine
compliance with the building code).
(b) New construction plan review process.
(1) The Zoning Administrator will review the plan for compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The Building Inspector will review the plan for compliance with
construction codes.
(c) Procedure. The Department will approve or reject the plan within 10
business days of receipt. If no decision is made in 10 days, the plan is
automatically denied. This date may be extended if approved by both
the applicant and planning staff.
Sec. 39-21 CHARTER Sec. 39-23
C:853
Sec. 39-23. Administrative staff review. [Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008;
amended Ord. No. 1700]
(a) Filing requirements. The applicant shall submit to the Director of
Community and Neighborhood Services Department or designee:
(1) A completed site plan review application form;
(2) A project description;
(3) The application fee; and
(4) The number of paper copies of the site plan as indicated on the
application form, and one digital copy in a pdf file format of a
complete proposed site plan that accurately and completely depicts
the scope of the project. Incomplete plans will not be considered. At
a minimum, the plan shall contain the following information and be
based on development standards listed in Sections 39-25 through
39-29. Required submissions not relevant to the particular site plan
or development plan may be waived by the City.
a. Plans and map based on an accurate land survey.
b. Direction arrow, date of plan and revisions, and scale (written
and graphic).
c. Legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the
subject property.
d. Size in acres and square footage of the subject property.
e. Property lines and dimensions.
f. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures on the subject property indicating building
setbacks, zoning setbacks, building dimensions and finished
floor grade elevations.
g. Elevation drawings of all building sides, indicating materials to
be used, and overall dimensions.
h. The location and approximate size of major exterior HVAC or
other mechanical equipment.
i. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed drives,
sidewalks, curb openings, curbing, parking areas, total number
of parking spaces, loading and unloading areas, recreational
areas, and common use areas.
j. Location, pavement width, right-of-way width and center line
elevation of all existing and proposed abutting streets, alleys,
and easements.
Sec. 39-23 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-23
C:854
k. Location, type, quantity, and dimension of all existing and
proposed landscaping and vegetation and the location, height
and type of existing and proposed fences and walls.
l. Size and location of existing and proposed hydrants and
utilities, including proposed connections to public sanitary
sewer and water supply systems, and private gas, electric,
telephone, cable television, and internet locations.
m. Location and size of all existing and proposed subsurface and
surface stormwater drainage facilities, including retention and
detention ponds, and any established floodplain areas, bodies
of water, wetland areas, or other unbuildable areas if present
on the site.
n. Proposed grading plan showing direction of drainage flow.
Sites that are one acre in size or smaller shall have one-foot
contour intervals, while larger sites may use two-foot intervals.
o. Location of existing and proposed refuse/recycling area
showing proposed enclosures and method of screening.
p. Location and intensity of existing and proposed exterior
lighting, including areas to be illuminated, illumination levels
(footcandles), type and height of fixtures, and cutoff shielding
provided.
q. Location, lighting, design and dimensions of proposed signage.
r. The City reserves the right to require other details pertaining
to the development to determine compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and applicable City policies.
(b) Administrative staff review process.
(1) Plans will be distributed to City departments for their review within
two business days of the application date.
(2) City department reviews. Copies of the site plans shall be
distributed to and evaluated by the Board of Public Works (water/
wastewater, electrical, pollution control, and fiber), Police, Fire,
Transportation Services, Leisure and Cultural Services, the Airport
Authority Board and staff, and Community and Neighborhood
Services Departments with respect to applicable ordinances and
policies, and with respect to the safe, efficient delivery of
community services.
(3) Departments will respond with written comments to the planning
staff within 10 business days of the application date. In their
comments, departments shall clearly distinguish between any
comments or requirements that are mandated by law or other
authority, and those that are recommended or desirable.
Sec. 39-23 CHARTER Sec. 39-23
C:855
(4) All mandated conditions shall be incorporated into the final plan.
Community and Neighborhood Services staff may incorporate into
the site plan comments listed as recommended or desirable.
(5) Upon receipt of the departmental reviews, planning staff shall
provide copies of the comments and findings to the applicant.
(c) Administrative staff procedure.
(1) Subject to Subsection (d), Community and Neighborhood Services
staff will approve with conditions, approve or deny the plan within
15 business days of the application date. If no decision is made
within 15 business days of the application date, then the plan is
automatically denied. This date may be extended if approved by
both the applicant and planning staff.
(2) In making a determination of approval or disapproval, the
Community and Neighborhood Services staff shall base its decision
upon findings of compliance with the requirements of the particular
zone district, site plan review standards found in Sections 39-25
through 39-29, other applicable sections of this chapter and this
Code, and applicable state or federal statutes.
(3) When a site plan is approved subject to conditions, those conditions
must be:
a. Reasonable, and based on protecting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public;
b. Necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected
by the proposed land use or activity be capable of
accommodating increased service loads caused by the land use
or activity;
c. Protective of the natural environment and responsible for
conservation of natural resources and energy;
d. Compatible with adjacent uses of land, and/or would promote
the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
(4) In approving the site or development plan subject to conditions,
Community and Neighborhood Services staff may exercise
reasonable discretion with respect to those characteristics of a
development which may not be strictly regulated by ordinance or
policy restrictions, such as, but not limited to: [Amended
1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1759]
a. Location of parking areas and drives in relation to traffic,
intersections or other driveways;
b. Impact on pedestrian and automobile circulations;
Sec. 39-23 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-23
C:856
Sec. 39-24. Planning Commission site plan review and development
plan review. [Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008; amended Ord. No. 1700;
12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1756]
c. Impact on air space within 3,200 feet from the West Michigan
Regional Airport authority as specified in Article VIII, Division
3 of this chapter.
d. Location and screening of accessory uses, such as
transformers, exterior HVAC equipment, and storage
buildings;
e. Location and design of recreational areas;
f. Potential impact of light, noise, and other emissions; and
g. Other similar installations and equipment which might impact
adjoining properties and for which specific regulations have
not been established.
(d) Notice of administrative review. Community and Neighborhood
Services Department staff will notify property owners and occupants
within 300 feet of the subject property. Notice will be mailed at least
five days before the review. A public hearing will be conducted if a
written request is received from a notified person within seven days of
the mailing of the notice, or if requested by the applicant, or at the
initiative of Community and Neighborhood Services Department staff.
(a) Filing requirements. The applicant shall submit to the Community and
Neighborhood Services office:
(1) A completed site plan review application form.
(2) An application fee.
(3) The number of paper copies of the site plan as indicated on the
application form, and one digital copy in a pdf file format that
accurately and completely depicts the scope of the project.
Incomplete plans will not be considered. At a minimum, the plan
shall contain the information listed in Subsection 39-23(a)(4).
Additional information will be required as follows: A written
narrative shall be included as either general notes on a site or
development plan, or as an attachment and shall include the
following:
a. Percentage of site allocated to buildings, parking lots, and
other impervious surfaces;
b. For residential developments, a summary of the number, type
and density of dwelling units, number of bedrooms, the
proposed market to be served, and proposed typical elevation
views of each type of building;
Sec. 39-23 CHARTER Sec. 39-24
C:857
c. Impact on public services to include schools, police and fire
protection, utilities, and traffic;
d. Expected schedule or phases of development;
e. List of all state, federal, or other regulatory approvals to which
the development may be subject, the status of any pending
applications, and the anticipated time frame for obtaining such
approvals;
f. Discussion of relationship to surrounding properties and uses
regarding vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation,
development density and orientation, and the development's
architectural and landscape character;
g. Discussion of any impacts relating to such issues as noise,
vibration, smoke, light, glare, or other potentially problematic
conditions associated with proposed uses;
h. Other information as may be requested by the Department or
Planning Commission which is reasonably necessary to
evaluate the site plan. A request for independent professional
studies, including, but not limited to, traffic studies,
environmental impact assessments, fiscal impact assessments,
floodplain and wetland determinations, soil test borings, and
market studies to determine evidence of a market need for the
uses and economic feasibility of the project shall require a
Planning Commission request, unless an applicant willingly
consents to providing such requested information, in which
case the Department may make such a request. All costs
incurred by the City to obtain such professional studies shall be
fully paid by the applicant.
(4) Additional planned unit development information. For a project in a
PUD zone, the plan shall include computation of the percentage of
acreage and building area which will be utilized for each of the
permitted uses under Section 39-166. The plan shall also include a
written statement describing the objectives of the project and
conformity to the City's Master Plan.
(5) Additional airport area information. Any proposed project in the
airport area as described in Subsection 39-337(b) shall require:
a. Written recommendation from the Airport Advisory Board prior
to site plan or development plan approval; and
b. The completed Federal Aviation Administration review prior to
receiving a building permit.
(b) Planning Commission review process.
(1) Complete applications shall be submitted a minimum of 21
calendar days prior to a meeting with the Planning Commission.
Sec. 39-24 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-24
C:858
(2) Public hearing requirement. Upon receipt of a complete
application, the Department shall provide public notice in
accordance with Section 39-4.1.
(3) City department reviews. Copies of the site plans shall be
distributed to and evaluated by the Board of Public Works (water/
wastewater, electrical and pollution control), Police, Fire,
Transportation Services, Leisure and Cultural Services, and
Community and Neighborhood Services Departments with respect
to applicable ordinances and policies, and with respect to the safe,
efficient delivery of community services.
(4) Public outreach workshop requirement. The applicant shall hold
one public outreach workshop prior to applying for site plan
approval and submit a public outreach workshop summary report
at the time of Planning Commission application submittal in
accordance with the procedures and requirements of the City of
Holland's Development Guide. These requirements will apply to the
following:
a. All site plan reviews in the C-3 Central Business Zone District.
b. All development plans associated with a PRD Planned
Residential Development or PUD Planned Unit Development.
c. All site or development plans associated with a site
condominium or multifamily residential development.
(5) Upon receipt of the departmental reviews, Community and
Neighborhood Services staff shall provide copies of the City
department review comments and findings to the applicant as well
as incorporate the various comments in the official report
submitted to the Planning Commission.
(c) Planning Commission process.
(1) Prior to the meeting with the Planning Commission, Community
and Neighborhood Services staff shall submit a written report to
the Planning Commission evaluating the site plan, and informing
the Planning Commission of any concerns about the site plan
identified by other City departments.
(2) The Planning Commission shall review and approve, review and
approve with conditions, or review and deny a site or development
plan based on compliance with the articles of this chapter,
including the development standards of Sections 39-25 through
39-29.
(3) When a site plan is approved subject to conditions, those conditions
must be:
a. Reasonable and based on protecting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
Sec. 39-24 CHARTER Sec. 39-24
C:859
Sec. 39-25. Development standards; site and development plans.
[Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008]
b. Necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected
by the proposed land use or activity be capable of
accommodating increased service loads caused by the land use
or activity.
c. Protective of the natural environment.
d. Responsible for conservation of natural resources and energy.
e. Compatible with adjacent uses of land, and/or would promote
the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
(4) In approving the site or development plan subject to conditions, the
approving authority may exercise reasonable discretion with
respect to those characteristics of a development which may not be
strictly regulated by ordinance or policy restrictions, such as, but
not limited to: [Amended 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1759]
a. Location of parking areas and drives in relation to traffic,
intersections or other driveways;
b. Impact on pedestrian and automobile circulations;
c. Location and screening of accessory uses such as
transformers, exterior HVAC equipment, and storage
buildings;
d. Location and design of recreational areas;
e. Potential impact of light, noise and other emissions; and
f. Other similar installations and equipment which might impact
adjoining properties and for which specific regulations have
not been established.
(5) In making a determination of approval or disapproval, the Planning
Commission shall base its decision upon findings of compliance
with the requirements of the particular zone district, site plan
review standards found in Sections 39-25 through 39-29, other
applicable sections of this chapter and this Code, and applicable
state or federal statutes.
(a) Utility service. All buildings shall be served by public sanitary sewer
and water. The development shall not overburden the sanitary drains,
water, solid waste disposal or similar public facilities and utilities. All
electrical and wired services shall be installed underground. All utilities
shall be planned and installed per the City of Holland and the Holland
Board of Public Works requirements.
Sec. 39-24 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-25
C:860
(b) Drainage. The drainage of stormwater runoff shall be accomplished in
such a manner so as to not adversely affect neighboring upstream and
downstream properties or the public stormwater management system.
If practical, stormwater shall be removed from all impervious areas and
carried away in an underground or surface drainage system or allowed
to disseminate into the groundwater aquifer via leaching basins.
Temporary on-site detention of stormwater may be required to reduce
peak runoff flows and velocities. Permanent stormwater storage in the
form of retention ponds may be required when deemed necessary by
the City or county drain authority. The City or county drain authority
may also require off-site shared drainage facility improvements
between the owners of the properties where sending waters originate
and the owners of properties receiving the water. Surface water in all
paved areas shall be collected at intervals and/or shall be directed via
sheet flow, so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, and will not create long-term standing water in the paved areas.
On-site drainage areas shall be indicated on the site or development
plan. The approving authority may specify any required fencing or
other screening devices, if a wet retention pond is planned which may
be deemed to constitute an attractive nuisance. The area of a
stormwater detention or retention pond will be used in the calculation
of density on a site, and shall be an integrated part of the required
landscaping, open space, and recreational provisions of the
development.
(c) Streets, drives, and traffic flow. The applicant shall show either
unobstructed frontage on a public street or shall construct a public
street or private street or drive to assure public access to the project
site. The approving authority, subject to the concurrence of City
Council, has the discretion to require the construction and dedication of
public streets in accordance with City street standards. All streets and
drives shall be so arranged to provide adequate access to all buildings
for emergency service vehicles. In an effort to provide safe and
adequate levels of service in regards to adjacent and on-site street
safety and service levels, the site or development plan approving
authority may require the following:
(1) Limitations on the number and size of curb cuts;
(2) Determination of the proper number of lanes and lane widths per
driveway based on the expected trip generations and peak turning
volumes of the proposed land use(s).
(3) Restrictions or prohibitions of certain left turns if corner clearance,
sight distance, or driving spacing is determined to be inadequate.
(4) Driveways and streets aligned with driveways and streets on the
opposite side of the street, when appropriate and reasonably
possible.
Sec. 39-25 CHARTER Sec. 39-25
C:861
(5) Adequate sight distance assured for all vehicles exiting from a
development. If certain movements cannot be made safely, then
they shall be prohibited, or joint access with adjoining property
shall be encouraged.
(6) Minimum driveway and street spacing standards may be required
based on the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other
acceptable urban planning or engineering standards.
(7) Improvements on-site and for immediately adjacent streets,
including, but not limited to: deceleration and acceleration lane
provisions, center turn lanes, bypass lanes, curb radii
requirements, clear vision areas, driveway throat widths, and
driveway and street intersection slope requirements.
(8) The approving authority may limit or prohibit the use of cul-de-sac
streets.
(9) Sidewalks/bicycle paths. Sidewalks or bicycle paths shall be
required along the frontage of public and private streets where the
approving authority determines such sidewalks are appropriate
and where deemed necessary to assure one or more of the
following: public safety; continuity with existing or planned future
pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation; and consistency with
sidewalk programs or policies adopted by the Holland City Council.
Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete six feet wide and shall
be constructed to City specifications unless an alternate is
specifically reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the
approving authority. Waiver of sidewalks during site or
development plan review does not prevent the City from requiring
sidewalks at some future date and assessing property owners for
the cost thereof, as appropriate. Bicycle storage facilities may be
required, where appropriate.
(d) Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall comply with the following standards:
(1) All streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and other common areas or
facilities shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of
property and the safety of persons using such areas and facilities.
(2) Lighting within any property that unnecessarily illuminates any
other property and substantially interferes with the use and
enjoyment of such other property is prohibited.
(3) All outdoor lighting used to illuminate the general area of a specific
site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to
deflect light away from all adjacent residential districts and
adjacent residences.
(4) All outdoor lighting shall be parallel with the ground and confined
to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots.
Sec. 39-25 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-25
C:862
(5) Light fixtures shall be designed so that no light emitted above a
horizontal plane parallel to the ground.
(6) The lighting of outdoor parking lots shall comply with Subsection
39-53(b).
(7) All lighting used for the external illumination of buildings,
landscapes, and merchandise so as to feature said buildings,
landscapes and merchandise, shall be directed downward and
placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons
on adjacent properties, streets, or highways. For buildings
determined by the Department or Planning Commission to have
special architectural merit or public significance warranting
special lighting, the Department or Commission may approve
lighting which is not directed downward.
(8) Exterior illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded
downward so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on
adjacent properties, streets and highways.
(9) Artificial light and fixtures shall be maintained in a manner so as
not to constitute a hazard or nuisance.
(10) Exterior lighting of nonresidential properties shall be diminished to
levels adequate only for security purposes during times of the night
when the business is closed.
(11) In applying the criteria and development standards for exterior
lighting, the reviewing authority may consider and apply the
recommendation guidelines promulgated by the illuminating
engineers society for "minimum recommendations of lighting
levels" as existing or subsequently amended and such
administrative rules as shall be adopted by the Planning
Commission establishing criteria and interpretation for exterior
lighting development, pursuant to Section 1-7 of this Code.
(e) Parking, loading and unloading.
(1) For any new construction or land use, the applicant shall provide
parking and loading/unloading areas which conform to Article IV,
Off-Street Parking and Loading, of the Zoning Ordinance. For any
expansion which requires site or development plan approval, the
applicant shall provide parking as required by the article, provided
however, that the approving authority may modify the
requirements based on the following factors:
a. The parking requirements in effect at the time of original
development and current requirements.
b. The anticipated demand for parking in light of the proposed
expansion.
Sec. 39-25 CHARTER Sec. 39-25
C:863
c. The availability of alternate parking either as shared parking
or on street parking within a reasonable distance from the
subject property as outlined in Section 39-51.
d. General site organization and its orientation to surrounding
properties and land uses.
e. Relationship to surrounding streets and access drives.
f. Internal and external pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
g. Aesthetic characteristics of the site, building, and parking
area.
h. The extent to which changes otherwise required will result in
mitigating negative impacts of existing or proposed
development on surrounding properties.
i. The extent to which the cost of compliance with current
ordinance requirements is balanced by the benefits realized by
compliance.
j. The reviewing authority shall not impose parking requirements
greater than those required for new construction under the
Zoning Ordinance.
(2) In addition to the above standards, the reviewing authority shall
also evaluate the following design elements:
a. The safety of traffic flow into and through parking areas.
b. The orientation of the spaces to the access drive, street and
building.
c. Treatment of traffic and landscaping islands and peninsulas
and the handling of snow and clear vision considerations.
d. Design and location of entrances and exits to parking areas to
minimize traffic congestion.
e. Consideration of design and spacing requirements for delivery
vehicles.
f. Placement of large parking areas relative to the view from the
public street.
(f) Signage. The size, location, and lighting of all signs shall be required in
accordance with Article IX, Signs, of the Zoning Ordinance.
(g) Landscaping, screening and buffering. A detailed landscape plan and
plant list shall be submitted as a required component of any site or
development plan. All landscape plans shall include the following:
(1) At a spacing of no less than one every 30 feet, the planting of 2 1/2
inches (measured six inches above the ground) caliper, street shade
Sec. 39-25 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-25
C:864
Sec. 39-26. Additional development standards for PUD Planned
Unit Developments and PRD Planned Residential Developments.
[Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 1585, 5-16-2012]
trees in right-of-way locations between the sidewalks and curbline
along all public and private streets; species to be approved by the
City.
(2) All building and parking lot perimeters planted with appropriate
shrubs, trees, perennials and/or annuals, which may include a
mixture of turf grass.
(3) For every parking lot developed as a principal or accessory use,
there shall be provided on lands, contiguous to such parking lot an
area or areas of open space, planted and landscaped with natural
vegetation, at a ratio of not less than one square foot of landscape
area for each 10 square feet of parking area. Where any parking lot
exceeds 200 feet in any dimension, it shall further be required that
at least 50% of the required landscaped open space be provided
within the parking lot as opposed to the perimeter of the lot, so as
to mitigate the adverse aesthetic impact of large masses of
uninterrupted blacktop or concrete. No parking lot shall be closer
than 10 feet to any street, property, or common line with a
residential district line. These 10 feet shall be planted and
landscaped with natural vegetation.
(4) When a commercial or industrial development is proposed adjacent
to residential properties, screening and buffering in the form of
vegetative plantings and/or fences or walls may be required to
minimize any negative impacts on the adjacent residential
properties due to light, noise, dust, and other potentially negative
impacts.
(5) All required landscaping, screening and buffer areas shall be
maintained by the applicant and successor owners and/or
occupants. Trees and other vegetation that die due to weather or
cultural practices such as, but not limited to, too much or too little
irrigation, or incorrect pruning methods shall be promptly replaced
with in kind vegetation.
(h) Environmental quality. Any project shall be so designed as to
reasonably protect residents of such project, and residents or
occupants of neighboring premises, with respect to the emission and
transmission of noise, smoke, dust, dirt, litter, odor, vibration, light
glare, traffic congestion, ease of routine and emergency services,
drainage, erosion, light and ventilation, surface and groundwater
quality, overcrowding of persons, sanitation, property values, general
appearance and character, and other similar considerations.
(a) Percentage of uses in the PUD or PRD. The applicant shall submit
calculations of the percentage of the total acreage and floor space of
Sec. 39-25 CHARTER Sec. 39-26
C:865
each use proposed for the project. The Planning Commission shall
determine if the percentage of uses is appropriate for the size of
the project, location of the PUD or PRD, compatible with surrounding
neighborhood development, established and future traffic patterns, and
market to be served by the PUD or PRD.
(b) Area and density. Since the PUD or PRD district may serve to promote
creative design in the redevelopment of the central City areas as well as
cohesive development of outlying areas, no minimum area and density
regulations are prescribed. It shall remain the responsibility of the
Planning Commission and the City Council to review the proposed
density in each particular instance and to establish a maximum density
in cooperation with the developer based on such factors as:
(1) The size and projected density of individual dwelling units;
(2) Occupancy characteristics and needs of the primary market to be
served by the project;
(3) Proximity and inclusion of parks, playgrounds, waterways or other
open space;
(4) Density of adjoining and nearby residential and other
developments;
(5) Degree of redevelopment, if any, necessary for implementing the
project;
(6) Pedestrian and traffic circulation patterns.
(c) Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with Article IV of this chapter
and calculated according to the uses of the project. These requirements
may be increased in a PUD or PRD by the Planning Commission if it is
determined that the project will need additional parking spaces on site
due to the twenty-four-hour usage of the spaces, inability to share
parking with surrounding entities, impracticality of walking any
distance to the facilities within the PUD or PRD, or other such demands
as stated by the Planning Commission. Parking requirements may be
reduced in a PUD or PRD by Planning Commission. Such reduction shall
be based upon a finding by the Planning Commission:
(1) That the applicant has provided sufficient evidence to indicate
parking will be available through sharing of spaces by different
uses;
(2) That the parking requirement is excessive for the type of use
proposed;
(3) That walk-in trade for commercial centers will reduce parking
demand, or similar factors.
Sec. 39-26 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-26
C:866
The Planning Commission may require that additional parking
area(s) be designated on the final site plan but not constructed
until such time that the City or the developer finds the demand for
parking exceeds the number of spaces that are initially provided.
At that time the developer shall construct the parking area within
four months of a written request by the Building Official or upon
issuance of a building permit from the Building Official.
(d) Streets. In addition to the requirements of Subsection 39-25(c), private
drives or courts may be allowed within a PUD or PRD district:
(1) When intended to serve only residents of a particular development;
(2) When deemed adequate for the provisions of routine and
emergency services; and
(3) When acknowledged by owners/developers to be excluded from all
maintenance services related to dedicated public streets within the
City. Adequate provisions must be made by the owner/developer to
maintain the streets.
(e) Building restrictions. In an effort to allow flexibility in a PUD and PRD,
building restrictions should be kept to a minimum, except that each of
the following standards shall be adhered to:
(1) Building setbacks and height shall be determined by the Planning
Commission according to the use of the buildings and character of
the neighborhood.
(2) All portions of the land not developed must be landscaped with
trees, shrubs and suitable live ground cover.
(3) Any portions of a commercial structure or parking area must be
screened from any abutting residential area by a wall or berm
measuring not less than four feet in height.
(4) No portion of the off-street parking shall be any closer than 25 feet
to any property line adjoining a street or sidewalk. The remaining
25 feet between the parking and property lines shall be landscaped
in accordance with Subsection (e)(2). The 25 feet may be reduced
by the Planning Commission if more intense screening is provided.
(f) Enclosures. All processing or storage of merchandise and materials in a
PUD district shall be conducted wholly within a completed enclosed
building. Business and service uses may be permitted without
enclosure upon approval by the Planning Commission where
appropriate.
Sec. 39-26 CHARTER Sec. 39-27
C:867
Sec. 39-27. Additional requirements for site condominium projects.
[Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008]
Site condominiums are allowed in any district. This section shall apply
to any new site condominium project and any amendment to an existing
master deed including, without limitation, an amendment which creates
additional condominium units by an addition of land or the conversion
of areas to additional condominium units. In addition to the standards
contained in Sections 39-25 through 39-29, a development plan for a site
condominium project shall also comply with the following requirements:
(a) Each condominium unit shall contain an appurtenant limited common
element for the exclusive use of the condominium unit owner which
complies with the applicable zone district, in which the site
condominium project shall be located concerning lot area, minimum lot
width and frontage, and required front, side and rear yards, unless such
requirements are specifically waived by the Planning Commission in its
approval of the development plan. For purposes of determining
compliance with these provisions, the condominium unit and its
appurtenant limited common elements shall be considered the
equivalent of a lot.
(b) Each condominium unit shall be subject to all other applicable
requirements of the zone district in which the site condominium project
is located, including, but not limited to, use regulations, minimum floor
area, and the maximum building height, unless such requirements are
specifically waived by the Planning Commission in its approval of the
development plan.
(c) Each site condominium project, and the condominium units created
therein, shall be constructed in compliance with the standards
otherwise applicable to subdivision plats and lots created therein
pursuant to Chapter 33 of the Code. Said standards may be waived by
the City Council of the City of Holland by a variance granted pursuant
to Chapter 33 of the Code of the City of Holland.
(d) Each site condominium project and the condominium units created
therein, shall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 32
(Streets and sidewalks) and the standards otherwise applicable to the
site condominium project for development, unless such standards are
specifically waived by the City Council of the City of Holland pursuant
to a variance granted there under.
(e) Each site condominium project shall comply with the requirements
otherwise applicable to subdivision plats contained in Chapter 33 of the
Code concerning public improvements, which must be constructed by
the proprietor of the site condominium project, including financial
security requirements to complete construction, unless such
requirements are specifically waived by the City Council of the City of
Holland pursuant to a variance granted pursuant to Chapter 33.
Sec. 39-27 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-27
C:868
Sec. 39-28. Additional standards for overlay zone districts. [Ord.
No. 1504, 6-18-2008]
For additional development standards, refer to Article VIII, Division 5,
Overlay Zone Districts.
Sec. 39-29. Additional requirements for development in the C-3
Central Business District. [Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008]
Development within the C-3 Central Business District is intended to support
pedestrian activity through both the diversity of permitted uses and through
the character of the building and street environment.
(f) The developer of an approved site condominium project shall be
required to execute and deliver to the City any dedicatory instruments,
easements, or other documents necessary to convey and dedicate the
roads and utilities for public use.
(a) Review criteria. In order to support the character, safety, and use of this
district, site plan or development plan approval within this zone district
shall satisfy the following criteria, as determined by review of the
Planning Commission:
(1) Street-level building facades.
a. Along street level elevations of and facing type "A" streets,
there shall be a minimum window area of 60% of the portion of
the street facade, as measured beginning at 18 inches above
the sidewalk to a height of 10 feet above the sidewalk. For
measurement purposes, this percentage of window area may
include sills, lintels, muntins, mullions, and window framing, as
well as entry doors. For corner properties, the minimum
percentage of window area shall be no less than 40% of the
wall area within the defined limits on the secondary streetfronting
facade. Application of this subsection may be
determined by the Planning Commission to be eligible for the
optional plan review process.
b. Window area similarly measured for frontages along
permanent public open space and facing off-street parking
areas shall comprise a minimum 25% of the portion of the
building facade in order to facilitate visibility and security to
that open space and parking area. Application of this
subsection may be determined by the Planning Commission to
be eligible for the optional plan review process.
c. The downtown is characterized by frequent and inviting
building entrances supporting the pedestrian vitality and
continuity of the commercial center. Entrances to commercial
buildings along type "A" streets shall occur at least every 60
Sec. 39-27 CHARTER Sec. 39-29
C:869
feet. The Planning Commission may increase this interval
where it determines that:
1. The site is in transitional areas where street level
commercial activity is not yet mature or supported by
surrounding development, provided accommodation is
made in the design and construction of the building not to
restrict future additional entrances when more
comprehensive development has occurred and pedestrian
activity along this street frontage has increased;
2. The proposed building use is significantly compromised by
entrances placed at this maximum spacing;
3. On corner buildings, entrances along more than one street
frontage significantly impede the use of street level
building area; or
4. Grade changes along the subject building frontage
significantly impede such access.
Application of this subsection may be determined by the
Planning Commission to be eligible for the optional plan
review process.
d. Materials shall be selected for street level building facades
that are compatible with the existing character of nearby
buildings, while allowing the opportunity for the use of
contemporary materials and design elements. Materials
selected must be of high quality and durable.
e. Renovations and alterations of existing buildings shall not
make a facade any less conforming to those standards than the
existing condition.
(2) Upper story facade design. Portions of building facades above a
storefront along type "A" streets shall be reviewed to assure the
design of those new building facades is compatible with other
features of the building and with positive attributes of surrounding
properties. Factors to consider include, but may not be limited to,
the amount, scale, and proportion of window openings,
compatibility of exterior building materials, and the architectural
ornamentation and detailing. Application of this subsection may be
determined by the Planning Commission to be eligible for the
optional plan review process.
(b) Optional Plan Review (OPR) for development within the C-3 District.
Section 39-29 establishes the standards for design and development of
buildings and property in the C-3 District. However, circumstances
arise which those provisions do not address or did not foresee.
Therefore, this Subsection (b) establishes an alternative process by
which the Planning Commission may evaluate and approve a
Sec. 39-29 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-29
C:870
Sec. 39-30. Modifications to approved site and development plans.
[Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008]
development project that does not meet certain standards of Section
39-29. Review under this OPR process shall be pursuant to Section
39-130.
(c) Review by Downtown Development Authority. Prior to final action by
the Planning Commission regarding a site or development plan
approval within the C-3 District, including both the standard site plan
review process and the OPR, a copy of the proposed development plans
and elevations shall be forwarded to the Downtown Development
Authority for its information.
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to recognize that changing
conditions in our environment and economy may require deviations
from approved site and development plans. This section sets forth a
process to approve these modifications when they arise. These
modifications may be due to:
(1) Unforeseen utility or geological problems;
(2) Changes in market demand over a phased project or during the
period in which an approval is valid;
(3) Changes necessitated by refinements to plans during the
construction documentation process; or
(4) New technologies or design features that would improve a
development.
Potential modifications are categorized into three sections: minor,
moderate, and major.
(b) Minor changes include modifications in which there is no significant
deviation from the approved site or development plan and include the
following:
(1) Minor adjustment in the layout of streets, drives or utilities.
(2) Minor reconfiguration of an approved footprint area to include
increases or decreases in building footprint areas.
(3) Minor relocations of building footprint areas provided there would
be no additional encroachment into required perimeter yards.
(4) Adjustments to parking relating to such footprint changes or to
other minor modifications.
(5) Relocation or addition of walkways, provided the intent of
pedestrian circulation is not inhibited.
(6) Relocation of refuse stations.
Sec. 39-29 CHARTER Sec. 39-30
C:871
(7) Modifications to signage plans.
(8) Addition of recreation equipment not involving permanent
buildings.
All such proposed minor modifications shall be submitted to the
Community and Neighborhood Services Department which may
distribute the site or development plans to the Board of Public
Works, Police, Fire, Transportation Services, and Leisure and
Cultural Services Department personnel for review and comment
with respect to applicable ordinances and policies. The
Department with consultation from the Zoning Administrator has
the authority to approve such minor changes or to refer the
proposed modifications to the Planning Commission.
In the event the Department determines that the change to the
approved site or development plan meets the criteria set forth in
this section, an administrative summary prepared by Community
and Neighborhood Services Department staff shall be placed in
the project file stating the nature of the change proposed by
the owner, the reason for such change, and the approval by the
department. If the subject site or development plan to be modified
was originally approved by the Planning Commission, a summary
of the Community and Neighborhood Services Department
approval shall be filed for informational purposes with the
Planning Commission at its next regular meeting.
(c) Moderate changes include those modifications which deviate enough
from the site plan so that they should receive Planning Commission
review and approval, but do not require noticing of a public hearing.
They include:
(1) Changes include changes to the approved site plans or
development plans that result in the reduction of lots in residential
developments;
(2) All amendments to approved development plans in planned unit
development districts and planned residential development
districts that do not increase that density of uses; and
(3) Other modifications not listed in Subsection (b) that are
determined by Community and Neighborhood Services staff as not
having any negative impact on surrounding property.
Sec. 39-30 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-30
C:872
Sec. 39-31. Appeals procedure. [Ord. No. 1504, 6-18-2008]
Sec. 39-32. Control of the plan and enforcement. [Ord. No. 1504,
6-18-2008]
All moderate modifications to approved site plans or development
plans shall be submitted to the Community and Neighborhood
Services Department no fewer than seven days before the
Planning Commission meeting at which time the applicant would
like the modifications approved. Community and Neighborhood
Services staff will distribute the site or development plans to
be evaluated by the Board of Public Works (water/wastewater,
electrical and pollution control), Police, Fire, Transportation
Services, Leisure and Cultural Services, and Community and
Neighborhood Services Departments with respect to applicable
ordinances and policies, and with respect to the safe, efficient
delivery of community services.
Upon reviewing the proposed modifications, the Planning
Commission shall make its determination in accordance with
Subsection 39-24(c).
(d) Major changes. Other site plan changes not listed in Subsections (a)
and (b) shall be reviewed in accordance with the Planning Commission
site plan review and development plan review as outlined in Section
39-24.
(a) Any person aggrieved by a staff administrative review decision to grant
or deny approval of a site plan, or modify an approved site plan, may
appeal the decision to the Planning Commission. The appeal must be
filed within five days of the decision, and shall state the factual basis for
the appeal. An appeal shall stay action on the issuance of any permit
pursuant to an approved site plan. The Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing according to the requirements of Section 39-4.1. After
such hearing, the Planning Commission shall affirm, reverse, or
otherwise modify the original staff administrative decision, stating its
finding and the reasons for its action. A written copy of such findings,
reasons and actions shall be given to the appellant.
(b) Any person aggrieved by a procedural decision of the Planning
Commission to grant or deny approval of a site plan, or modifications to
an approved site plan, may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of
Appeals (ZBA). The application for ZBA review must be filed within 21
days of final Planning Commission action.
(a) When a site or development plan is approved, in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this Article II, that plan shall be the
controlling element for building on a property. All foundation, building,
and site work shall be consistent with the approved site or development
plan. A filed site or development plan, approved under the provisions of
this Article II, shall have the full force of the Zoning Ordinance. Upon
Sec. 39-30 CHARTER Sec. 39-32
C:873
approval, a site plan shall be deemed valid for the duration of the
development period, provided, that substantial construction of utilities,
streets or buildings has commenced within 18 months of the date of site
plan approval. Substantial construction shall include the installation
of one or more underground utility systems, the installation of streets
or the installation of one or more building foundations. When the
site includes the phased construction of streets, utilities or other
infrastructure, which may relate to adjoining property or the public
interest, assurances that a timely completion is achieved may be
required. The site plan and development plan approving authority may
require a performance guarantee in the form of posting a bond or
irrevocable letter of credit for an amount determined by site plan and
development plan approving authority to ensure the installation of the
specified public or other approved site improvements.
(b) Site improvements and the construction of buildings must continue to
proceed in a diligent manner, and the project must be pursued
according to the phasing component of the plan. If circumstances
dictate a change in the phasing plan, a change must be submitted to the
Community and Neighborhood Services Department prior to the
expiration of the eighteen-month validity period. If site improvements
have not commenced in accordance with the eighteen-month validity
period, the developer, prior to the original expiration date, may file a
petition with the Community and Neighborhood Services Department
to extend the validity period for an additional one-year period. The
Community and Neighborhood Services Department shall forward the
petition to the original plan approving authority, which may add up to a
one-year extension if it determines that valid unforeseen circumstances
disrupted the implementation of the plan and that the plan may be
expected to proceed during the requested extension period. In the
event a plan approval period expires, and no site improvements have
commenced, nor has the developer requested an extension period prior
to the expiration, the plan shall be deemed void and invalid. The land
areas affected by such plan shall from thereon not be developed except
upon the submission, review and approval of a subsequent plan in
accordance with original plan approval procedures.
(c) Violations of any approved site plan shall be grounds for the City to
order that building permits be withheld, revoked or suspended until the
violation is removed or adequate guarantee of such removal is provided
to the Department and Zoning Administrator, along with such other
remedies for violation as may be prescribed by the Charter and Code of
the City of Holland.
(d) Continued compliance. Where an installation, alteration, or condition
has been established for approval of a site or development plan, the
continued adherence to the same shall be required for the duration of
the use or activity on the site. Failure to provide maintenance, as may
be necessary to assure the ongoing compliance with the terms of
Sec. 39-32 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-32
C:874
Sec. 39-33. through Sec. 39-34. (Reserved)
approval, shall be deemed a violation of this Article II and subject to
legal remedies available to the City.
Sec. 39-32 CHARTER Sec. 39-33
C:875

ARTICLE III
Nonconforming Uses And Structures
Sec. 39-35. Intent. [Ord. No. 1014, 12-19-1990; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1336, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 7-20-2005]
Sec. 39-36. Change of use. [Ord. No. 1014, 12-19-1990; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
The nonconforming use of any structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use upon public hearing and findings of fact by the Zoning
Board that the proposed nonconforming use will not be more incompatible,
detrimental, or create additional nuisance factors than the previous
nonconforming uses. The Zoning Board shall consider the following for its
determination:
(a) The lawful use of any land or structure as such existed at the time of the
enactment of this chapter or amendments thereto may be continued,
although such use or structure does not conform with the provisions of
this chapter or amendments thereto.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as authorizing or approving
the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation of
zoning regulations in effect January 9, 1991.
(c) It is the intent of this section to permit nonconforming uses to continue
until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such
nonconforming uses and structures are declared by this section to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further
the intent of this section that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged
upon, extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(d) Nonconforming structures, conforming in use, may be expanded if the
following provisions are met:
(1) Parking be in accordance with this ordinance for such structure;
(2) Expansion conforms to the present zone district specifications.
(e) Notwithstanding Subsection (c) of this Section 39-35, certain
nonconforming uses within the C-3 District may be enlarged or
extended when satisfying requirements of Section 39-128(c)(1).
(a) Evidence that proposed nonconforming use will not adversely effect or
decrease the valuation of neighboring property;
(b) Evidence that the proposed nonconforming use will not increase
density, congestion or general nuisance to neighboring property;
Sec. 39-35 CHARTER Sec. 39-36
C:877
Sec. 39-37. Reestablishment of nonconforming use. [Ord. No. 1014,
12-19-1990; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Whenever the nonconforming use or structure or land has been brought into
conformance, a nonconforming use, structure or land shall not thereafter
be reestablished. In addition, if structure or use is altered, remodeled or
modified so as to eliminate or remove any or all of its nonconforming
characteristics, then such nonconforming characteristics shall not be later
reestablished.
Sec. 39-38. Repairs, maintenance, moving and restoration. [Ord.
No. 1014, 12-19-1990; Ord. No. 1097, 10-6-1993; Ord. No. 1152,
9-6-1995; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
(c) Evidence that the proposed, nonconforming use will not increase the
amount of radioactivity, vibration, noise, odor, heat or other adverse
factors listed in Section 39-84;
(d) Evidence that the proposed nonconforming use will not necessitate an
increase in off-street parking which would be detrimental to
neighboring property; or
(e) Such additional factors as determined by the Zoning Board relating to
the health, safety, and welfare of adjacent property which would be
adversely impacted.
(a) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the repair and
maintenance of a nonconforming use or structure such as may be
necessary to maintain it in safe, sound condition, nor to prevent repairs
to damage not exceeding 50% of assessed value.
(b) A nonconforming structure and/or a nonconforming use which is
damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind, other calamity or neglect and
deterioration by 50% or greater of assessed value, at the time of
destruction or request for a building permit may be restored if the
Zoning Board finds the following conditions are met:
(1) Restoration of the structure and/or use will not substantially extend
the probable duration of the nonconforming structure and/or use.
Restoration of the structure or use will be done with similar
building materials, structural layout and design, construction
methods, fixtures, and mechanical equipment, thereby limiting the
possibility that such restoration will substantially extend the
probable duration of the structure or use; and
(2) Circumstances are such that the land previously occupied by the
nonconforming structure and/or use cannot reasonably meet the
criteria of that zone district.
(c) A nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to
another location unless such structure conforms to the requirements of
this article.
Sec. 39-36 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-38
C:878
Sec. 39-39. Discontinuance. [Ord. No. 1014, 12-19-1990; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Sec. 39-40. Buildings under construction. [Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure
from the date a building permit was issued by the City's Department of
Environmental Health if the zoning ordinance is amended prior to
completion of a structure. This building permit must be effective, not
expired, and issued prior to the date the ordinance amendment was
enacted.
Sec. 39-41. Elimination by acquisition. [Ord. No. 1014, 12-19-1990;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
The Council may acquire by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private
property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming
uses and structures. The Council may provide that the cost and expense of
acquiring such private property may be paid from general funds or assessed
to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions
relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for
public improvements. Property acquired under this subsection shall not be
used for public housing. The elimination of the nonconforming uses and
(d) Notwithstanding Subsections (a) through (c) above, existing buildings
which are accessory to permitted residential structures and found to be
legally constructed yet nonconforming due to setback, height, or other
dimensional requirement shall be permitted to be repaired, maintained,
or rehabilitated. Where a foundation or slab from a former legally
constructed nonconforming accessory building remains intact on the
property, the building may be rebuilt or reconstructed provided the slab
or foundation meet current building codes. Such buildings, either
existing or reconstructed on an existing slab or foundation, may be
enlarged when the addition is constructed in a manner so that the
addition conforms to zoning requirements in place at the time of the
addition.
(a) If the use of any nonconforming structure or land is discontinued
through vacancy, lack of operation or otherwise for a continuous period
of 365 days or more, then the use of such structure shall not be
resumed until such use, or structure conforms to the provisions of this
article and that district in which the use, or structure is located.
(b) If the building and zoning inspector finds that the use of any
nonconforming structure is discontinued under the provisions of this
section, the property owner shall have the burden of proof to
substantiate that the use was not discontinued and shall provide
adequate documentation thereof.
Sec. 39-38 CHARTER Sec. 39-41
C:879
structures in a zone district is declared to be for a public purpose and for
a public use. The Council may institute proceedings for condemnation of
nonconforming uses and structures under Public Act 149 of the Public Acts
of 1911, as amended (MCLA §§ 213.21 — 213.25).
Sec. 39-42. Nonconforming structures conforming in use. [Ord. No.
1419, § 2, 7-20-2005]
(a) Nonconforming structures, conforming in use, may be expanded or
reoccupied if the following provisions are met:
(1) Parking be in accordance with this chapter for such structure.
Parking spaces legally existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter or amendments thereto may be continued and counted
towards the minimum amount of parking spaces required;
(2) Expansion conforms to the present zone district specifications.
(b) In all zoning districts except the R and PRD residential districts,
nonconforming structures which are conforming in use may be
remodeled and reoccupied for other lawful conforming uses as
permitted by right without the need for any variance or special
exception review, as long as there are no structural expansions of the
building footprint, or all structural expansions conform to the current
zone district height and area requirements. If applicable, the
requirements for site plan review are still in effect.
(c) In all R and PRD residential districts, nonconforming structures which
are conforming in use may be remodeled and reoccupied for other
lawful conforming uses when approved as a special exception by the
Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 39-42(d).
(d) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall use the following standards when
evaluating special exception requests pursuant to this section:
(1) Expansions of the existing building footprint shall not be allowed,
unless all structural expansions conform to the current zone
district height and area requirements.
(2) The use and any proposed building expansions shall be in character
with and will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties.
(3) Parking shall be provided at the ratio required in the parking
schedule of this chapter and shall be adequately screened with a
fence or vegetative screening materials when deemed necessary by
the approving authority.
(4) All new construction and remodeling activities shall comply fully
with all other applicable City codes.
(5) Reasonable conditions may be attached on the approval of a special
exception under this section if deemed necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 39-41 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-43
C:880
Sec. 39-43. through Sec. 39-44. (Reserved)
Sec. 39-43 CHARTER Sec. 39-43
C:881

ARTICLE IV
Off-Street Parking And Loading
Sec. 39-45. Nonresidential requirements. [Ord. No. 622; Ord. No.
1097, 10-6-1993; Ord. No. 1163, 3-27-1996; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1254, 8-4-1999; Ord. No. 1360, § 3, 3-19-2003;
Ord. No. 1419, § 3, 7-20-2005; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
(a) No building shall hereafter be erected or enlarged nor shall any
building or land use be changed to another use, unless provision shall
be made to provide off-street parking and loading areas in conformance
with the requirements herein specified. Parking spaces legally existing
at the time of the enactment of this chapter or amendments thereto may
be continued and counted towards the minimum amount of parking
spaces required. Any person desiring to establish a parking area shall
submit plans to the Building Official showing the location, size, shape,
design, lighting landscape, curb cuts, drainage and other features of
the parking area. If such plans comply with the provisions of this
article, the Building Official shall issue a permit to allow the use and
occupancy of such parking area upon the completed development of the
area. Any use or occupancy of parking areas without the approval of the
Building Official shall be in violation of this article.
(b) If the parking area was subject to site plan review by the Planning
Commission, the applicant shall submit evidence showing compliance
with all requirements imposed by the Planning Commission. If such
plans comply with the requirements approved by the Planning
Commission, the Building Official shall issue a permit to allow the use
and occupancy of the parking area upon the completed development of
the area.
(c) With respect to a building expansion which does not require site plan
approval, an applicant shall comply with all of the requirements of this
chapter or such lesser requirements approved under this subsection.
The applicant may apply to the Planning Commission for a special
exception determination of parking requirements. The Planning
Commission shall determine the parking requirements based on factors
set forth in Section 39-25(e). The determination shall not be final until
the Commission gives notice to those persons who would receive notice
of a site plan review, if one was required. If a written objection is filed
with the Community Services and Development Department's office
within 10 days after notice is mailed, the Planning Commission shall
conduct a public hearing and make a determination of the parking
requirements based on the factors cited above set forth in Section
39-25(e). The Development Department may refer an application under
this subsection to the Planning Commission for a parking determination
regardless of whether an objection has been filed.
Sec. 39-45 CHARTER Sec. 39-46
C:883
Sec. 39-46. Mixed occupancies. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.6; Ord. No. 622;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking
area shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately. Collective provision for off-street parking areas for two or more
buildings or uses shall be permitted; provided that the total of such offstreet
parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of
the various uses computed separately. Parking areas for churches, theaters
or other uses in which the primary parking demand occurs out of normal
retail operation hours may be jointly used where adequate arrangements
are made to insure that the space is available for each function.
Sec. 39-47. Uses not specified. [Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 685; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
For uses not herein specified or for mixed or unusual uses for which the
minimum requirements herein established do not directly apply, parking
shall be provided at the ratio of one square foot of usable total parking area
for each square foot of floor area, exclusive of basement area used for utility
or storage purposes. For outdoor commercial activities or for any use where
floor area is an obviously inadequate measure of parking needs, parking
shall be provided at the ratio of one square foot of usable total parking area
for each square foot of land or water area used for such activity or use.
Sec. 39-48. Off-street parking schedule. [Ord. No. 622; Ord. No.
910, 9-3-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1727]
The minimum amount of off-street parking shall be determined in
accordance with the following schedule:
Use Spaces Per Unit of Measurement
One-family house or apartments,
new construction
1.0 per dwelling unit
Converted house and apartments As determined by Zoning Board
pursuant to Section 39-189(c)(5),
but in no event less than 2.0 per
dwelling unit
Hotel, motel 1.0 per rental unit
Rooming house, fraternity, sorority 0.5 per sleeping room
High school, college, vocational
school
1 per 2 teachers, administrators,
employees, and 1.0 per 10 students
Elementary or junior high school 1.0 per 2 teachers, administrators,
employees
Hospital, nursing home 0.5 per each bed
Library, museum 1.0 per 400 square feet floor area
Sec. 39-46 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-48
C:884
Use Spaces Per Unit of Measurement
Governmental office 1.0 per employee
Church 1.0 per 4 seats
Lodges, clubs, meeting halls 1.0 per 6 members
Medical, dental, health office 4.0 per doctor
Other office uses 1.5 per employee
Automotive sales, TBA stores 1.0 per 200 square feet sales area
Funeral home 1.0 per 6 seats
Theater, auditorium, stadium 1.0 per 4 seats
Bowling alley 3.0 per alley
Beauty, barber shop 1.0 per each chair
Restaurant, tavern 1.0 per 100 square feet of service
area
Food store 1.0 per 80 square feet sales area
Dry goods, variety store 1.0 per 160 square feet sales area
Carpet, home furnishing store 1.0 per 500 square feet sales area
Banks, financial institutions 1.0 per 200 square feet floor area
Other retail store 1.0 per 200 square feet sales area
Warehousing, storage 1.0 per 2 employees
Manufacturing, processing 1.0 per 2 employees
Repair, service 1.0 per each employee
Research, testing, development 1.0 per 2 employees
Printing, publishing 1.0 per 2 employees
Freight terminals 1.0 per 2 employees
Contractor, construction yard 1.0 per 2 employees
Material sales yard 1.0 per each employee
Agricultural, greenhouse 1.0 per 2 employees
Essential service user 1.0 per 2 employees
Park, public recreation 2.0 per acre
Private pool, athletic club 1.0 per 6 members
Regional shopping centers 3.0 square feet of usable parking
area for each square foot of floor
area
Sec. 39-49. Size and access. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.6; Ord. No. 622;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 160 square
feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and shall be a minimum of eight
Sec. 39-48 CHARTER Sec. 39-49
C:885
feet in width. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all
parking spaces. The total usable parking area includes access drives within
the actual parking area.
Sec. 39-50. Units of measurement. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.6; Ord. No.
622; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
For the purposes of this article, "floor area" shall mean the gross floor
area of all floors of a building or an addition to an existing building, but
shall not include basement floor area when used for storage purposes only.
The number of "employees" shall be determined by the maximum number
of persons employed, both part and full time, including all supervisory,
office, maintenance, production and other personnel, during any one shift
or work period for any given week during the most recent calendar year. For
new uses, the number of employees shall be determined by projected peak
employment estimates provided by the developer.
Sec. 39-51. Location of off-street parking facilities. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.6; Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereafter specified. Where
a distance is specified it shall be the distance measured from the nearest
point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such
facility is required to serve, as follows:
Sec. 39-52. Community parking in Central Business District. [Ord.
No. 622; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
All businesses located in the C-3 Central Business District shall be deemed
participants in a community parking program and shall be exempt from
parking requirements herein specified. For any additional residential use
created, additional parking areas shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein.
Sec. 39-53. Parking lot requirements for all zone districts. [Ord.
No. 464, § 9-1.6; Ord. No. 549; Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1283, § 1, 8-16-2000; Ord. No. 1411, § 2,
3-30-2005]
Every parcel of land in any zone district hereafter established as a public
or private parking area, or any parking area hereafter enlarged or altered,
(a) For all residential buildings and for all nonresidential buildings in
residential zones, required parking shall be provided on the same plot
with the building.
(b) For commercial and all nonresidential uses in commercial zones,
required parking shall be provided within 300 feet.
(c) For industrial uses, required parking shall be provided within 500 feet.
Sec. 39-49 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-53
C:886
shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
Sec. 39-54. Parking lot requirements for residential zone districts.
[Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.6; Ord. No. 549; Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1283, § 1, 8-16-2000; Ord. No. 1292, 2-7-2001]
(a) Off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with an asphalt, concrete or
similar durable and dustless surface. Off-street parking areas shall be
graded and drained to dispose of all surface water in accordance with
standard specifications for such construction on file in the office of the
City Engineer. Off-street parking areas shall be subject to the approval
of the City Engineer to insure its adequacy in relation to traffic safety,
protection of the adjacent property, and lighting standards.
(b) The outdoor lighting of parking lots shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) All parking lot lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall
be so arranged as to direct and deflect light away from all adjacent
residential districts and adjacent residences. Lighting shall be
directed towards and confined to the ground areas of parking lots.
(2) Outdoor lighting poles, standards, or wall mounting heights shall
meet the following requirements:
a. They shall not exceed the maximum height limitations of the
district in which they are located.
b. They shall not exceed 16 feet in height from the grade of the
parking lot adjacent to the base of each pole when located
within 200 feet of a residential zone district, or they shall not
exceed 20 feet in height when it is demonstrated by an
illumination plan prepared and certified by a licensed
electrician, architect, or similar design professional that the
illumination level will not exceed 0.5 footcandles at any
property line that abuts a residentially zoned property.
c. Recreational field lighting and public streetlighting are
exempted from this height limitation.
(c) Where off-street parking areas are established without setback from lot
lines, wheel chocks or other restraining devices shall be installed to
prevent the encroachment of any portion of parked vehicles into
adjoining properties or public areas abutting such parking areas.
(d) Where an area proposed for the development of an off-street parking
area contains mature trees, landscaping or other site amenities, effort
shall be made, insofar as practical, to preserve such amenities and
include them in the overall design of the parking area or facility.
Sec. 39-53 CHARTER Sec. 39-54
C:887
Sec. 39-54.1. Parking lot requirements for commercial and
industrial zone districts, except the C-3 Central Business District,
and commercial and industrial uses in residential zone districts.
[Ord. No. 1283, § 1, 8-16-2000; Ord. No. 1360, § 2, 3-19-2003]
(a) All off-street parking areas required for new multiple-family dwellings
and all nonresidential but noncommercial buildings shall be subject to
this section.
(b) No part of such off-street parking areas shall extend into the required
front yard more than 1/2 of the yard required for a residential building,
and where the lot or a portion of the lot lies between two privately
owned residential properties, the full front yard setback shall be
observed. In either case, the front yard area not occupied by the access
drive shall be landscaped.
(c) All such parking areas shall be at least 40 feet in width. No more than
60 contiguous spaces shall be provided without an internal landscaped
dividing buffer at least 10 feet in the least dimension.
(d) Such parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
vehicles, and no commercial repair work, sales or service of any kind
shall be conducted on such parking lot. No sign, other than entrance,
exit, and condition of use signs shall be maintained.
(e) Each entrance to and exit from such parking lot shall be not less than
12 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential
zone, and the location and design of entrances, exits, surfacing,
landscaping, signs and marking and lighting shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer or his designated representative to insure
adequate relation to traffic safety and protection of the adjacent
residential area.
(a) A parking lot for commercial or industrial uses shall be no closer than
10 feet from a street, property, or common line with a residentially
zoned or residentially used property, and shall be landscaped with
natural vegetation. Parking lots shall be effectively screened on any
side or rear yard which adjoins premises situated in any residential
zone district, residentially used property, or institutional premises by a
screening of evergreen hedge, natural landscaping, fence screen or
wall screen not less than four feet high; provided, that such screening
shall not exceed 30 inches along street property lines. Parking lots in
residential zone districts shall also abide by the additional front yard
setback and landscaping requirements of Section 39-54(b). After due
notice and a public hearing pursuant to the noticing requirements for a
site plan review, the Planning Commission may reduce the screening
and setback requirements of this section and/or specific requirements
noted in the individual commercial and industrial zone districts either
as a singular issue, or as a component of a site plan review, if it
determines the following:
Sec. 39-54 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-54.1
C:888
Sec. 39-55. Required off-street loading and unloading space. [Ord.
No. 464, § 9-1.6; Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
(1) That alternative fencing and/or landscaping can effectively produce
the same screening and separation effect as otherwise required.
(2) That such reduction is necessary to allow the reasonable
improvement of the site.
(3) That such improvements will not be detrimental to adjacent
residential properties.
(b) Expansions of existing nonconforming parking lots shall comply with
the requirements of this section provided that the Community Services
and Development Department may reduce the screening and setback
requirements for such expansions in accordance with the review
standards of Section 39-54.1(a)(1) through (3). The Community
Services and Development Department may refer these requests to the
Planning Commission for its final determination, in which case a public
hearing will be held.
(c) No portion of the public right-of-way lying between the sidewalk line
and the traveled portion of a street shall be surfaced or used for parking
purposes except by the explicit approval of City Council. Parking areas
established and so used at the effective date of this article may be
continued until revoked by City Council.
(a) In all districts, every building or part thereof, hereafter erected, which
is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display,
retail store or block of stores over 10,000 square feet in floor area,
wholesale store or warehouse, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary,
laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or
distribution in vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be
provided and maintained, on the same premises with such building, offstreet
loading spaces in relation to floor area as follows:
(1) Up to 20,000 square feet, one space;
(2) Twenty thousand square feet to 50,000 square feet, two spaces;
(3) Fifty thousand square feet to 100,000 square feet, three spaces;
(4) One additional space for each additional 100,000 square feet or
part thereof.
(b) Each loading space shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Each loading space shall be at least 10 feet in width, 25 feet in
length and 14 feet in height.
(2) Such space may occupy part of a required yard or court space.
Sec. 39-54.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-55
C:889
Sec. 39-56. Off-street parking required—residential structures in all
zones. [Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1226,
10-7-1998; Ord. No. 1260, 8-18-1999; Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 9-3-2008;
Ord. No. 1576, 1-18-2012; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1762]
Sec. 39-57. Same—New residential structures in all zones. [Ord. No.
622; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1226, 10-7-1998; Ord. No.
1260, 8-18-1999; Ord. No. 1517, § 2, 9-3-2008]
For new one-family and two-family dwellings hereafter erected, or every
dwelling unit created by conversion, one improved off-street parking space
shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such parking space shall be
(3) No such space shall be located closer than 50 feet to any lot in any
residential district, unless wholly within a completely enclosed
building or enclosed on all sides facing residential zones by a wall
or uniformly painted solid board or masonry fence of uniform
appearance which is not less than six feet in height.
(a) Parking on a residential lot shall be limited to the parking of the
following vehicles:
(1) Passenger motor vehicles which do not accommodate more than
nine passengers;
(2) Motorcycles;
(3) Recreational vehicles;
(4) Trucks not exceeding two tons in carrying capacity; and
(5) Riding lawnmowers.
The parking of trucks exceeding two tons in carrying capacity and the
parking of buses on a residential lot shall be limited to the parking of
those vehicles for deliveries, service calls, and other short duration
parking.
(b) A front yard of a lot shall not be used for the parking of a vehicle listed
under Subsection (a), except on a clearly designated driveway or
parking space with a finished surface of asphalt, concrete, pavers,
permeable pavers, grass pavers or another similar durable surface, or
on a nonconforming, established driveway or parking space as defined
by Section 18-29(a)(2). For purposes of this subsection, on a corner lot,
each yard adjoining a street shall be considered a front yard.
(c) No driveway approach shall be installed except in conjunction with
approved curb cuts and driveway approach regulations as specified by
the City Engineer in Chapter 32 and in accordance with the
requirements of Section 39-58 of this article.
(d) Parking of vehicles is only allowed on a durable surface in the Central
Neighborhood District.
Sec. 39-55 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-57
C:890
constructed with concrete, asphalt, permeable pavement, grass pavers or
other similar surfaces as approved by the Zoning Administrator and shall be
made accessible to a street by means of a similarly constructed driveway.
Such driveway and parking space shall also comply with the requirements
of Section 39-58 of this article.
Sec. 39-58. Residential driveways, parking spaces and driveway
approaches—all zones. [Ord. No. 1226, 10-7-1998; Ord. No. 1260,
8-18-1999; Ord. No. 1357, 2-5-2003; Ord. No. 1517, § 3, 9-3-2008]
(a) Permits.
(1) A person shall not establish or expand an asphalt, concrete, pavers,
permeable pavement, grass pavers or another similar durable
surfaced driveway or parking space without first obtaining a
permit.
(2) A permit application shall be submitted to the Building Official
showing the location, size, shape, design, and surface material of
the driveway or parking space and the name, address, telephone
number, and licensing information of the person performing the
work. If the application complies with this section, then the
Building Official shall issue a permit for the construction and use of
such driveway or parking space.
(3) A person shall not commence any work within the public right-ofway
without obtaining a permit from the Department of
transportation services.
(4) A driveway or parking space shall be made accessible to the public
street by an asphalt, concrete, pavers or similar durable surface
constructed driveway approach.
(b) Placement of driveways and parking spaces within 25 feet of street
rights-of-way. Neither a driveway nor a parking space shall be placed
directly between a residential structure and the street right-of-way, or
in the front corner on a corner lot, except for a driveway to a vehicle
entrance of a garage attached to the residential structure. Additional
driveway or parking area such as expanded driveway width, parking for
recreational vehicles and turnaround accommodations may be
constructed in residential yards only when located 25 feet or more from
a street right-of-way.
(c) Driveway and parking space dimensions. The Planning Commission, or
in the case of administrative review, the City staff, shall establish
appropriate driveway and parking space widths for residential
developments subject to site plan review. For residential developments
not subject to site plan review, the width of a driveway or parking space
shall not be limited, except as otherwise set forth in Subsection (b) of
this section.
Sec. 39-57 CHARTER Sec. 39-58
C:891
Sec. 39-59. Parking space determination by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. [Ord. No. 1357, 2-5-2003]
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special exception to vary or
modify the number of parking spaces required per this chapter. The Board
shall consider applications for parking determinations based on the
applicant's special circumstances to alleviate the need for the number of
spaces required by this Article IV, Off-Street Parking and Loading. The
applicant shall need to demonstrate that such varying or modification will
not be detrimental to adjacent properties including properties situated
immediately across the street from the subject property. The Board shall not
have the authority to modify parking requirements imposed by the Planning
Commission during a site plan review process.
Sec. 39-60. Parking location determination by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. [Ord. No. 622; Ord. No. 1097, 10-6-1993; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1226, 10-7-1998; Ord. No. 1260, 8-18-1999;
Ord. No. 1270, 2-2-2000; Ord. No. 1357, 2-5-2003]
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special exception for parking
between the residential structure and the street right-of-way if the applicant
demonstrates that such varying or modification will not be detrimental to
adjacent properties including properties situated immediately across the
street from the subject property, and the applicant demonstrates one of the
criteria in this section.
(d) Driveway approaches. The Planning Commission, or in the case of
administrative review, the City staff, shall determine the number of
driveway approaches for residential developments subject to site plan
review. For residential developments not subject to site plan review,
only one driveway approach per street front shall be permitted.
Exceptions to these requirements are as follows:
(1) An additional driveway approach is necessary to provide access to
parking serving multiple residential units on a single lot, or
cumulative paving of the front yard will not exceed 40% of the yard
area.
(2) If street frontage on any one street exceeds 140 feet for a single lot
or multiple lots under common ownership.
(a) That varying or modifying the driveway, parking space, or driveway
approach requirements is the only manner to permit reasonable use of
a residential lot or to provide two independently accessible parking
spaces for the residential lot, and where there is insufficient lot
dimension to the sides or rear of the residential structure to allow
passage of a vehicle to the side or rear of the lot and that there is no
alternative access to the side or rear of the lot via an alley or other
dedicated access or easement.
Sec. 39-58 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-60
C:892
Sec. 39-61. Violations. [Added 10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1659]
A person who violates Section 39-54 or 39-56 is responsible for a Class II
civil infraction and is subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of
fees and charges adopted in Section 2-118 of this Code or any other relief
that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon
which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 39-62. Paving and parking on traditional residential properties
in the Central Neighborhood District overlay area. [Added 3-7-2018
by Ord. No. 1726; amended 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1762]
(b) That traffic conditions on the adjoining street warrant the varying or
modifying of the driveway, parking space, or driveway approach
requirements of this chapter in order to better address safety concerns.
Traffic conditions to be considered may include but not be limited to the
posted speed limit, adequate site distances at the driveway intersection
with the street, the traffic counts on the street both over a twenty-fourhour
period and during peak hour times, and whether on-street parking
is allowed on the adjoining street. Such request shall be granted only
where there is no less intrusive alternative for safely entering or
exiting.
(a) Purpose. The Central Neighborhood District (CND) is a defined overlay
area encompassing portions of the Education District (ED) and the
Traditional Residential Neighborhood District (R-TRN). The purposes of
these zoning districts as set forth in Sections 39-280 and 39-320 are
reaffirmed and incorporated in this section. The CND area contains
large areas of properties with traditional residential structures on small
lots and large areas owned and used by long-standing educational
institutions, which also include some traditional residential structures
on small lots. Most of the small residential lots owned and used by the
educational institutions benefit from a broader unified parking plan
utilized by the institutions. Residential lots within the CND area face
increasing pressure to develop in ways inconsistent with preserving the
aesthetic value of such residential properties and the residential
qualities of their neighborhoods. These pressures include the
development of large paved parking areas on traditional residential
properties that increase the noise and congestion from the number of
vehicles in the area, in addition to those vehicles that park on the street
during the day. This pressure detracts from the desirability of owneroccupied
residences and the stability of the neighborhood.
(b) Rear and side yard paving. For properties with traditional one- to fourfamily
unit residential structures in the Central Neighborhood District,
the amount of paved areas for vehicle access and parking located in
rear and side yard areas shall be generally consistent with that of
adjoining properties and neighboring properties on the same block.
Plans to provide paved areas in the Central Neighborhood District for
vehicles that are determined to be greater in area than the amounts of
Sec. 39-60 CHARTER Sec. 39-62
C:893
Sec. 39-63. through Sec. 39-64. (Reserved)
paved areas generally consistent with that of adjoining properties and
neighboring properties on the same block may be permitted:
(1) In one side yard only covering an area up to 75% of the side yard
area. For a side yard less than 14 feet in width, a minimum paved
area of 10 feet is allowed. Landscaping and screening in the form of
natural vegetation and/or fencing are required to buffer and soften
the view from neighboring properties when side yard paving
exceeds a width of 10 feet.
(2) For a corner lot, the maximum paving within the side yards is up to
50% of the yard area with paving set back a minimum of 10 feet
from the public sidewalk or street right-of-way. Landscaping and
screening in the form of natural vegetation and/or fencing are
required to buffer the view from neighboring properties.
Notwithstanding where adequate dimension exists, this shall not
prohibit a driveway with a minimum width of 10 feet entering from
the street.
(3) On up to 50% of the rear yard if landscaping and screening in the
form of natural vegetation and/or fencing are provided to buffer
and soften the view of the side and rear yard paved surfaces from
neighboring properties.
(4) The remainder of the rear yard shall be green space.
(c) Violations. A person who violates this Section 39-62 is responsible for a
Class II civil infraction and is subject to the civil fines set forth in the
schedule of fees and charges adopted in Section 2-118 of this Code or
any other relief that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation
and each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a
separate violation. Violations are also deemed a nuisance per se.
Sec. 39-62 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-63
C:894
ARTICLE V
Automotive Sales Areas, Garages, Service Stations And Other Drivein
Facilities
Sec. 39-65. Generally. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.7; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1216, 8-19-1998]
Sec. 39-66. through Sec. 39-68. (Reserved)
(a) Every parcel of land hereafter used as an automobile or trailer sales
area or as an automobile service station shall be subject to the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59; except, that in the case of an
automobile service station the requirement concerning screening on
that side which faces premises situated in a residential district or
institutional premises shall apply only to that area used for parking.
(b) No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected or converted
which is intended or designed to be used as a drive-in facility, public
garage, automobile repair shop or gasoline service station within 300
feet of any portion of any building used as a school, church, hospital,
public library or institution for dependents or for children; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to the C-3 Central Business
District, nor shall this section prohibit the redevelopment of gasoline
sales facilities in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District existing on
January 1, 1998, that have their gasoline fueling activities and the
display of liquid accessories located within 132 feet of a state or federal
trunkline.
Sec. 39-65 CHARTER Sec. 39-66
C:895

ARTICLE VI
Industrial And Commercial District Regulations
DIVISION 1
Site Plan Review Applicable to Commercial Districts C-1, C-2, C-3,
C-4 and C-5 and Industrial Districts I-1, I-2 and Planned Unit
Development District PUD113
Sec. 39-69. Accessory uses of commercial and industrial yards.
[Ord. No. 1239, 3-24-1999]
The following accessory uses or encroachments shall not be deemed
inconsistent with the intent and purpose of maintaining open unoccupied
commercial and industrial yard spaces, and may be permitted in required
commercial and industrial yard areas. In no case, however, shall any
commercial or industrial yard area be used for any purpose or in any
manner which would adversely effect the reasonable enjoyment of adjoining
properties, or which would be likely to create or increase a nuisance.
(a) The following commercial and industrial accessory uses shall be
permitted:
(1) Arbors, trellises, yard ornaments, statuary, or flagpoles.
(2) Eaves or awnings projecting not more than three feet beyond the
face of a wall, but in no case closer than one foot to property line.
(3) Plantings, shrubs, landscaping and indigenous vegetation.
(4) Parking of passenger vehicles in approved parking areas and
surfaces.
(5) Pole mounted yard lights.
(6) Brick veneer or other new exterior wall surfacing to existing
buildings.
(7) Signs which are permitted by Article IX of this chapter.
(8) Bay windows and chimneys projecting not more than three feet
from the face of a wall and encroaching no closer than five feet to
any property line.
(9) Mailboxes installed or mounted in accordance with federal law.
(10) Fences and screening which comply with the following limitations:
a. In commercial districts, they shall not exceed six feet in height
in side and rear yards and four feet in height in front yards and
side yards adjoining a side street.
113. Editor's Note: The title of this Division 1 was amended 10-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1551.
Sec. 39-69 CHARTER Sec. 39-69
C:897
b. In industrial districts, they shall not exceed eight feet in height
in side and rear yards and four feet in height in front yards and
side yards adjoining a side street.
c. Fence gates shall not swing over a public sidewalk.
(11) Accessory recreational equipment, including picnic tables and
barbecues.
(12) Pad mounted air-conditioning, heating or ventilating equipment.
(13) Accessory buildings in commercial and industrial districts used for
the storage of lawn care and other equipment for the purpose of onsite
maintenance, with the following limitations:
a. Maximum size of 120 square feet.
b. No accessory building allowed in any required front yard area.
c. Maximum of one accessory building per lot pursuant to these
requirements.
d. If the accessory building is 60 feet or more from any front yard
property line, it is permitted two feet from a side or rear lot
line.
(14) Swimming pools as permitted by Section 39-195.
(15) Refuse storage facilities, in accordance with Chapter 27 of this
Code.
(16) Accessory uses not specifically itemized, but which are similar in
nature and scope to any of the foregoing uses, recognized as
appropriate and approved during the site plan review process.
(17) Strings of lights on private property. All lights shall be maintained
in good condition and shall not flash, blink, oscillate, have any
appearance of movement, create a nuisance or be hung in a way
which could be considered a sign. [Added 1-2-2019 by Ord. No.
1760]
(b) In addition to the foregoing, fences of unrestricted height, playground
equipment, shelters or pavilions, fountains, sculpture and similar
installations of a scale not commonly found in commercial and
industrial yards may be permitted in conjunction with permitted uses
and approved during the site plan review process.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fence, hedge, vegetation,
obstruction, or other accessory use shall be permitted or maintained,
which materially impedes traffic visibility across a corner lot, or
otherwise obstructs required open spaces in a manner that constitutes
a hazard to the safe use of public streets and sidewalks as determined
by the Police Department.
Sec. 39-69 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-69.1
C:898
Sec. 39-69.1. Site plan review. [Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No.
1239, 3-24-1999]
Due to the impact of commercial and industrial development in the City, the
Planning Commission shall conduct a site plan review for projects in any "C"
district or the I-1 District when required by Article II of this chapter.
Sec. 39-69.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-69.1
C:899

DIVISION 2
I-1 Industrial District
Sec. 39-70. Intent and permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.8; Ord.
No. 723; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1455, 5-24-2006; Ord.
No. 1482, 10-3-2007; Ord. No. 1506, § 1, 6-18-2008; amended
5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1628]
The I-1 Industrial District is intended to meet the needs of established and
prospective industry within the industrial areas of the City other than an
I-2 Industrial District. In addition to manufacturing, fabrication, assembly
and similar operations, this district allows material storage and supply,
construction trades, automotive services and commercial uses, subject,
however, to the requirements and prohibitions set forth in this division. The
following uses are permitted therein:
Sec. 39-71. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.8; Ord. 601; Ord.
723; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1455, 5-24-2006; Ord. No.
1482, 10-3-2007; Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 6-18-2008]
Within any area of the City which is zoned as I-1 Industrial District, no
building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure
shall be constructed or altered which is intended or designed to be used in
whole or in part for any of the following uses:
(1) Manufacturing, development, fabrication, compounding, processing,
assembly or treatment of materials, substances or objects, except as
hereinafter qualified in Section 39-72.
(2) Offices, research, testing or development facilities.
(3) Freight terminals, storage or warehousing.
(4) Storage and distribution of steel, lumber, bricks, blocks and similar
construction materials.
(5) Public utility facilities, including manufacturing, treatment, storage and
service areas.
(6) Automotive and machinery sales and services.
(7) Construction trades and services.
(8) Wholesale and retail commercial sales and services, including
restaurant uses.
(9) Municipal administrative and municipal services.
(10) Indoor archery or firearm range but only if permitted as a special land
use pursuant to Sections 39-17.1 and 39-17.2.
(11) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted.
Sec. 39-70 CHARTER Sec. 39-71
C:901
Sec. 39-72. Uses allowable as special exception uses. [Ord. No. 723;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
(a) As new dwellings, or as conversions of existing dwelling buildings to
additional dwelling units;
(b) For hotels, motels, tourist cabins, campgrounds or other facilities
providing overnight sleeping accommodations, except municipal
administrative and municipal services;
(c) For schools, other than for industrial training purposes, hospitals,
clinics, nursing homes and similar institutions or establishments for
educational purposes or for providing human care;
(d) For lodges, clubhouses, assembly halls, theaters, auditoriums, churches
and other places of assemblage;
(e) For any use which does not conform to all applicable provisions of this
Code, statutes and regulations of the City, the state, any department or
agency thereof, and the United States of America, or any department or
agency thereof.
(a) The following uses may be allowed as special exception uses, whether
as principal or accessory uses, subject to the procedures for special
exception uses outlined in Section 39-73 of this chapter:
(1) The manufacture of glue size or gelatine; processes involving
recovery from fish or animal offal;
(2) The manufacture of volatile, toxic or irritating chemicals;
(3) Acetylene gas manufacture on a commercial scale;
(4) Celluloid or cellulose products manufacture; the manufacture of
pyroxylin plastic materials or of products therefrom;
(5) Cement packaging or storage;
(6) Chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture;
(7) Coal yard, gravel yard, mineral stockpile;
(8) Crematory, except in connection with a cemetery;
(9) Creosote manufacture;
(10) Explosives, fireworks or match manufacture or assembly;
(11) Fertilizer manufacture or potash refining;
(12) Metal reduction or smelting or aluminum, copper, iron, tin or zinc
ore;
(13) Paint manufacture;
Sec. 39-71 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-72
C:902
Sec. 39-73. Procedures for special exception uses. [Ord. No. 723;
Ord. No. 749; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
(14) Petroleum refining or bulk storage, or both;
(15) Processing pulp or other materials into paper or cardboard;
(16) Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill;
(17) The incineration or reduction of dead animals, offal or garbage;
(18) Resource recovery facilities, automobile salvage operations, or
junkyards.
(b) In addition to those uses set forth in Subsection (a) above, those uses
which, by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke or other air pollution,
vibration or noise, water disposal, heat, cold, dampness or movement of
air, electrical interference or disturbance, atmospheric vibration or
disturbance, glare, or the hazard of fire, explosion, atomic or other form
of radioactivity, are or could be deleterious either to the industrial
district, or to uses lawfully conducted in neighboring districts, may be
permitted as special exception uses under the procedures and
conditions as hereinafter set forth.
(a) Any person seeking to use property for any of the aforementioned types
of uses in a I-1 Industrial District either as a principal use or as an
accessory use shall make application therefore to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall proceed in accordance with
applicable statutes and the provisions of Article XII of this chapter to
hear such application. It shall be the duty of the applicant for such
special use permit to furnish such information to the Zoning Board of
Appeals as may be required relevant to its consideration of the
environmental guidelines of Section 39-74.
(b) Approval of any such use shall allow expansion thereof onto additional
land in which the applicant has an interest; provided, the applicant
specifically requests the Zoning Board of Appeals to consider such
additional land in the granting of a special exception. Any expansion
onto land not so considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals in the
granting of a special exception shall be subject to additional
proceedings before the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a legal description of all
lands considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals in proceedings
pursuant to this section. In the event the Zoning Board of Appeals
approves the proposed use as a special exception the Clerk shall, at the
expense of the applicant, record a copy of the order of the Zoning Board
of Appeals in the office of the registrar of deeds of the county in which
such lands are located.
Sec. 39-72 CHARTER Sec. 39-73
C:903
Sec. 39-74. Considerations for granting special exception permits.
[Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1727]
(d) Those uses which exist on November 28, 1979, on land owned and used
by the applicant and which would be allowed only as special exception
uses, may be continued to the extent of existing operations, and
expanded as long as the applicant does not change, modify or alter the
type of equipment operations conducted on November 28, 1979. The
expansion of any such use onto additional lands which were not owned
and used by the applicant as special exception uses on November 28,
1979, or the change of the existing type of equipment operations shall
be subject to additional proceedings before the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(a) No use shall be permitted under Section 39-73 if it is found that the
proposed use would be contrary to any applicable ordinance of the City,
or would be injurious to surrounding property and persons by reason of
the peculiar operating characteristics of the proposed use. In
consideration of the granting of a special exception permit, no use shall
be approved which would be contrary to the following environmental
guidelines:
(1) Radioactivity. Any use of radioactive substances, isotopes or
products shall present no hazard to the health, safety or property of
others;
(2) Vibration. Every use shall avoid causing vibration of the land or air
to such an extent as to interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of
any present or prospective legally conforming use of adjoining or
nearby premises;
(3) Noise. Every use shall avoid the emission of noise of such pressure,
loudness, pitch or frequency of occurrence, or any combination
thereof, which would interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of
any present or prospective legally conforming use of adjoining or
nearby premises;
(4) Odor. Every use shall avoid the emission of odorous gases or matter
in such quantities as to be noxious, offensive or injurious beyond
the property line of the parcel devoted to such use, or any present
or prospective legally conforming use;
(5) Heat. Every use shall avoid the discharge or exhausting of heated
air or water in such quantities as to be detrimental to the
reasonable enjoyment of adjoining premises or to plant or animal
life downwind or downstream from such discharge;
(6) Nuisance. Every use that may likely be deleterious to, or have an
adverse effect on, other uses lawfully conducted within the
Sec. 39-73 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-74
C:904
Sec. 39-75. Performance standards. [Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Every use permitted in a I-1 Industrial District, either of right or as a special
exception, shall comply with the following performance standards:
Sec. 39-76. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 723; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within the I-1
Industrial District:
industrial district, or to uses lawfully conducted in neighboring
districts.
(b) The Zoning Board may attach conditions to such approval pursuant to
Section 39-407 of this Code and may also attach conditions requiring
the applicant to continue to comply with the levels of performance not
expressly defined by statute, ordinance or regulation, but which have
been represented to the Zoning Board by the applicant in its written
application or in representations given to the Zoning Board during the
hearing process.
(a) Environmental protection. Every use shall conform to the
environmental guidelines set forth in Items (1) through (6) of
Subsection 39-74(a), with respect to radioactivity, vibration, noise, odor,
heat and nuisance;
(b) Enclosure. Except for the storage, sale, operation or service of items
normally kept or used outside, loading and unloading operations,
parking of vehicles, and those uses allowable as special exception uses,
all principal permitted uses shall be conducted within an enclosed
building;
(c) Screening. Every use which involves the outside storage of materials or
the outside processing or handling of materials, shall be fenced or
screened by natural vegetation so as to reasonably diminish any
adverse effect on nearby premises or the general community.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 40 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet from the
street line; provided, that where an existing setback line has been
established by existing buildings occupying 40% or more of the
frontage within the same block, such established setback shall apply.
(c) Side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of 30 feet on each side of
a building. Where a lot has an average width of less than 200 feet, the
side yard shall not be less 15% of the average width. When a side yard
adjoins a side street, the front yard provisions of this section shall apply
to the side yard that adjoins the street.
Sec. 39-74 CHARTER Sec. 39-76
C:905
Sec. 39-77. Compliance with overlay district requirements. [Ord.
No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001]
The portions of a property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay
district per Article VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the
requirements of the applicable overlay district.
Sec. 39-78. through Sec. 39-79. (Reserved)
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 24 feet.
(e) Side and rear yard exceptions. Where an alley, railroad right-of-way,
utility easement, or public open space other than a public street abuts a
side or rear property line, 1/2 the width of such space may be counted
as part of the required yard.
Sec. 39-76 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-78
C:906
DIVISION 3
I-2 Industrial District
Sec. 39-80. Intent and permitted uses. [Ord. No. 625; Ord. No. 691;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1279, 5-3-2000; Ord. No. 1482,
10-3-2007; Ord. No. 1506, § 3, 6-18-2008]
The I-2 Industrial District is intended to provide areas in the City in which
industrial uses may be located in such a manner as to preserve and develop
land area in a manner consistent with an industrial park concept. It is
the purpose of the I-2 zone to require industrial development and uses in
areas classified as I-2, which will conform to requirements different from
those of the I-1 Industrial District and which will result in industrial park
developments. It is the specific purpose of the I-2 zone to provide for open
landscaped yards, for off-street parking and loading within the industrial
park and for the protection from those conditions which would not be
compatible with a concentration of industrial uses. The following uses are
permitted:
Sec. 39-81. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 625; Ord. No. 691; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1279, 5-3-2000; Ord. No. 1506, § 4,
6-18-2008]
Within any area of the City which is zoned as an I-2 Industrial District, no
building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure
shall be constructed or altered which is intended or designed to be used in
whole or in part for any of the following uses:
(a) Manufacturing, development, fabrication, compounding, processing,
assembly or treatment of materials, substances or objects.
(b) Offices, research, testing or development facilities.
(c) Freight terminals, storage or warehousing.
(d) Processing, packaging, distribution or servicing of industrial
equipment, supplies, materials or products.
(e) Automotive repair services.
(f) Municipal administrative and municipal services.
(g) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Paragraphs (a) through (e) above.
(a) As new dwellings or as conversions of existing dwelling buildings to
additional dwelling units.
(b) For hotels, motels, tourist cabins, campgrounds or other facilities
providing overnight sleeping accommodations, except municipal
administrative and municipal services.
Sec. 39-80 CHARTER Sec. 39-81
C:907
Sec. 39-82. Allowable special uses—enumerated. [Ord. No. 625;
Ord. No. 691; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
(c) For schools, other than those for industrial training purposes, hospitals,
clinics, nursing homes and similar institutions for educational purposes
or for providing human care.
(d) For any commercial use in which the principal use is the retail sale of
products, materials or services, except for those uses that are expressly
allowed in Section 39-80.
(e) For any use which does not conform to all applicable provisions of this
Code, statutes and regulations of the City, the state or any department
or agency thereof, and the United States of America or any department
or agency thereof.
(a) The following uses may be allowed as special uses hereunder, whether
as principal or accessory uses:
(1) The manufacture of glue, size, or gelatine; processes involving
recovery from fish or animal offal.
(2) The manufacture of volatile, toxic, or irritating chemicals.
(3) Acetylene gas manufacture on a commercial scale.
(4) Celluloid or cellulose products manufacture; the manufacture of
pyroxylin plastic material or of products therefrom.
(5) Cement packaging or storage.
(6) Chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(7) Coal yard, gravel yard or mineral stockpile.
(8) Crematory, except in connection with a cemetery.
(9) Creosote manufacture.
(10) Explosives, fireworks or match manufacture or assembly.
(11) Fertilizer manufacture or potash refining.
(12) Metal reduction or smelting of aluminum, copper, iron, tin or zinc
ore.
(13) Paint manufacture.
(14) Petroleum refining or bulk storage or both.
(15) Processing pulp or other materials into paper or cardboard.
(16) Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill.
(17) Incineration or reduction of dead animals, offal or garbage.
Sec. 39-81 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-82
C:908
Sec. 39-83. Same—Procedures. [Ord. No. 691; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
Sec. 39-84. Same—Considerations. [Ord. No. 625; Ord. No. 691;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
(18) Resource recovery facilities, automobile salvage operations or
junkyards.
(19) Fiberglass manufacturing operations.
(b) In addition to those uses set forth in Subsection (a) above, those
additional uses which, by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke or other
air pollution, vibration or noise, waste disposal, heat, cold, dampness or
movement of air, electrical interference or disturbance, atmospheric
vibration or disturbance, glare or the hazard of fire, explosion, atomic
or other form of radioactivity, are or could be deleterious either to
industrial or commercial activities lawfully conducted within the
industrial district or to uses lawfully conducted in neighboring districts
may be permitted as special exception uses under the procedures and
conditions as set forth in Sections 39-83 and 39-84.
(a) Permit; application. Any person seeking to use property for any of the
types of uses specified in Section 39-82 as allowable in an I-2 Industrial
District, either as a principal use or as an accessory use, shall make
application therefore to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall proceed in accordance with applicable statutes and the
provisions of Article XII of this chapter, to hear such application. It shall
be the duty of the applicant for such special use permit to furnish such
information to the Zoning Board of Appeals as may be required relevant
to its consideration of the granting of such permit.
(b) Approval; expansion. Approval of any such use shall allow expansion
thereof onto additional land in which the applicant has an interest;
provided, that the applicant specifically requests the Zoning Board of
Appeals to consider such additional land in the granting of a special
exception. Any expansion onto land not so considered by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in the granting of a special exception shall be subject
to additional proceedings before the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
(c) Description of lands; copy of order. The applicant shall submit to the
City Clerk a legal description of all lands considered by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in proceedings pursuant to this section. In the event
the Zoning Board of Appeals approves the proposed use as a special
exception, the Clerk shall, at the expense of the applicant, record a copy
of the order of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the office of the register
of deeds of the county in which such lands are located.
(a) No use shall be permitted under Section 39-82 if it is found that the
proposed use would be contrary to any applicable ordinance of the City
Sec. 39-82 CHARTER Sec. 39-84
C:909
Sec. 39-85. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 691; Ord. No.
778; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1425, 10-5-2005; Ord. No.
1543, 3-17-2010; Ord. No. 1696]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within the 1-2
Industrial District:
or would be injurious to surrounding property or persons by reason
of the peculiar operating characteristics of the proposed use. The
following factors shall be included in the consideration of the granting
of a special exception permit:
(1) Radioactivity. Any use of radioactive substances, isotopes or
products shall present no hazard to the health, safety or property of
others.
(2) Vibration. Every use shall avoid causing vibration of the land or air
to such an extent as to interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of
any present or prospective legally conforming use of adjoining or
nearby premises.
(3) Noise. Every use shall avoid the emission of noise of such pressure,
loudness, pitch or frequency of occurrence, or any combination
thereof, which would interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of
any present or prospective legally conforming use of adjoining or
nearby premises.
(4) Odor. Every use shall avoid the emission of odorous gases or matter
in such quantities as to be noxious, offensive or injurious beyond
the property line of the parcel devoted to such use or to any present
or prospective legally conforming use.
(5) Heat. Every use shall avoid the discharge or exhausting of heated
air or water in such quantities as to be detrimental to the
reasonable enjoyment of adjoining premises or to plant or animal
life downwind from such discharge.
(b) The Zoning Board may attach conditions to such approval pursuant to
Section 39-407 of this Code and may attach conditions requiring the
applicant to continue to comply with the levels of performance not
expressly defined by statute, ordinance, or regulation, represented to
the Zoning Board by the applicant in its written application or in
representations given to the Zoning Board during the hearing process.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 100 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. A
seventy-five-foot front yard shall be required for parcels that abut or are
located across the street from a residentially zoned or used property.
(c) Side yard. For all buildings other than those specifically enumerated in
Section 39-12 of this chapter, there shall be side yards of dimension
Sec. 39-84 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-85
C:910
Sec. 39-86. Conformance with environmental guidelines. [Ord. No.
1144, 5-3-1995; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Every use permitted within an I-2 zone, whether of right or as a special
exception, shall conform to the environmental guidelines set forth in Items
(1) through (5) of Subsection 39-84(a), with respect to radioactivity, noise,
vibration, odor, and heat.
Sec. 39-87. Compliance with overlay district requirements. [Ord.
No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001]
The portions of a property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay
district per Article VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the
requirements of the applicable overlay district.
Sec. 39-88. through Sec. 39-94. (Reserved)
equaling at least the height of the building; no side yard to be less
than 30 feet. Where a side yard adjoins a side street, the front yard
provisions of this section shall apply.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 24 feet.
(e) Side and rear yard exceptions. Where an alley, railroad right-of-way,
utility easement or public open space other than a public street abuts a
side or rear property line, half the width of such space may be counted
as part of the required yard.
(f) Lot coverage. Irrespective of yard area requirements, the maximum
building coverage of any parcel of land within the I-2 Industrial District
shall not exceed 60% of the gross area of the parcel upon which such
buildings are situated.
(g) Lot area and width. The minimum parcel in an I-2 Industrial District
shall be two acres, and shall have a minimum average width of not less
than 200 feet.
(h) Screening. Every use which involves the outside storage of materials or
the outside processing or handling of materials shall be so conducted
and screened as to reasonably diminish any adverse effect on nearby
premises or on the general community.
Sec. 39-85 CHARTER Sec. 39-88
C:911

DIVISION 4
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
Sec. 39-95. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.11; Ord. No. 533;
Ord. No. 594; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1470, 3-21-2007;
amended 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1630; 10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1660;
Ord. No. 1732]
The C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is intended primarily to meet
the neighborhood shopping and merchandising needs of particular
residential areas. The following uses are permitted herein:
(a) Commercial sales and services which are strictly retail in nature,
including, but not being limited to, the following types of uses:
(1) Bakery;
(2) Bank or other financial institution;
(3) Barber and beauty shop;
(4) Dry-cleaning and laundry pickup station;
(5) Office;
(6) Retail store;
(7) Shoe repair shop;
(8) Art- and craft-making studios, galleries, and shops;
(9) Art and craft schools;
(10) Music and dance studios;
(11) Photographic and film production services.
(b) Residential use of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, if the
building conforms to Chapter 6.
(c) Short-term rentals as allowed in Chapter 14 with a certificate of
compliance.
(d) Light assembly uses but only if permitted as a special land use pursuant
to Sections 39-17.1 and 39-17.3.
(e) Accessory uses that are necessary and incidental to any principal use
permitted by this division are hereby permitted, including necessary
incidental manufacturing, processing or storage of goods for sale,
subject to the following exceptions and limitations:
(1) The killing of animals or fowl is prohibited.
Sec. 39-95 CHARTER Sec. 39-95
C:913
Sec. 39-96. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.11; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Within any C-1 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any of the following prohibited
uses:
Sec. 39-97. Required conditions. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.11; Ord. No.
977, 6-21-1989; Ord. 1131, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1216, 8-19-1998; Ord. No. 1280, 6-7-2000; Ord. No. 1298,
§ 2, 5-23-2001; Ord. No. 1339, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 1387, § 1,
6-2-2004]
The following conditions are required within any C-1 District:
(2) A minimum of 50% of the products manufactured, processed or
stored on the premises shall be held for sale at retail on such
premises.
(3) No more than two persons shall be engaged in manufacturing or
processing activities, as distinguished from retail sales activities,
on such premises.
(4) All such accessory uses shall not produce any noise, vibrations,
odors, or heat that extends beyond the property line.
(f) Municipal off-street parking.
(a) Manufacturing, processing, industrial storage, or other industrial use,
or a wholesale business, except when permitted as an accessory use
under Subsection (d) of Section 39-95.
(b) Every accessory use which constitutes, creates or increases a nuisance
in fact, so as to adversely affect a legally conforming use of adjoining or
nearby premises.
(c) Hotels, motels and trailer parks.
(d) Any use not permitted by Section 39-95.
(a) Enclosure. All business, service, or processing shall be conducted
wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for the following
uses and goods:
(1) Sidewalk and outdoor cafes pursuant to Chapter 32 hereof;
(2) Gasoline fueling activities and the display of liquid accessories
associated with a gasoline sales facility that are within 132 feet of a
state or federal trunkline; and
(3) Merchandising and display of seasonal merchandise such as
garden, lawn and recreational goods, excluding vehicle sales,
Sec. 39-95 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-97
C:914
Sec. 39-98. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.11;
Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1280, 6-7-2000]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within any C-1
District, except as provided in Subsection (c) of Section 39-97, and except
as provided in Section 39-98.1:
designed and intended for outside use. All pricing and
identification signage shall be directly affixed to the goods and
shall have a maximum sign area of 100 square inches. All outside
display of goods shall be screened from adjacent Residentially
zoned properties with a minimum four-foot opaque fence so as to
reasonably diminish any adverse effect on nearby premises or the
general community.
(b) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with Sections 39-45 to 39-59, except only 50% of the required parking
per use is required in this district.
(c) Residential uses. Residential uses shall meet all the requirements of the
R-2 District; provided, that residential yard spaces are not required for
one accessory dwelling unit.
(d) Pick-up windows. For legally conforming retail and service uses within
100 feet of a state trunkline or a street designated as a major street by
the City of Holland, where located within a C-1 Neighborhood
Commercial District, a pick-up window accessible to pedestrian and/or
vehicles is permitted provided that:
(1) Separate and remote sign order panels and exterior
communication speakers are not permitted;
(2) Vehicular access windows to said pick-up window is from a private
driveway and does not create a safety hazard for pedestrian or
other vehicles; and
(3) Pick-up windows with vehicular access are separated from adjacent
residentially zoned or used properties by at least 25 feet and
screened with dense and continuous evergreen landscaping and/or
fencing at least six feet in height.
(e) Compliance with overlay district requirements. The portions of a
property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay district per Article
VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of the
applicable overlay district.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 35 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet from the
street line; provided, that where an existing setback line has been
established by existing commercial buildings occupying 40% or more of
Sec. 39-97 CHARTER Sec. 39-98
C:915
Sec. 39-98.1. Height and area regulations for traditional
neighborhood commercial areas. [Ord. No. 1280, 6-7-2000]
the business zoned frontage within the same block, such established
setback shall apply.
(c) Side yard. No side yard is required; except, that where a side yard
adjoins any R-1, R-2, or R-3 Residential District, or a side street, a
seven-foot yard is required, unless an existing setback line of less than
this required distance has been established by existing commercial
buildings occupying 40% or more of the business-zoned frontage within
the same block, in which case the established setback shall apply.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 24 feet where property
abuts any residential zone district; provided, that where an alley
separates the commercial zone from the residential zone, the full alley
width may be counted as part of the required rear yard.
(a) [Areas to which regulations apply.] The following height and area
regulations shall apply to the areas listed as follows:
(1) Area bounded by properties with frontage on 8th Street on the
north; Fairbanks Avenue north of 16th Street and Lincoln Avenue
south of 16th Street on the east; 24th Street extended on the south,
and Ottawa Avenue on the west.
(2) All C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District properties located
within 400 feet of where the center line of South Shore Drive
intersects the center line of Myrtle Avenue.
(3) All C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District properties located
within 400 feet of where the center line of 32nd Street intersects
the center line of Columbia Avenue.
(b) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 35 feet in height.
(c) Front yard. There shall be a front yard extending the entire width of the
principal building of not less than zero feet from the street right-of-way
line. In no case shall a front yard be greater than 10 feet from the street
right-of-way line. This maximum yard restriction shall not apply to any
accessory buildings.
(d) Side yard. No side yard is required, except that where a side yard
adjoins an R Residential District, a seven-foot yard is required. Side
yards on a side street shall have a side yard not greater than 10 feet.
This maximum yard restriction shall not apply to any accessory
buildings.
(e) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 24 feet where property
abuts any residential zone district, provided that where an alley
separates the commercial zone from the residential zone, the full alley
width may be counted as part of the required rear yard.
Sec. 39-98 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-98.1
C:916
Sec. 39-99. Administrative relief for persons adversely affected by
prohibitions of Section 39-96. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.11; Ord. No. 723;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
Any person aggrieved by the prohibitions of Section 39-96 may apply to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
proceed in accordance with applicable statutes and the provisions of Article
XII to hear such application. The applicant shall have the burden of proving
to the Zoning Board of Appeals that:
Sec. 39-100. Access areas and off-street parking. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.11; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Whenever a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is established in such
a location that the only access to a public right-of-way lies across not more
than 132 feet of intervening residentially zoned property, access drives and
off-street parking shall be permitted in the area lying between such C-1
Neighborhood Commercial District and such public right-of-way; provided,
that such off-street parking shall conform to the requirements of Sections
39-45 to 39-59.
Sec. 39-101. through Sec. 39-114. (Reserved)
(f) Additions to existing structures. Additions or alterations to existing
structures, conforming in use, that reduce nonconforming front yards
or side yards on a side street shall be permitted without regard to the
maximum yard requirements of this section.
(a) The proposed use would be essentially a retail commercial use in
nature, as contrasted with wholesale or industrial uses, and thereby
would be consistent with the character of the C-1 Neighborhood
Commercial District;
(b) The proposed use at the proposed location would not constitute or be
likely to create or to increase a nuisance in fact.
In reaching a decision on Subsection (b) of this section, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall apply the environmental guidelines established
in Paragraphs (a)(1) through (6) of Section 39-74, so as to reasonably
protect all legally conforming uses, present and prospective, of
adjoining and nearby premises.
Sec. 39-98.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-101
C:917

DIVISION 5
C-2 Highway Commercial District
Sec. 39-115. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.10; Ord. No. 627;
Ord. No. 872; Ord. No. 942, 5-4-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; Ord. No. 1474, 5-2-2007; amended
5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1628; 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1630; Ord. No.
1732]
The C-2 Highway Commercial District is intended to meet general
commercial and warehousing needs of the community. The following uses
are permitted therein:
(a) Any use permitted in the C-3 Central Business or the C-1 Neighborhood
Commercial Districts.
(b) Commercial uses, including, but not being limited to, the following
types of uses:
(1) Marina and boat-docking facilities;
(2) Automotive sales and services;
(3) Storage or warehousing, excluding freight terminals;
(4) Building trades and services, and construction materials (except as
hereinafter prohibited);
(5) Sexually oriented businesses; and
(6) Wholesale businesses.
(c) Light manufacturing uses including the development, fabrication,
compounding, processing, assembly or treatment of materials,
substances or objects that comply with the further required conditions
of this division.
(d) Residential use of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, if the
building conforms to Chapter 6.
(e) Short-term rentals as allowed in Chapter 14 with a certificate of
compliance.
(f) Indoor archery or firearm range, but only if permitted as a special land
use pursuant to Sections 39-17.1 and 39-17.2.
(g) Light assembly uses, but only if permitted as a special land use
pursuant to Sections 39-17.1 and 39-17.3.
(h) Accessory uses that are necessary and incidental to any principal use
permitted by this division are hereby permitted.
Sec. 39-115 CHARTER Sec. 39-116
C:919
Sec. 39-116. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.10; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 942, 5-4-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Within any C-2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any of the following prohibited
uses:
Sec. 39-117. Required conditions. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.10; Ord. No.
535; Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 942, 5-4-1988; Ord. No. 1199,
9-24-1997; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1199, 9-3-1997; Ord.
No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001; Ord. No. 1387, § 2, 6-2-2004; Ord. No.
1474, 5-2-2007]
The following conditions are required within any C-2 District:
(a) Any uses listed in Subsections (1) to (18) of Subsection 39-72(a), or
which cannot conform to the environmental limitations and conditions
applicable to those uses categorized by Subsections 39-72(a) and (b).
(b) Any use not permitted by Section 39-115.
(a) Noncommercial uses. Residential, institutional and other
noncommercial uses shall meet the requirements of the R-2 District.
(b) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of Article IV (Sections 39-45 to 39-59) of this
chapter, and shall be screened or fenced wherever such parking abuts
or faces residential premises. For every parking lot developed as a
principal or accessory use in a C-2 District, there shall be provided on
lands contiguous to such parking lot an area or areas of open space,
planted and landscaped with natural vegetation, at a ratio of not less
than one square foot of landscape area for each 10 square feet of
parking area. Where any parking lot exceeds 200 feet in any dimension,
it shall further be required that at least 50% of the required landscaped
open space be provided within the parking lot as opposed to the
perimeter of the lot, so as to mitigate the adverse aesthetic impact of
large masses of uninterrupted blacktop or concrete. No parking lot
shall be closer than 10 feet to any street, property, or common line with
a residential district line. This 10 feet shall be planted and landscaped
with natural vegetation.
(c) Storage of material. The outside storage of material or merchandise
shall be limited to accessory storage customarily incidental to a
permitted principal use of the premises, and shall be screened or
fenced wherever such storage abuts or faces residential premises.
(d) Vehicle storage. The storage of vehicles in a C-2 District, as contrasted
to the parking of vehicles by invitees, customers, or permittees, shall be
limited to the parking of vehicles used in the conduct of a business, or
to vehicles stored for sale or service on the premises. Unlicensed or
inoperable trucks or trailers shall not be used for the storage of
Sec. 39-116 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-117
C:920
Sec. 39-118. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.10;
Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 942, 5-4-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
amended 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1602]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within any C-2
District, except as provided in Subsection (a) of Section 39-117:
merchandise, material or stock on the premises. Vehicles which are
physically and visibly damaged to a point of inoperability, and are
stored on commercial premises awaiting repair, shall be stored in a
fully enclosed fenced or screened area. As used in this division, fenced
or screened shall be deemed to mean a solid wood or brick fence not
less than five feet in height, or an open-weave fence supplemented
by landscape materials of sufficient density to provide a comparable
screening effect.
(e) Flag lots. Except as may be approved as a platted lot in a recorded
subdivision, it is intended that the creation of a "flag lot" in a C-2
Commercial District be subject to the procedures and requirements of
Section 39-196 of this chapter.
(f) Compliance with overlay district requirements. The portions of a
property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay district per Article
VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of the
applicable overlay district.
(g) Sidewalk and outdoor cafes. Pursuant to Chapter 32.
(h) [Light manufacturing uses.] Light manufacturing uses shall comply
with the following conditions:
(1) None of the uses listed in Section 39-72(a) shall be allowed;
(2) Eligible properties shall be located within the area bounded by
Lincoln Avenue, Central Avenue, 48th Street and US 31;
(3) The total enclosed area of the business shall not exceed 10,000
square feet;
(4) No more than 10 employees are working on the premises at any
one time;
All manufacturing uses shall not produce any noise, vibrations,
odors, or heat that extends beyond the property line.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 45 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 50 feet from any
street.
(c) Side yard. There shall be side yards of not less than 25 feet on either
side of a building or structure.
Sec. 39-117 CHARTER Sec. 39-118
C:921
Sec. 39-119. Administrative relief for persons adversely affected by
prohibitions of Section 39-116. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.10; Ord. No.
723; Ord. No. 942, 5-4-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No.
1461, 9-6-2006]
Any person aggrieved by the prohibitions of Section 39-116 may apply to
the Zoning Board of Appeals for a hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall proceed in accordance with applicable statutes and the provisions of
Article XII to hear such application. The applicant shall have the burden of
proving to the Zoning Board of Appeals that:
Sec. 39-120. (Reserved)114
Sec. 39-121. through Sec. 39-124. (Reserved)
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Narrow lot provisions. On any lot having a width of less than 200 feet at
any street line, the minimum setback required from such street may be
reduced to a distance of not less than 25% of the width of such street
frontage, but in no case less than 25 feet.
(f) Side and rear yard exceptions. Where a railroad right-of-way abuts a
side or rear property line, half the width of such space may be counted
as part of the required yard.
(a) The proposed use would be essentially a commercial use consistent
with the character of the C-2 Highway Commercial District;
(b) The proposed use at the proposed location would not constitute or be
likely to create or to increase a nuisance in fact.
In reaching a decision on Subsection (b) of this section, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall apply the environmental guidelines established
in Paragraphs (a)(1) through (6) of Section 39-74, so as to reasonably
protect all legally conforming uses, present and prospective, of
adjoining and nearby premises.
114. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-120, which pertained to moratorium on development in
specified C-2 Highway Districts, adopted 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1290, was repealed
6-6-2007 by Ord. No. 1478.
Sec. 39-118 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-121
C:922
DIVISION 6
C-3 Central Business District
Sec. 39-125. Intent. [Ord. No. 1333, 5-1-2002115]
The City adopts the regulations set forth in this Division 6 to regulate land
uses in the C-3 Central Business District in order to meet the needs of
the residents of the City of Holland for places of trade, service, assembly,
residence, recreation, and other uses of land; to insure that uses of the
land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships; to facilitate
adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, utility
infrastructure, recreation, and other public service and facility needs; and
to promote public health, safety, and welfare. Regulations adopted herein
facilitate the unique and distinctive mixed use and pedestrian-friendly
environment that define and are necessary for a viable and secure
downtown, provide safety and security for pedestrians, and insure the
appropriate locations and relationships between uses and the public that
differentiate the C-3 Central Business District, by allowing land use and
development relationships that are consistent with the City's "Broadening
the Vision: A Strategic Plan for Downtown Holland".
Sec. 39-126. General. [Ord. No. 1333, 5-1-2002]
(a) Zone district designation. There shall be only one commercial district
designated as the C-3 Central Business District. Only property
contiguous to the C-3 Central Business District or property included
within the area master planned by the City for downtown expansion
may be rezoned to C-3 Central Business District.
(b) Downtown Development Authority. In order to be zoned within the C-3
Central Business District, property must be included within the
boundaries of the Downtown Development Authority as they may from
time to time hereafter be amended.
(c) Street designations. The "A" and "B" streets within the Central Business
District described as follows are shown on maps kept on file in the
offices of the City Clerk, Department of Community Services and
Development, Zoning Administrator, and the Downtown Development
Authority.
(1) "A" pedestrian destination streets (also known as type "A" streets).
The following streets shall be "A" pedestrian destination streets
(also known as type "A" streets):
A future 5th Street between Central and College;
6th Street including only the first 80 feet of frontage to the east
and west of each intersection;
115. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended Division 6, adopted 7-20-1988 by Ord. No. 957, as
amended 6-21-1989 by Ord. No. 978 and 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, in its entirety.
Sec. 39-125 CHARTER Sec. 39-126
C:923
Sec. 39-127. Permitted, prohibited and special uses. [Ord. No.
1333, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 1387, § 3, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1420,
7-20-2005; Ord. No. 1732]
7th Street from 80 feet west of River Avenue to 80 feet east of
Columbia Avenue including only the first 80 feet of frontage to the
east and west of each intersection;
8th Street (entire length);
9th Street from Pine Avenue to 80 feet east of Lincoln Avenue
including only the first 80 feet of frontage to the east and west of
each intersection;
10th Street from 80 feet west of River Avenue to 80 feet east of
Central Avenue;
11th Street from 80 feet west of River Avenue to River Avenue;
Pine Avenue including only the first 80 feet of frontage to the north
and south of 8th Street;
River Avenue (entire length);
Central Avenue (entire length);
College Avenue (entire length), including a future College Avenue
extension to the north;
Columbia Avenue (entire length); and
Lincoln Avenue including only the first 80 feet of frontage to the
north and south of 8th Street.
Exceptions. Those portions of the above streets within 50 feet of
the center line of a railroad crossing.
(2) "B" secondary streets (also known as type "B" streets). All streets,
or portions of streets, that are not "A" streets shall be "B"
secondary streets (also known as type "B" streets).
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses, either separately or in any
combination, are specifically permitted in the C-3 Central Business
District:
(1) Retail and wholesale commercial sales except where specifically
prohibited in Subsection (b) below and except as allowed as special
uses.
(2) Service providers.
(3) Office uses.
(4) Research and development offices and laboratories.
Sec. 39-126 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-127
C:924
(5) Recreation and entertainment uses, including but not limited to
theaters, performance facilities, health clubs and gymnasiums,
community recreation facilities, billiard parlors and gaming
facilities.
(6) Art galleries, museums, arts and crafts studios, and libraries.
(7) Educational facilities and places of worship.
(8) Restaurants and drinking establishments.
(9) Hotels and lodging.
(10) Convention, meeting, and exhibition facilities.
(11) Passenger transportation terminal.
(12) Park, plaza, garden, and other improved public or private open
space, recreation areas, public restrooms, public informational
kiosks, and community centers.
(13) Governmental administrative, service, or public market uses.
(14) Printing and publishing.
(15) Parking.
(16) Residential uses, excluding single-family residential uses in
detached, single-use, single-family structures.
(17) Short-term rentals as allowed in Chapter 14 with a certificate of
compliance.
(18) Sidewalk and outdoor cafes only as an accessory use pursuant to
Article V of Chapter 32 hereof.
(19) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted in this section, provided that such uses are in
conjunction with an existing permitted use on the premises, such
uses are consistent with other requirements of this division, and
provided further that such accessory uses shall not constitute,
create or increase a nuisance in fact, which adversely affects a
legal use of adjoining or nearby premises.
(b) Prohibited uses. Except where allowed as a special use, no building,
structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall
be erected or altered which is intended or designed to be used, in whole
or in part, for any of the following prohibited uses:
(1) Manufacturing, processing, industrial storage, or other industrial
use except where continued use is allowed as a special use under
Section 39-127(c).
(2) Machinery sales and service.
Sec. 39-127 CHARTER Sec. 39-127
C:925
(3) Automobile sales, repair, and service; and sale of automobile/
vehicular fuel and other liquid accessories.
(4) Outdoor advertising for products or services not provided on site.
(5) Outdoor vending machines, excluding newspaper vending boxes
and automatic teller machines, where both visible from and located
within 50 feet of the public right-of-way.
(6) Junkyards, scrap yards, recycling processes.
(7) Outside storage of sand, gravel or other aggregates.
(8) Drive-in or drive-through services, except drive-through banking
services or drive-through restaurant services allowed as a special
use under Section 39-127(c).
(9) Private telecommunications switching equipment and private
utilities as a principal building use on the street level.
(10) Every use which constitutes, creates or increases a nuisance in fact
so as to adversely affect a legally conforming use of adjoining or
nearby premises.
(11) Any use not permitted by Section 39-127.
(c) Permitted with special uses. The Planning Commission shall allow the
following uses as special uses provided they satisfy the specific criteria
stated below and satisfy other provisions of this Chapter 39. Review for
such special use applications shall occur through the site plan review
process consistent with procedural requirements of Article II of this
chapter.
(1) Notwithstanding Article III, expansion of legally existing
nonconforming industrial, automotive sales and service, and
warehousing uses shall be allowed as a special use provided that:
a. Exterior alterations to the structure and site conform to
requirements of Section 39-128.
b. Expansion of buildings and site storage and/or display use is
limited to 20% each of the square footage of existing building
and site storage/display use, respectively, existing as of the
date of the adoption of this section.
c. The nonconforming industrial, automotive sales and service,
and/or warehousing use has not been discontinued as provided
in Section 39-39; and
d. The Planning Commission determines such alterations or
expansions satisfy each of the following criteria:
1. The alteration or expansion, along with any associated
additional or relocated parking needs or truck access, do
Sec. 39-127 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-127
C:926
not negatively impact pedestrian areas along type "A"
streets.
2. New associated trucking, parking, and vehicular access
areas shall not occupy street frontage building or site area
to a depth of 25 feet from the street line along type "A"
streets.
(2) Drive-through banking services shall be allowed as special uses,
provided that the Planning Commission determines such use
satisfies each of the following criteria:
a. Such services shall only be to the side or rear of the principal
building, with no portion of the actual drive-through structure
or equipment located closer than 50 feet from a type "A" street;
b. Stacking lanes for such use shall not cross pedestrian
sidewalks; and
c. Driveways exiting such drive-through facilities are no wider
than 12 feet exiting onto a one-way street and 24 feet exiting
onto a two-way street where the driveway crosses the
sidewalk.
(3) A commercial building designed to be leased or occupied primarily
by one tenant with a street level floor area in excess of 30,000
square feet, provided that the building and site satisfy all of the
following criteria:
a. The building provides a second floor, with floor area totaling at
least 60% of the street level floor area, designed and
constructed and used for nonstorage uses;
b. The building has at least one entrance in every 60 feet of
building frontage along each type "A" street that it abuts; and
c. Requirements of Section 39-128.
(4) Drive-through restaurant services shall be allowed as special uses,
provided that the Planning Commission determines such use
satisfies each of the following criteria:
a. The restaurant is in operation on June 14, 2005;
b. There shall be no new or relocated curb cuts allowed onto "A"
streets;
c. Such drive-through services shall only be to the side or rear of
the principal building, with no portion of the actual drivethrough
structure or equipment located closer than 50 feet
from a Type "A" street;
d. Stacking lanes for such use shall not cross pedestrian
sidewalks; and
Sec. 39-127 CHARTER Sec. 39-127
C:927
Sec. 39-128. Performance requirements. [Ord. No. 1333, 5-1-2002;
3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
All development, additions, site alterations, and street-level facade
alterations within the C-3 Central Business District are subject to the
following procedures and performance requirements.
e. Driveways exiting such drive-through facilities are no wider
than 12 feet exiting onto a one-way street and 24 feet exiting
onto a two-way street where the driveway crosses the
sidewalk.
(a) Review process:
(1) Planning Commission review. Where site plan review is otherwise
required, review and approval regarding compliance with
requirements of this section shall be conducted by the Planning
Commission during the site or development plan review process as
described in Article II of this chapter.
(2) Administrative review. All street-level facade alterations and site
alterations not otherwise requiring site plan review shall be
submitted to the Department of Community Services and
Development for review and approval. Review of such proposed
work shall be conducted administratively by the Department of
Community Services and Development. Where staff is required to
make a discretionary determination according to requirements of
this section, notice of the application shall be published in a local
newspaper and shall be given to owners of the property and to
residents and property owners within 300 feet of the subject
property not less than seven nor more than 15 days before the
application will be considered.
At the initiative of the Planning Commission or official responsible
for approving requests, upon the written request of a resident
or property owner within 300 feet made within 15 days of the
mailing of notification, or upon written request of the applicant,
a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission
with notification as required above and a decision on whether to
approve the site alteration and/or street-level facade alteration
shall be made by the Planning Commission. A request for a public
hearing shall be filed with the Department of Community Services
and Development. If the applicant or official responsible for
approving the application requests a public hearing, only
notification of the public hearing need be made.
A decision on an application shall not be made unless notification
of the application is given as required by this article. If a public
hearing is not requested or required, a decision on the request
shall be made within 21 days of the receipt of a complete
application. This time may be extended upon mutual agreement of
Sec. 39-127 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-128
C:928
the applicant and the City. If a public hearing is not conducted, and
the application is not approved within the 21 days after receipt, or
within an agreed-upon extension, the application shall be deemed
denied without prejudice.
In this administrative review process, any person aggrieved by the
determination of the Department may appeal the decision within
10 days in writing to the Planning Commission. Such an appeal
shall be filed with the Department of Community Services and
Development. An appeal shall stay all further proceedings, and
shall be heard by the Commission at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, at which time the Commission shall sustain or modify the
determination of the Department. Any appeal of a determination by
the Commission may be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Pedestrian environment. All work shall support and enhance pedestrian
use, character, and safety by satisfying the following criteria, and shall:
(1) Building entrances.
a. All buildings shall have a minimum of one primary entrance
opening to the adjacent sidewalk of the street on which the
building fronts.
b. Where public parking or private parking is available to
patrons, residents, and/or employees to the rear of a building,
whether on the subject property or on a site adjacent to the
subject property, an additional entrance shall be located to
provide access to such parking.
(2) Street level building facades. In order to assure compatibility with
other buildings in the C-3 Central Business District and to promote
a safe and enjoyable walking environment, proposed new
construction of and renovation or alteration to exterior street-level
building facades facing a type "A" street meet the requirements of
Section 39-29. Application of this subsection may be determined by
the Planning Commission to be eligible for the optional plan review
process.
(3) Glazing for visibility and security. Given the nature of pedestrian
activity in the C-3 Central Business District and the desire to
promote a safe pedestrian environment, all glazing at street level
shall be transparent to allow visual contact between individuals
within and outside the building. Reflective glass and
nontransparent glass are not permitted along sidewalks and public
open space areas adjoining street-level facades. Application of this
subsection may be determined by the Planning Commission to be
eligible for the optional plan review process.
(4) Exemption for existing industrial uses. Lawfully nonconforming
industrially used structures, including additions or alterations
Sec. 39-128 CHARTER Sec. 39-128
C:929
thereto, shall not be required to comply with the requirements of
Sections 39-128(b)(2), 39-128(b)(3), or 39-29.
(c) Yard and height requirements. All new construction and expansion of
existing buildings shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Required front yard.
a. For purposes of this section, all yards of a lot with frontage
along a street shall be considered a front yard.
b. Buildings and structures along a type "A" street shall have a
maximum front yard requirement of six feet.
c. Front yards along type "A" streets may be increased by the
Planning Commission during site plan review where the
Planning Commission determines all of the following
conditions exist. The additional yard area:
1. Provides a special pedestrian-oriented feature such as, but
not limited to, a publicly accessible plaza or garden or
outside dining area which adds amenity to the pedestrian
character of the street;
2. Does not create a significant interruption in the continuity
of street level pedestrian movement and interest;
3. Is compatible and integrated with adjoining properties and
nearby public improvements; and
4. Is not for the purpose of providing parking and/or drivethrough
access between the building and an "A" street.
d. Front yards along a "B" street shall have a maximum front yard
requirement of 25 feet. Application of this subsection may be
determined by the Planning Commission to be eligible for the
optional plan review process.
e. Where lots have frontage on more than one street, the
following shall apply:
1. Buildings and structures located on corner lots shall meet
the yard requirements for each intersecting street.
2. Buildings and structures located on through lots with
frontages along two parallel streets shall satisfy the yard
requirements along only the more restrictive parallel
street (type "A" is more restrictive than type "B").
3. In the case where a site has frontage on more than two
streets, the Planning Commission shall determine which
streets warrant the required yards.
Sec. 39-128 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-128
C:930
f. For properties north of 6th Street and east of Central Avenue,
buildings containing multiple residential units including
residential uses along the street level shall have the maximum
front yard increase to 12 feet where such additional yard area
is utilized as an entry or porch zone serving the building,
where such yard area is integrated with the public sidewalk
area as a pedestrian area, or where such yard is incorporated
as garden area with the intention of both enhancing the street
level character of the property and providing additional
privacy to street level residential uses.
g. Additions to existing structures. Additions or alterations to
existing structures, conforming in use or otherwise allowable
under this division, that reduce nonconforming yards shall be
permitted without regard to the maximum front yard
requirements of this section. Under this provision, an addition
or alteration to an existing structure, conforming or otherwise
allowable under this division, shall be permitted if it decreases
the side yard, notwithstanding that the addition or alteration
may create front yard space in front of the addition or
alteration that does not comply with the maximum front yard
requirements of Section 39-128(c)(1).
(2) Required side yard. New buildings along type "A" streets shall be
constructed to the side property line. The Planning Commission
may approve a greater setback where the Commission determines
a proposed break in building continuity will be developed as a
publicly accessible park or through-block pedestrian connection;
where such a break in continuity is otherwise permitted and
necessary as driveway access into a site; where the size and
placement of the proposed building cannot readily be changed to
occupy the full site frontage; or where phasing of development on a
site will over time result in a continuous building frontage along the
type "A" street.
(3) Required rear yard. No rear yard is required.
(4) Building height.
a. Commercial and residential buildings exceeding a building
footprint of 800 square feet fronting along a type "A" street
shall be constructed not less than two habitable stories or 26
feet in height, whichever is less. Additions to such buildings
that are proposed further than 50 feet from the type "A" street
shall not be required to meet this minimum height. Application
of this subsection may be determined by the Planning
Commission to be eligible for the optional plan review process.
b. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 75 feet in
height except as allowed under Section 39-12.
Sec. 39-128 CHARTER Sec. 39-128
C:931
(d) Vehicular access, parking, service requirements. All new development
and proposed alterations to building sites within the C-3 Central
Business District shall be designed to protect pedestrian safety,
enhance the character of the pedestrian environment, and mitigate
possible negative impacts from such vehicular conditions.
(1) Parking requirements. No off-street parking is required for
nonresidential uses within the C-3 Central Business District. All
nonresidential uses located in the C-3 Central Business District
shall be deemed participants in a community parking program per
Section 39-52 and any applicable City-adopted policies therein, and
shall be exempt from parking requirements of Article IV of this
chapter. Parking for any new residential use shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Article IV of this
chapter. Where on-site parking for that residential use is not
available, parking requirements may be met in accordance with the
policies promulgated by the City or its Downtown Development
Authority for the use of its designated downtown public parking
areas for long term and/or overnight parking.
(2) Access to site.
a. Access to parking or off-street loading from a type "A" street is
prohibited except where the Planning Commission determines
all of the following criteria are satisfied:
1. Access is not available from a type "B" street;
2. Driveway width is minimized and such access is
compatible with the manner of access along nearby
portions of the affected street; and
3. Such access does not have a significant negative impact on
pedestrian movement and safety.
b. Application of this subsection may be determined by the
Planning Commission to be eligible for the optional plan review
process.
(3) Placement of parking.
a. Parking shall not be located between a building and street line
of an "A" street. This applies only to that portion of the site
where the frontage of the building is intended to satisfy the "A"
street yard requirements.
b. All parking areas shall be set back at least eight feet from all
street-fronting property lines, with the required setback area
landscaped, or the setback may be reduced to three feet where
the setback area includes a continuous brick wall 30 inches in
height and landscaping between the wall and sidewalk.
Sec. 39-128 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-128
C:932
c. For residential uses, outdoor surface parking shall be set back
from the street line a minimum of 25 feet along type "A" streets
and shall not be accessed directly from any type "A" street
except by a shared driveway where no access is available from
a type "B" street. Only garage doors providing access to
common, shared parking areas are permitted along type "A"
streets. Garage doors and individual driveways serving
garages of individual residences are not permitted facing and
within 25 feet of a type "A" street. Application of this
subsection may be determined by the Planning Commission to
be eligible for the optional plan review process.
d. Parking garages/decks located along type "A" streets shall
integrate permitted nonparking street level uses for at least
the first 25 feet in depth along type "A" street frontages.
Entrances and exits shall be from type "B" streets, wherever
possible. Application of this subsection may be determined by
the Planning Commission to be eligible for the optional plan
review process.
(4) Landscaping and lighting of parking.
a. Design of parking lots shall comply with Sections 39-53 and
39-54.1.
b. Landscaping of the lot interior. In addition to perimeter
landscaping, interior areas of parking lots exceeding 20
parking spaces shall be landscaped with natural vegetation in
the amount of one square foot of landscaping for every 20
square feet of parking area. For purposes of interpretation,
landscaping in this subsection may include trees, shrubs,
ground cover, and grass. For planter islands in parking areas
that include tree wells, surrounding landscaped areas may
include streetscape pavers in place of plant materials.
c. Lighting. Lighting for parking areas shall be in accordance
with the requirements of Section 39-53.
(5) Required off-street loading and unloading space. Provision of
loading shall comply with Section 39-55, provided that,
notwithstanding Section 39-55(b)(2), off-street loading shall not be
located between a building and street line of an "A" street. This
applies only to that portion of the site where the frontage of the
building is intended to satisfy the "A" street yard requirements.
(6) Service area, loading docks, and trash/recycling/dumpster
locations. All service areas, including but not limited to loading
docks, trash dumpsters, recycling containers, and other disposal
areas shall be located and screened to minimize visibility from
publicly accessible areas.
Sec. 39-128 CHARTER Sec. 39-129
C:933
Sec. 39-129. Other required conditions. [Ord. No. 1333, 5-1-2002]
Sec. 39-130. Optional plan review (OPR) for development within the
C-3 Central Business District. [Ord. No. 1333, 5-1-2002; amended
3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
(a) All activities within enclosures. All business, servicing or processing
shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building except
for:
(1) Outside display of merchandise for sale on private property,
including but not limited to automobiles, bicycles, and other
objects of transportation, by a tenant or owner of the property; and
(2) Sidewalk cafes pursuant to Chapter 32 of this Code.
(b) Environmental performance standards. All uses in the C-3 Central
Business District shall comply with the environmental guidelines
pertaining to radioactivity, vibration, noise, odor, heat and nuisance as
enumerated in Section 39-74.
(a) Purpose and intent.
(1) Section 39-128 establishes the performance requirements for
design and development of buildings and property in the C-3
Central Business District. The expectation is that these
requirements will be satisfied by every development; however,
circumstances arise which those provisions do not address or did
not foresee. Therefore, this section establishes an alternative
process by which the Planning Commission may evaluate and
approve a development project that does not meet certain
standards of Section 39-128.
(2) It is the intent of the OPR to permit modest flexibility in the
regulation of development projects to achieve successful
integration of a project with the characteristics of the central
business area. The OPR process establishes a mechanism to review
and address special problems or opportunities and unique
proposals or circumstances which cannot otherwise be
accommodated within the standards of the C-3 Central Business
District. Sections 39-29 and 39-128 form the basic framework that
will be used to evaluate an OPR development project, but
specifically identified requirements may be modified by the
Planning Commission in the approval of an application.
(b) Application and procedure. Review under this section of the ordinance
is intended to only occur under unusual circumstances where, during
the course of administrative or Planning Commission review under the
otherwise applicable sections of this division, special circumstances are
identified relating to the property or the proposed development by the
Planning Commission that warrant consideration under the provisions
of the OPR. Prior to the formal submission of an application for a site
Sec. 39-129 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-130
C:934
plan or development plan review of a proposed project within the C-3
that anticipates utilizing the OPR for allowing some variation from
specified requirements, the applicant shall submit a preliminary site
plan for study session review by the Planning Commission. The
Commission will not vote on the request at this time but will provide
reaction and advice regarding the proposed development and the
applicability of ordinance requirements. The applicant may
subsequently submit an application for site or development plan
approval, clearly indicating any sections of the ordinance where OPR
consideration is requested. The application shall be processed in
accordance with the procedural requirements of Section 39-23, with
special note in public notices of any OPR consideration requested.
(c) Review and approval.
(1) In considering an application for plan approval using the OPR
process, the Planning Commission shall not approve such
application unless it determines that:
a. The variation requested is generally consistent with the
intentions of the C-3 Central Business District, and will not
impair the public health, safety, and welfare;
b. The extent of variation from the applicable requirements of
Section 39-128 is modest in the context of the proposed
development and nearby properties;
c. There is public benefit or amenity proposed to be created that
is created and/or enhanced by the variation if permitted;
d. Such use and/or variation from the specific standard will not
result in a violation of Section 39-74 regarding environmental
impact covering radioactivity, vibration, noise, odor, heat, and
nuisance;
e. There is no negative impact presented by those variations on
existing and future development in the area;
f. The variation will not cause substantial detriment to the value
of other property in the area;
g. The variation will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property for
uses permitted within the district;
h. Adequate site improvements have been or will be made to
accommodate the proposed variation;
i. The variation will not result in impacts on ingress and egress
that will negatively impact pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and
j. There are circumstances applying to the property or the
proposed development that do not generally apply to other
Sec. 39-130 CHARTER Sec. 39-130
C:935
Sec. 39-130.1. Administrative relief for persons adversely affected
by prohibitions of Section 39-127. [Ord. No. 1333, 5-1-2002; Ord.
No. 1461, 9-6-2006; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
properties and development (existing and proposed) in the
same zone district.
(2) The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating that there are
unusual circumstances relating to the property or the proposed
development, that the justification for variation relative to the
issues identified above are sufficient to warrant the flexibility
provided for under this section, and that the proposed variation and
development are consistent with each of the standards described
above.
(d) Variations not permissible. A variation shall not be approved where
such variation:
(1) Allows an intrusion of motor vehicles into a pedestrian
environment;
(2) Is solely for the purpose of gaining additional usable space within a
building; or
(3) Is requested only for increased financial return.
(a) Any person aggrieved by the prohibitions of Section 39-127(b) may
apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a hearing. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall proceed in accordance with applicable statutes and the
provisions of Article XII to hear such application. The applicant shall
have the burden of proving to the Zoning Board of Appeals that:
(1) The proposed use would be essentially a retail commercial use or
service-oriented in nature or a pedestrian-oriented use, as
contrasted with an industrial use, and thereby would be consistent
with the character of the C-3 Central Business District.
(2) The proposed use at the proposed location would not constitute, or
be likely to, create or to increase a nuisance.
(b) In reaching a decision on Subsection (a)(2) of this section, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall apply the environmental guidelines established
in Subsection (a)(1) through (6) of Section 39-74, so as to reasonably
protect all legally conforming uses, present and prospective, of
adjoining and nearby premises. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also
apply the site plan requirements of this chapter and requirements of
Section 39-128 in order to assure that the proposed use is otherwise
compatible with C-3 Central Business District development.
Sec. 39-130 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-130.1
C:936
DIVISION 6.1
Windmill Island Neighborhood Business District
Sec. 39-131. Intent. [Ord. No. 1213, 6-3-1998]
It is the intent of this district to be consistent with and facilitate the orderly
implementation of the Windmill Island Development Master Plan ("Master
Plan"), as initiated and approved by Holland City Council. The Planning
Commission shall adopt the Master Plan as a component of the 1992 Master
Plan for the physical development of the City, as amended, prior to the
Commission's approval of a development plan. Copies of the Master Plan
document are on file in the offices of the City Clerk, Department of
Community Services and Development, Downtown Development Authority,
and the Windmill Island trust/authority/managing entity.
For purposes of establishing a basis for zoning designation, the Scenario for
Development of the Windmill Island Master Plan, dated June 25, 1997, shall
serve as the City's interim Master Plan for Windmill Island until adoption of
the Master Plan.
The Master Plan and this zone district have as its purposes the realization
of the following objectives for the business, commercial, residential, and
governmental development of Windmill Island:
(a) Windmill Island as a business and commercial district integral with
downtown Holland;
(b) Windmill Island as a new pedestrian-oriented mixed use business
district and neighborhood;
(c) Windmill Island as a place of community culture and history;
(d) Windmill Island as a central place within an environmentally sensitive
region-wide "greenway" open space network;
(e) Windmill Island as a public gathering place for community-wide
celebration of Dutch heritage by residents and visitors alike for
business, commercial, residential, and governmental development; and
(f) Windmill Island as a business, commercial, and residential development
to strengthen the tax base; halt declining property values through
development; and to promote the economic growth and development of
the City.
Sec. 39-131 CHARTER Sec. 39-131
C:937
Sec. 39-132. Establishment, development plan review, procedures.
[Ord. No. 1213, 6-3-1998; amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
It is intended that the business, commercial, residential, and
governmental development within this publicly owned and controlled
zone district shall enjoy maximum latitude and flexibility in utilization
of land and facilities, provided consistency is maintained with the
Master Plan. Where inconsistencies exist between the approved
Master Plan and the provisions of Chapters 32 (Streets and Sidewalks)
and 33 (Subdivisions), and the City's requirements for site
condominiums referencing standards and provisions of Chapters 32
and 33, the requirements of the Master Plan shall prevail.
(a) Establishment of zone district. The Windmill Island Neighborhood
Business District is hereby established in accordance with the terms of
this division.
(b) Development plan. The use of any lands within this district shall be
contingent upon the submission and approval of a development plan
and the faithful adherence to that plan. It is anticipated that the
development plan will be part of and consistent with the Master Plan as
approved by the City Council. The development plan approval shall
supersede and be in lieu of any other plan review process of this
chapter.
(c) Development plan approval. The development plan shall be submitted
by the City through the Department of Community Services and
Development for review and approval by the Planning Commission.
(1) Plan review. The development plan shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission to determine whether the plan conceptually
conflicts with any plans or policies of the City and whether the
development plan meets the goals and objectives of Section
39-131(a) through (f). The primary focus of Commission review
shall be the potential impacts of this development on surrounding
properties and infrastructure.
(2) Submission requirements. In order to consider the development
plan, 17 copies of the following materials shall be submitted at
least 21 days prior to the public hearing:
a. Preliminary development plan indicating property boundaries,
division of land, and proposed general locations for streets,
buildings, and utilities. The development plan shall
differentiate between land which is to be privately used from
that which will remain in public use, and shall specifically
designate land which is to be dedicated for public use as a
public park. The development plan shall also include any
private restrictive covenants proposed to control and restrict
the development of Windmill Island and such additional
Sec. 39-131 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-132
C:938
documentation as the applicant or the Commission shall deem
relevant relating to the review of the development plan.
b. Urban design narrative including:
1. Development framework and design intentions;
2. Preliminary design guidelines for public and private
development, with discussion of such elements of the plan
as:
(i) Pedestrian environment, streetscape, landscape;
(ii) Building location, appearance, performance;
(iii) Vehicular access, parking, service requirements;
(iv) Infrastructure, including utilities, streets, and
drainage; and
(v) Other elements of the plan, including but not limited
to signage, lighting, outdoor dining, outdoor display
and storage, and nuisances;
3. Statement of maximum development density; and
4. Statement of anticipated development schedule and
phasing.
(3) Development plan review procedure.
a. Distribution of plan. The Department of Community Services
and Development shall distribute copies of the development
plan to the Board of Public Works, Department Public Safety,
City Engineer, Department of leisure and cultural services, and
the Department of Community and Neighborhood. The
development plan shall be reviewed and comments developed
with respect to applicable ordinances and policies and to
assure the safe and efficient delivery of community services.
Upon completion of these reviews, the Department of
Community and Neighborhood shall provide copies of the
comments and findings to the City and Planning Commission.
In the event the proposal includes development within the
floodway or floodplain, the proposal shall be reviewed and
comply with requirements of Chapter 6, Article V, Floodplain
Management Provisions, of this Code.
b. Public hearing. Prior to a decision on the development plan,
the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing to
solicit comments regarding the proposed plan, subject to
publication of notice and mailing of notice to all properties
within 300 feet of the parcel to be developed.
Sec. 39-132 CHARTER Sec. 39-132
C:939
c. Final approval. A determination of approval of the development
plan shall be deemed final when approved by the Planning
Commission. A report of the Planning Commission findings
shall be submitted to City Council. Upon final approval, an
affidavit shall be recorded with the register of deeds by the
applicant, indicating such approval has been granted.
d. Conditions of approval. The approval of the development plan
may be subject to the establishment of reasonable conditions.
Without limitation on the type of conditions to protect the
health, safety, and welfare, the conditions may include, but not
be limited to, restrictions necessary to:
1. Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the
proposed land use or activity be capable of
accommodating increased service loads caused by the
land use or activity;
2. Protect the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy;
3. Ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land including
the business district of the City;
4. Protect the social and economic well-being of those who
will use the land and residents and owners of adjacent
property;
5. Promote the use of land in a socially and economically
desirable manner; and
6. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and
purposes which are affected by the proposed activity.
e. Control of plan, modifications, continued compliance.
1. It is the intent that the development plan, approved in
accordance with the foregoing procedures and standards,
shall be the controlling requirement for development in
this district. Upon approval, the development plan shall be
deemed valid in perpetuity, as it may subsequently be
amended as provided below, and all development shall
substantially comply with the approved development plan.
2. While this approval is intended to assure that conceptual
representations made at the time of development plan
approval are adhered to in actual development, it is not
intended to be so rigid as to prohibit adjustments that do
not affect the basic concept of the plan.
(i) Minor modifications to the development plan,
consistent with the Master Plan, may be allowed upon
approval of the City Council or their designated
Sec. 39-132 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-132
C:940
representative without further Planning Commission
review. Any such approved changes to the
development plan shall be filed with the Department
of Community Services and Development for
distribution to those offices received the initial
distribution of the plan.
(ii) Major modifications to the development plan would
include one or more of the following:
[A] An increase in number of dwelling units or square
footage of commercial space to a maximum of
15% above the original approved total;
[B] The construction of public or private buildings
within areas designated as public park;
[C] Substantial realignment of existing roadways or
development of new roadways; and
[D] The increase or reduction of public parking by
15% or greater.
3. For purposes of this subsection, a building shall be defined
as any permanent structure occupied or intended or
supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
4. Major modifications pursuant to Subsection (c)(3)e2(ii)[A],
[C] and [D] above, where consistent with the Master Plan,
may be allowed upon approval of the Planning Commission
following the review requirements as provided elsewhere
in this section. Major modifications pursuant to Subsection
(c)(3)e2(ii)[B] above, consisting of constructing buildings
within areas designated as public park, where consistent
with the Master Plan, may be allowed upon approval of at
least 3/4 of the membership of the entire Commission.
Such construction shall also be reviewed and approved by
at least seven members of City Council.
5. The approved development plan may identify future
improvements, in which case subsequent plan approval is
unnecessary except where such future improvements vary
from that which is shown on the approved development
plan.
f. Approval of land division. In the event the development plan
requires the division of land, the Planning Commission shall
review and approve the proposed land divisions. This review
shall occur concurrently with the review of the development
plan, with land divisions in a manner compatible with the
Master Plan and in compliance with the applicable City site
condominium requirements (Section 39-27) or Subdivision
Sec. 39-132 CHARTER Sec. 39-132
C:941
Sec. 39-133. Uses and dimensional requirements. [Ord. No. 1213,
6-3-1998; Ord. No. 1482, 10-3-2007]
Sec. 39-134. District requirements and development standards.
[Ord. No. 1213, 6-3-1998]
All development within this district shall adhere to the specific
requirements and preliminary design guidelines as provided for in the
development plan, consistent with the Master Plan. City Council or its
designee shall be responsible for assuring that proposed buildings, streets
and parking, sidewalks, landscaping, and other public and private site
improvements are consistent with the development plan.
Ordinance (Chapter 33). Where inconsistencies exist between
the approved Master Plan and the provisions of Chapter 32
(Streets and Sidewalks), Chapter 33 (Subdivisions), or the
City's requirements for site condominiums referencing
standards and provisions of Chapters 32 and 33, the
requirements of the Master Plan shall prevail.
(a) Permitted uses. Commercial uses shall be permitted in accordance with
Section 39-127. In addition, uses which are consistent with the Master
Plan shall be permitted and include, but are not limited to: residential,
institutional, educational, bed-and-breakfast, light manufacturing,
recreational, service, and tourism uses. City Council or their designee
shall be responsible for assuring that proposed uses are consistent with
the Master Plan.
(b) Dimensional requirements. There are no specific minimum or maximum
dimensional requirements in this zone district. Lot areas, lot
dimensions, setbacks, building heights, and other similar typical
dimensional requirements shall be established consistent with the
Master Plan and generally approved through the review of preliminary
design guidelines of the development plan. City Council or its designee
shall be responsible for assuring that proposed sizes and locations of all
buildings and lots are consistent with those approved preliminary
design guidelines of the development plan.
Sec. 39-132 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-134
C:942
DIVISION 7
C-4 Regional Shopping Center District
Sec. 39-135. Compliance required. [Ord. No. 578; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
Any development in the C-4 Regional Shopping Center District shall comply
with the minimum requirements of Chapter 33 on subdivisions, as amended,
and the Land Division Control Act, being Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of
1967, as amended, except insofar as any of such provisions, in the judgment
of the Planning Commission, work a hardship, apply inequitably or by their
terms apply primarily to residential subdivision development.
Sec. 39-136. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 578; Ord. No. 1016,
2-20-1991; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; Ord.
No. 1387, § 4, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1482, 10-3-2007; amended
5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1628; 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1630]
The C-4 Regional Shopping Center District is to meet the retail shopping
and merchandising needs of the entire community or general region. The
following principal uses are permitted therein:
(1) Retail commercial sales and services, including, but not being limited
to, the following types of uses:
(a) Retail stores.
(b) Personal service stores.
(c) Offices.
(d) Banks.
(e) Movie theaters.
(f) Restaurants.
(g) Motels.
(h) Gasoline sales.
(i) Automotive service businesses.
(j) Sexually oriented businesses.
(k) Sidewalk and outdoor cafes pursuant to Chapter 32.
(2) Municipal parks, municipal recreation areas, and municipal gardens.
(3) Indoor archery or firearm range but only if permitted as a special land
use pursuant to Sections 39-17.1 and 39-17.2.
(4) Light assembly uses but only if permitted as a special land use pursuant
to Sections 39-17.1 and 39-17.3.
Sec. 39-135 CHARTER Sec. 39-136
C:943
Sec. 39-137. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 578; Ord. No. 601; Ord. No.
1016, 2-20-1991; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Within a C-4 District the following uses are prohibited:
Sec. 39-138. Required conditions. [Ord. No. 578; Ord. No. 604; Ord.
No. 689; Ord. No. 822; Ord. No. 979, 6-21-1989; Ord. No. 1016,
2-20-1991; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1340, 7-17-2002;
Ord. No. 1384, 5-12-2004; Ord. No. 1401, 12-15-2004]
The following conditions are required in the C-4 Regional Shopping Center
Zone District:
(5) Accessory uses that are necessary but incidental to any principal uses
such as incidental fabrication, servicing, processing or enclosed
storage of goods are hereby permitted, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) All products fabricated, serviced, processed or stored on the
premises shall be held for sale on such premises.
(b) Automotive service businesses shall be limited to gasoline and oil
sales, car washes, tune-ups, and replacement of minor parts such
as plugs, shock absorbers, mufflers, tail pipes, tires, batteries,
brakes and similar items subject to frequent replacement. Motor
vehicles to be serviced shall be parked within a completely
enclosed structure overnight. Discarded parts and salvage items
shall be stored within a completely enclosed structure. Placement
of outdoor displays of merchandise shall be limited to the pump
island, and all signs shall comply with the sign ordinance provisions
of this chapter.
(a) The killing of animals or fowl.
(b) Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, wholesaling, warehousing,
industrial storage or other industrial uses, except when conducted
accessory to principal retail uses as permitted by Section 39-136.
(c) Mobile home parks and residential use.
(d) Automotive sales whether new or used and automotive servicing,
except as provided in Section 39-136.
(e) Tents, temporary structures and outdoor promotional activities such as
fairs, carnivals or similar outdoor amusements.
(f) Overnight parking of trucks of more than 1 1/2 ton capacity, except in
designated loading spaces.
(g) Any principal or accessory use which constitutes, creates or increases a
nuisance in fact so as to adversely affect a legally conforming use of
adjoining or nearby premises.
Sec. 39-136 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-138
C:944
(a) New uses and expansion of existing uses shall be subject to site plan
review procedures and criteria set forth in Section 39-20 of this
chapter.
(b) Within a C-4 District, the landscape plan required for site plan approval
shall be prepared by a landscape architect, and shall show all landscape
materials or features to be retained as well as provided within the
development. Such landscape plan shall further conform to all other
landscape or screening requirements set forth in this chapter, except
that a maintained landscaped area, consisting of a mixture of trees,
shrubs and perennials separating a parking lot and or building from a
major arterial right-of-way in a C-4 District shall be not less than 25 feet
in width. With respect to the existing C-4 District, this standard is
intended to apply to 16th Street and Waverly Road, or to similar major
arterial streets in any subsequent C-4 District which might be
established.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided as required in Section 39-45, and
loading space as required in Section 39-55.
(d) All businesses, servicing or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed structures, except for the following:
(1) Off-street loading operations;
(2) Automotive service station operations;
(3) Storage and display of merchandise within a fully enclosed fenced
area. Said fencing shall be opaque, shall have a minimum height of
six feet, and shall adequately screen the merchandise within the
fenced area. Alternatively, the Planning Commission may approve
as a component of a site plan review or as a singular issue,
alternative fencing and landscape screening that is sufficiently
comparable to opaque fencing.
(4) The display of seasonal merchandise such as garden, lawn and
recreational supplies shall comply with the following requirements:
a. A sketch plan that indicates the proposed display area shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator and the Community
Services and Development Department for review and
approval. This administrative review is meant to insure
compliance with this section and to insure safe traffic and
pedestrian circulation around and through the display area.
b. The display area shall be no greater than 10% of the total gross
floor area of the main principal building.
c. The display area shall be entirely located within 300 feet of the
main principal building.
d. The display area shall not encroach into any required yard
area.
Sec. 39-138 CHARTER Sec. 39-138
C:945
Sec. 39-139. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 578; Ord. No.
689; Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 1016, 2-20-1991; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within the C-4
Regional Shopping Center Zone District:
e. The use of the display area is allowed from March 15 to
September 1 of each year.
(e) Buildings and structures within a C-4 District, whether principal or
accessory, shall be architecturally integrated and compatible with one
another.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum height of 60 feet.
(b) Setbacks. Building setbacks from major arterial streets shall be no less
than 100 feet. With respect to the existing C-4 District, this requirement
is intended to apply to 16th Street and Waverly Road, or to similar
major arterial streets in any subsequent C-4 District which may be
established. In the case of nonarterial streets within or adjacent to a
C-4 District, building setbacks shall be no less than 50 feet. In all other
instances, rear and side yard setbacks shall be established by the
Planning Commission, taking into consideration the character of the
overall development site and plan, the types of streets and buildings,
and the density and prospective market of the proposed development.
Sec. 39-138 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-139
C:946
DIVISION 7.1
C-5 Professional Office Service District
Sec. 39-140. Intent. [Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 2-2-2000]
The C-5 Professional Office Service District is intended to allow for the
development of a variety of office uses of a business, professional, and
institutional nature, as well as to allow for the development of residential
and institutional uses. It is also the intent of this district to locate office
uses in proximity to highways and major arterial streets, and to encourage
office uses as a transitional use and character between adjacent commercial
and residential land uses. The regulations contained in this division are
designed to insure a harmonious relationship between the uses allowed in
this district and abutting land uses.
Sec. 39-141. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 2-2-2000;
amended Ord. No. 1732]
The following uses are allowed by right in the C-5 District:
Sec. 39-142. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 2-2-2000]
Within any C-5 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
(a) Corporate, executive, and administrative offices.
(b) Medical and dental clinics for the treatment of humans, professional
office of doctor, dentist, lawyer, accountant, realtor, architect, engineer,
business or financial consultant, cosmetologist, or other similar
professional person.
(c) Churches and other places of religious assembly; public park; public
and private educational uses such as a university, college campus, or
business school; and governmental office buildings.
(d) Banks, credit unions, and other financial institutions, including drivethrough
and outdoor automatic teller facilities.
(e) Residential uses that conform to the use, height, and area requirements
of the nearest residential district located on the same side of the street.
When two or more residential districts are of equal distance, then the
least restrictive district shall apply. Residential dwelling units on the
second floor level or higher of a multifloor mixed-use commercial
building are not required to provide residential yard spaces per the
requirements of said residential district.
(f) Short-term rentals as allowed in Chapter 14 with a certificate of
compliance.
(g) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the permitted
principal uses described above.
Sec. 39-140 CHARTER Sec. 39-142
C:947
designed to be used in whole or in part for any of the following prohibited
uses:
Sec. 39-143. Required conditions. [Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 2-2-2000;
Ord. No. 1371, § 6, 10-15-2003]
(a) Every use, which constitutes, creates or increases a nuisance in fact, so
as to adversely affect a legally conforming use of adjoining or nearby
premises.
(b) Any use not permitted by Section 39-141, Permitted uses by right.
(a) All drive through and outdoor ATM facilities associated with a financial
institution shall abide by the building setback requirements, and shall
be screened from any adjacent residentially used or zoned property
with a minimum seven feet of dense and continuous evergreen
landscaping at least six feet high, and/or a solid six-foot high fence
backed up with landscaping. Any outdoor speakers and/or lighting
associated with such facilities shall be directed away from and of an
intensity low enough so as to not create a nuisance to nearby residential
properties. All such drive through and ATM facilities shall also provide
adequate on-site areas for vehicle stacking.
(b) All business, service, or processing shall be conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building. If specifically approved by the Planning
Commission, businesses may be permitted the accessory outside
storage of vehicles and equipment without enclosure when completely
screened or fenced from the view of any adjacent property or street.
(c) For every parking lot used as a principal or accessory use in a C-5
District, the following shall apply:
(1) There shall be provided on lands contiguous to such parking lot an
area or areas of open space, planted and landscaped with natural
vegetation, at a ratio of not less than one square foot of landscape
area for each 10 square feet of parking area.
(2) Where any parking lot exceeds 140 feet in any dimension, it shall
further be required that at least 50% of the required landscaped
open space be provided within the parking lot as opposed to the
perimeter of the lot, so as to mitigate the adverse aesthetic impact
of large masses of uninterrupted blacktop or concrete. The
Planning Commission may approve a transfer of all or part of the
required interior landscaping to other areas of the site.
(3) No parking lot shall be closer than 10 feet to any street right-of-way
or any common line with a residential or residentially zoned use or
property. This 10 feet shall be planted and landscaped with natural
vegetation.
(4) Parking lots shall be located in the side and rear yard areas of
properties, unless the Planning Commission determines that based
Sec. 39-142 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-143
C:948
Sec. 39-144. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 1271, § 1,
2-2-2000; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 3-19-2003]
on health, safety, and welfare concerns the parking lot should be
located in a front yard location. For purposes of this subsection,
any frontage of a property on a street shall be deemed a front yard
area.
(5) Such parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger vehicles, and no commercial repair work, sales or
service of any kind shall be conducted on such parking lot.
(d) Buildings and structures within the C-5 District, whether principal or
accessory, shall be architecturally integrated and compatible with one
another, and if located in a residential or mixed-use neighborhood
context shall have a residential scale and character. The Planning
Commission may use the standards of Section 39-198, Residential infill
regulations, to interpret and evaluate the architectural compatibility of
the proposed commercial or residential structure within the urban
design and architectural context of the site.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum height of 35 feet.
(b) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard extending the entire width of the
building of not less than 10 feet from the street right-of-way line,
provided, that where an existing setback line has been established
by existing commercial buildings occupying 25% or more of the
commercial zoned frontage within two consecutive blocks, such
lessor established setback shall apply. In no case shall a front yard
be greater than 25 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(2) Yard requirements for specific streets. The minimum and maximum
yard requirements for properties with frontage on certain streets
are as follows:
a. 16th Street from the center line of Waverly Road to the center
line of Quarterline Road. There shall be a front yard of not less
than 25 feet and not greater than 100 feet from the street
right-of-way line.
b. 24th Street from the center line of Waverly Road to the center
line of Country Club Road. There shall be a front yard of not
less then 25 feet and not greater than 100 feet from the street
right-of-way line.
(c) Side yard.
(1) No side yard is required, except that where a side yard adjoins an R
Residential District, a residential use, or a side street, a seven-foot
Sec. 39-143 CHARTER Sec. 39-144
C:949
Sec. 39-145. through Sec. 39-149. (Reserved)
yard is required. Side yards on a side street shall not be greater
than 25 feet.
(2) Yard requirements for specific streets. The side yard requirement
for properties with frontage on certain streets are as follows:
a. 16th Street from the center line of Waverly Road to the center
line of Quarterline Road. The minimum side yard is 15 feet.
b. 24th Street from the center line of Waverly Road to the center
line of Country Club Road. The minimum side yard is 15 feet.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a minimum rear yard of 25 feet where
property abuts any R Residential District, or a residential use. A fivefoot
rear yard is required where property abuts a C Commercial District
or I Industrial District.
(e) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not be located in any
required yard, and maximum yard restrictions shall not apply.
(f) Additions to existing structures. Additions or alterations to existing
buildings, conforming in use, that reduce nonconforming front yards or
side yards on a side street shall be permitted without regard to the
maximum yard requirements of this section.
Sec. 39-144 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-145
C:950
DIVISION 8
Sexually Oriented Businesses
Sec. 39-150. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002116; amended
3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADULT ARCADE — An adult arcade means any place to which the public
is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are predominantly distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE — An adult bookstore or
adult video store means a commercial establishment which has a
substantial portion of its stock-in-trade for sale or rent, for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following items:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
pictures, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video tapes, any
material in digital format [including, but not limited to compact discs
(CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs)], greeting cards, or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations or electronic
media or other merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities".
(2)
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended Division 8, adopted by Ord. No. 850, as amended
2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188 and 2-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1236, in its entirety.
Sec. 39-150 CHARTER Sec. 39-150
C:951
ADULT CABARET — An adult cabaret means a nightclub, restaurant, or
other similar commercial establishment which regularly features or
displays:
A commercial establishment may have other stock-in-trade which does
not involve the offering for sale or rental of merchandise depicting or
describing "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"
and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store.
Such other stock-in-trade will not serve to exempt such a commercial
establishment from being characterized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store so long as a substantial portion of the commercial
establishment's stock-in-trade is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified merchandise which is predominantly
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual
activities".
The phrase "substantial portion of its stock-in-trade" shall be
construed with reference to all relevant factors, including, but not
limited to one or more of the following:
(1) Twenty-five percent or more of the commercial establishment's
gross sales area is used for the sale of merchandise which is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas"
or "specified sexual activities". For purposes of this division,
gross sales area is defined as the floor area within the inside
perimeter of the exterior walls of the commercial
establishment, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, storage,
stock, office, and shipping areas, without deduction for
corridors, display fixtures, stairways, public rest rooms, closets,
the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features.
(2) Twenty-five percent or more of the commercial establishment's
stock-in-trade (inventory) is comprised of merchandise which is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas"
or "specified sexual activities".
(3) Twenty-five percent or more of the commercial establishment's
gross revenues are generated by the sale or rental of
merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".
There is a rebuttable presumption that a commercial establishment
constitutes an adult bookstore or adult video store if the commercial
establishment (1) offers or advertises merchandise that is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities" and (2) fails to make revenue and stockin-
trade (inventory) or related business records available to the City
upon reasonable advance notice.
Sec. 39-150 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-150
C:952
ADULT MOTEL — An adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment that:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An adult motion-picture theater
means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, videotapes, any material in digital
format [including, but not limited to compact discs (CDs) or digital video
discs (DVDs)], slides, or similar photographic reproductions or visual media
are regularly featured which are predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to "specified anatomical activities" or "specified sexual activities". This
definition includes, but is not limited to, commercial establishments that
offer individual viewing booths.
ADULT THEATER — An adult theater is a theater, concert hall, auditorium
or similar commercial establishment that regularly features a person or
persons who appear in a state of nudity and/or regularly features a person
or persons in live performances that are predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities".
ESCORT — An escort means a person who, for a fee, tip or any other form of
consideration and regardless of who pays that consideration, agrees to act
or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
Live performances predominantly distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of any "specified anatomical areas" or by any
"specified sexual activities"; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, videotapes, any material in
digital format [including, but not limited to compact discs (CDs) or
digital video discs (DVDs)], slides, other photographic reproductions or
visual media which are predominantly distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any "specified
anatomical areas" or any "specified sexual activities".
(3)
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television (as distinguished
from commercial cable services) transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, videotapes, any material in digital format [including,
but not limited to compact discs (CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs)],
slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas"
or any "specified sexual activities"; and
(1)
Offers a sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or occupant of a
sleeping room to subrent the room, for a period of time that is less than
10 hours.
(2)
Sec. 39-150 CHARTER Sec. 39-150
C:953
ESCORT AGENCY — An escort agency means a person or business
association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
An escort agency is deemed to be operated in the location where (1) a
request for an escort is received, or (2) the escort and the person requesting
the escort are together.
MASSAGE — Massage means any method of applying pressure on, friction
against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or
stimulating the external parts of the body, for remedial or hygienic or
other purposes, with the hands, with or without the aid of any mechanical,
magnetic or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without
supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Massage establishment means any
building, room, place or establishment where body massage is regularly
practiced on the human body, to club members or to the general public, for
a charge. The term "massage establishment" includes, but is not limited to
massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths and steam baths if massages are
performed at those locations. The term "massage establishment" shall not
include:
MATERIAL — Material means anything tangible, whether through the
medium of reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner, including,
but not limited to, anything printed or written, any book, magazine,
newspaper, pamphlet, picture, drawing, pictorial representation, motion
picture, photograph, video tape, video disk, film, transparency, slide,
audiotape, audiodisk, computer tape, holographic images, or any other
medium used to electronically produce or reproduce images on a screen,
or any mechanical, chemical, or electronic reproduction. Material includes
undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and other latent
representational objects whether or not processing or other acts are
(1) Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics;
The office of a state-licensed physician, surgeon, physical therapist,
osteopath or chiropractor;
(2)
The establishment of a barber, manicurist, beautician or cosmetologist
who is duly licensed under the laws of this state, or another state
within the United States, or the federal government, and who practices
within the established limits of his or her license, and who administers
a massage in the normal course of his or her duties in which massages
are administered only to the scalp, face, neck, hands, feet or shoulder;
(3)
The establishment of a myomassaologist who is a current member of
the American Massage Therapy Association or other national massage
therapy organization with comparable prerequisites for certification; or
(4)
A nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool,
tennis court or other educational, cultural, recreational or athletic
facility for the welfare of the residents of the area.
(5)
Sec. 39-150 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-150
C:954
required to make the content of the material apparent. This definition
is intended to include material which is the product of any technology,
whether that technology is available on the effective date of this Ordinance
or becomes available after that date.
MERCHANDISE — Merchandise means material and novelties.
NOVELTY — Novelty means any instrument, device, or paraphernalia which
depicts or describes any "specific anatomical areas" or any "specific sexual
activities," or which is designed for use, or commonly used, in connection
with "specific sexual activities," excluding condoms and other birth control
and disease prevention products.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Nude model studio means any place where a
person who displays "specified anatomical areas" is regularly provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nude Model Studio does not include either of the following:
PREDOMINANTLY DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN
EMPHASIS ON — "Predominantly distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on" means the dominant or essential theme of the object
described by such phrase.
PUBLIC NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY — Public nudity or state of nudity
means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or in any
other place for payment or promise of payment by any person, including,
but not limited to payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any
individual's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus or anal cleft with less than a
fully opaque covering, a female individual's breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of the nipple and areola, or the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state. Public nudity does not include any of the following:
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — Sexual encounter center means a
business or commercial establishment, except that which is part of the
practice of and under the supervision and control of a physician,
An educational institution funded, chartered or recognized by the State
of Michigan; or
(1)
Any modeling session for a local, nonprofit organization, that is not
open to the public or to any persons other than members of the
organization, that is for the purpose of instruction in the artistic
depiction in two-dimensional or three-dimensional media of the human
form, during which no "specified sexual activities" occur and during
which the model remains in a fixed pose.
(2)
A woman's breast-feeding of an infant shall not under any
circumstances constitute public nudity irrespective of whether the
nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding.
(1)
Any display of any part of the anatomy occurring as part of the regular
curriculum of an educational institution that is funded, chartered, or
recognized by the State of Michigan.
(2)
Sec. 39-150 CHARTER Sec. 39-150
C:955
psychologist or psychiatrist licensed to practice in the State of Michigan,
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Sexually oriented business means a
business or commercial establishment engaging in any of the following
businesses: (a) adult arcade; (b) adult bookstore or adult video store; (c)
adult cabaret; (d) adult motel; (e) adult motion-picture theater; (f) adult
theater; (g) escort agency; (h) nude model studio; or (i) sexual encounter
center. Each of these businesses shall constitute a separate sexually
oriented business.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Specified anatomical areas means:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Specified sexual activities means:
Sec. 39-151. Applicability of division. [Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002;
amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Section 39-150, shall be subject
to the regulations of this division. A massage establishment, as defined in
Section 39-150, is not subject to the regulations of this division.
Sec. 39-152. License and public hearing prerequisite. Amended
3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
A use specified in Section 39-151 shall not be conducted, nor shall a
building permit or certificate of occupancy be issued by the Building
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or exposes
or displays any "specified anatomical areas."
(2)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or a female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola, but not including any portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is
not exposed; and
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
(2)
The fondling or any other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
(2)
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in (1) or (2) above.
(3)
Sec. 39-150 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-152
C:956
Official, until the applicant has obtained a license as required by Chapter 40
of this Code and a public hearing has been conducted in accordance with
Section 39-409 of this chapter.
Sec. 39-153. Permitting as special exceptions—General restrictions.
[Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
A use specified in Section 39-151 shall be allowed as a special exception
use, subject to the following restrictions:
Sec. 39-154. Same—Applicant to comply with certain standards.
[Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
The Zoning Board shall grant a special exception to allow a use specified
in Section 39-151 of this chapter if the applicant complies with each of the
following:
(a) The nature of the use must be permitted in the zoned district where it is
proposed to be located, either C-2 or C-4.
(b) Within 60 days of the filing of an application for a special exception to
allow a use specified in Section 39-151, a public hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 39-409 of this chapter, and the
decision of the Zoning Board shall be in accordance with the standards
set forth pursuant to Section 39-82 of this chapter.
(a) The proposed use is not an accessory or incidental use in any zoned
district, instead, the proposed use is a principal use to the extent
permitted within a designated zoned district, subject to the regulations
of this chapter or other statutes, codes or ordinances.
(b) The proposed use is not located or operated within 500 feet of a church,
synagogue, mosque, temple or regular place of worship; public or
private nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, elementary or
secondary school; public park; licensed child-care center;
entertainment business that is oriented primarily toward children or
family entertainment; the boundary of any residential district; or any
residential use not located within a residential district, and the
proposed use is not located within 1,000 feet of another sexually
oriented business.
(1) For purposes of this subsection, the separation distance between a
sexually oriented business and a use listed in this subsection shall
be measured from the sexually oriented business structure to the
boundary line of the use or district in which the other use is located
and the separation distance between a sexually oriented business
and another sexually oriented business shall be measured from one
sexually oriented business' lot line to the other sexually oriented
business' lot line.
(2) If any portion of the building or structure in which the sexually
oriented business is located fails to meet the separation distance
Sec. 39-152 CHARTER Sec. 39-154
C:957
Sec. 39-155. Same—Referral of application for administrative
review. [Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1727]
Prior to the granting of a special exception, the Zoning Board shall refer
copies of the application to the Planning Commission, office of the City
Engineer, City Manager, Environmental Health and Human Services, City
Assessor, Police Department, Fire Department and Board of Public Works
for review and recommendation.
Sec. 39-156. Same—Conditions or limitations imposed by Zoning
Board. [Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No.
1727]
The Zoning Board may impose such conditions or limitation upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the uses
permitted pursuant to Section 39-154 as shall be necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the City or adjacent
and adjoining properties.
requirements of this subsection, then the entire building or
structure shall be ineligible for a sexually oriented business use.
(3) The presence or existence of a City, county or other political
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating
and applying the separation distance requirements of this
subsection.
(4) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the location or
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business, of a church,
synagogue, mosque, temple or regular place of worship, a public or
private nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, elementary or
secondary school, a public park, a licensed child-care center, an
entertainment business that is oriented primarily toward children
or family entertainment, or another sexually oriented business.
(c) The proposed use is not located or operated in the same building,
structure or portion thereof of another sexually oriented business.
(d) Signs for a sexually oriented business comply with the requirements of
Article IX of this chapter, and no sign shall contain any words, lettering,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of a
sexually explicit manner, or of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified
sexual activities."
(e) The activities to be conducted or the materials to be distributed shall
not be in violation of any applicable statute, code or ordinance.
Sec. 39-154 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-157
C:958
Sec. 39-157. Severability. [Ord. No. 1342, 8-7-2002; 3-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 1727]
The various parts, sections and clauses of this ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 39-158. through Sec. 39-164. (Reserved)
Sec. 39-157 CHARTER Sec. 39-158
C:959

DIVISION 9
PUD Planned Unit Development District
Sec. 39-165. Findings and intent. [Ord. No. 1585, 5-16-2012117]
There exist in the City properties which are not ideal for traditional
residential, commercial or industrial development. This may be due to
land conditions, topography or as a response to the economic environment
of the City of Holland. It is the purpose and intent of this division to
provide a degree of flexibility for development not attainable in the other
zoning divisions. Promotion of this division will ensure architecturally
complementary design, significant areas of green space with maintained
landscaping, compatible uses within the development and amenities
provided for employers, employees, residents of the area and users of the
facilities provided to the public.
The parcel shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners
and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit.
Application for a PUD District must be made with the written authorization
of all owners of the site or may be initiated by the City. The designation
of a PUD District requires adherence with the zoning ordinance as well as
the provisions stated herewith including a public hearing for rezoning and
development plan review.
Sec. 39-166. Specifically permitted uses. [Ord. No. 1585, 5-16-2012;
amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1598; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727;
Ord. No. 1732]
The following uses, either separately or in conjunction with the delineated
uses, are permitted in a PUD District:
(a) Cooperative, condominium or apartment residences.
(b) Single-family, duplexes, cluster housing, zero-lot-line housing.
(c) Nursing homes, retirement homes, licensed day-care facilities.
(d) All uses permitted by Section 39-210 with required setbacks to be
determined by the Planning Commission.
(e) Executive, professional or administrative offices.
(f) Medical or dental clinics, dispensaries, therapy or treatment centers or
hospitals and those uses typically associated with a hospital.
(g) Radio and television broadcasting stations, excluding towers.
(h) Financial institutions.
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Division 9, adopted 4-6-1988 by Ord.
No. 941, as amended 9-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1120; 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188; 11-19-1997
by Ord. No. 1202; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 1238; 5-23-2001 by Ord. Nos. 1298 and
1303;9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 1348, 11-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1354; 6-2-2004 by Ord. No.
1387; and 5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 1475.
Sec. 39-165 CHARTER Sec. 39-166
C:961
(i) Retail sales and services.
(j) Hotels or motels; accredited overnight sleeping establishments.
(k) Restaurants.
(l) Athletic and fitness clubs.
(m) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted in Subsections (a) through (l) of this section, provided that
such uses are in conjunction with an existing permitted use on the
premises, and provided further that such accessory uses shall not
constitute, create or increase a nuisance in fact which adversely affects
a legal use of adjoining or nearby premises.
(n) All processing or storage of merchandise and materials shall be
conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. Businesses
and service uses may be permitted without enclosure upon approval by
the Planning Commission where appropriate.
(o) Mini-warehouses.
(1) Mini-warehouses only on those portions of the property lying within
300 feet of the right-of-way of US 31. For purposes of this section
and Section 39-25, "mini-warehouse" is defined as a building or
group of buildings in a controlled-access, fenced and screened
compound that contains relatively small storage spaces of varying
sizes and/or spaces having individual, compartmentalized and
controlled access for the dead storage of excess personal property
of an individual or family generally stored in residential structures,
when such building or group of buildings are not located on the lot
of the residence. This may include the indoor and/or outdoor
storage of personally owned recreational vehicles, boats, and
trailers. Said outdoor storage areas shall be covered with a durable
hard surface and shall comprise no more than 15% of the total
property area.
(2) The facilities may also be utilized for storage of goods and
materials of a commercial business, provided that access to such
facilities is necessary only on an occasional basis. The facility is for
storage only, and in no event may the buildings or property be
utilized for repairs, assembly, fabrication, processing activities, or
wholesale sales. No retail sales may be conducted on-site without
prior Planning Commission review and approval of any such
change of use for compliance with PUD and site plan requirements.
(p) Wholesale and warehousing businesses with total gross floor areas of
25,000 square feet and less, only on those portions of the property lying
within 300 feet of the right-of-way of US 31.
(q) Parking facilities; outdoor, open-air and/or enclosed or partially
enclosed markets; community festival places; and special event venues.
Sec. 39-166 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-166
C:962
Sec. 39-167. Conditionally approved permitted uses. [Ord. No.
1585, 5-16-2012; amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1598]
(r) Sidewalk and outdoor cafes pursuant to Chapter 32, and pursuant to
the enclosure requirements of Section 39-25.
(s) Short-term rentals as allowed in Chapter 14 with a certificate of
compliance if this use has been approved by the Planning Commission
as part of the site plan.
(a) Background for industrial uses. The land described in Subsection (b)(1)
is uniquely located between land otherwise zoned for industrial uses
and is suited for those industrial uses described in Subsection (c) of this
section if regulated as a planned unit development so as to avoid
negative impact on public infrastructure and those commercial uses in
the area.
(b) Conditions for industrial use. The uses described in Subsection (c) are
permitted uses in a PUD District if the Planning Commission
determines that the following conditions are present:
(1) The subject property has frontage on Waverly Road and is located
south of 48th Street and north of I-196;
(2) The minimum size of the property is one acre;
(3) All uses will conform to the environmental guidelines of Section
39-86.
(4) All processing or storage of materials will be conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building. Exterior refuse and
recycling areas are permitted when dumpsters and containers are
fully screened with an opaque fence.
(c) Permitted industrial uses. The uses permitted under this section
include:
(1) Manufacturing, development, fabrication, compounding,
processing, assembly or treatment of materials, substances or
objects.
(2) Offices, research, testing or development facilities.
(3) Wholesale, storage or warehousing businesses.
(4) Processing, packaging, distribution or servicing of industrial
equipment, supplies, materials or products.
(5) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted in this section, provided that such uses are in
conjunction with an existing permitted use on the premises, and
provided further that such accessory uses shall not constitute,
Sec. 39-166 CHARTER Sec. 39-167
C:963
create or increase a nuisance in fact which adversely affects a legal
use of adjoining or nearby premises.
(d) Background for automotive/vehicular and machinery sales and service
uses. The land described in Subsection (e)(1) is uniquely located along a
gateway corridor entering the City in the vicinity of land used for the
conditionally permitted use described herein but also immediately
adjoining land planned and zoned for future residential and
neighborhood center development and therefore conditionally
appropriate for those uses described in Subsection (f) of this section if
regulated as a planned unit development so as to avoid negative impact
on public infrastructure and those neighborhood commercial and
residential uses planned in the area.
(e) Conditions for automotive/vehicular and machinery sales and service
use. The uses described in Subsection (c) are permitted uses in a PUD
District if the Planning Commission determines that the following
conditions are present:
(1) The subject property is south of I-196 and east of and within 400
feet of M-40.
(2) Buildings containing such uses shall not be limited in size except as
restrained by setback requirements.
(3) Such uses displayed, sold or serviced outside [subject to Section
39-26(f)] shall:
a. Only be allowed within the site area beginning at forty-foot
setback from the street right-of-way and extending back to the
four-hundred-foot setback line;
b. Occupy not more than 50% of the lot width frontage in the area
defined between the forty-foot setback and eighty-foot setback;
c. Be screened, landscaped and bermed in accordance with the
overlay requirements (already in the ordinance in separate
Section 39-341) and portions of the site between 40 feet and 80
feet in setback between the street, and such uses shall be
further landscaped and screened as determined during site
plan review;
d. Shall be screened continuously with fencing and landscaping
along portions of property abutting residentially zoned or used
property; and
e. Be located on a paved and durable surface.
f. The driveway and paved area within 40 feet of the right-of-way
shall be no wider than the width of the curb cut as approved by
MDOT.
Sec. 39-167 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-167
C:964
Sec. 39-168. Specifically prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 1585,
5-16-2012; amended 11-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1598]
Sec. 39-169. Establishment. [Ord. No. 1585, 5-16-2012]
PUD Districts may be established by initiative of the Planning Commission
and the City Council or may be established by application and approval,
in accordance with procedures of this Code. In either case, the use of any
lands within a PUD District shall be contingent upon the submission and
approval of a development plan and the faithful adherence to that plan. The
development plan approval of a PUD shall supersede and be in lieu of any
other plan review process of this chapter. In the case of an application for
rezoning to a PUD District, the approval of a zone change and the approval
of a development plan shall proceed concurrently. In cases where a PUD
District is existing, a development plan shall be approved by the Planning
Commission prior to issuance of a building permit. Where the scope of a
PUD District indicates development may incorporate several distinct types
of land use, or may span several years, a project plan for the site shall
be presented in its entirety and development plans may be approved in
phases. In the event of a proposed subdivision within a PUD District, the
preliminary plat submitted and approved shall be deemed the subdivision
plan and subsequent development plan review in accordance of this chapter
shall proceed. Except for lot size and area requirements, all applicable
provisions of Chapter 33 shall apply to a subdivision within a PUD District.
In considering approval or disapproval of a plan, the standards set forth in
Section 39-24 shall be applied.
(f) Permitted automotive/vehicular and machinery sales and service uses.
The uses permitted under this section include:
(1) Automobile, truck, recreational vehicles, bus, or other on-road or
off-road vehicles.
(2) Boats or other similar vehicles.
(3) Trailers or other accessory conveyances typically pulled by such
vehicles noted in Subsection (f)(1) and (2) above.
(4) Machinery sales and services.
(a) Mobile home parks.
(b) Automotive and machinery sales and service, except for automotive and
machinery sales and services located south of I-196 and east of and
within 400 feet of the M-40 right-of-way.
(c) Facilities that produce hazards to the public in the form of noxious
odors, excessive radiation, dirt, heat, noise or vibrations which are
perceptible without instrument at the building exterior; or other
potential hazards or nuisances. In applying this criteria, environmental
guidelines of Section 39-74 shall be applicable.
Sec. 39-167 CHARTER Sec. 39-170
C:965
Sec. 39-170. Development plan review. [Ord. No. 1585, 5-16-2012]
All developments in a PUD zone district shall be reviewed in accordance
with Sections 39-20 through 39-27 of this chapter.
Sec. 39-171. Compliance with overlay district requirements. [Ord.
No. 1585, 5-16-2012]
The portions of a property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay
district per Article VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the
requirements of the applicable overlay district.
Sec. 39-172. Minimum residential densities. [Ord. No. 1585,
5-16-2012]
Where the lot is served by, or is otherwise available to, a public sewer
system, and when a planned unit development exclusively consists of
residential land uses, there shall be a minimum allowable residential
density of greater than three dwelling units per acre. Where the lot is not
served by, or is not otherwise available to, a public sewer system, and when
a planned unit development exclusively consists of residential land uses,
there shall be a minimum allowable density of greater than two dwelling
units per acre.
Sec. 39-173. through Sec. 39-184. (Reserved)
Sec. 39-170 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-173
C:966
ARTICLE VII
Residential District Regulations
DIVISION 1
General Provisions Applicable to Residential Districts
Sec. 39-185. Height and area regulations and exceptions. [Ord. No.
464, § 9-1.12; Ord. No. 975, 3-1-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1231, 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 1268, 1-19-2000; Ord. No.
1383, 5-12-2004; Ord. No. 1558, 2-2-2011; amended 6-5-2013 by
Ord. No. 1606; 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 1650; 10-7-2015 by Ord. No.
1656; 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1669; Ord. No. 1698; 4-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 1731; 8-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1741]
Height and area regulations shall be specified for each residential district;
provided, however, that the following general exceptions are made:
(a) If 40% or more of all the frontage on one side of a street, between two
intersecting streets, is developed with one- and two-family residences,
the lesser front yard setback so established shall prevail, but nothing in
this division shall be construed to permit any new house closer than five
feet to the front street line. Except where compliance with infill
residential standards of Section 39-198 requires a greater setback, this
section shall not require a front yard greater than that required for the
zone district.
(b) Accessory buildings, except in the PRD Planned Residential
Development District.
(1) No accessory building shall be erected in any required front yard.
(2) Accessory buildings shall be located at least three feet from any
dwelling and at least three feet from any other accessory building
on the lot.
(3) A maximum of two accessory buildings per residential lot less than
two acres in size and a maximum of four accessory buildings per
lots two acres in size or greater shall be permitted.
(4) Accessory buildings shall not exceed 17 feet in average roof height
unless the property is located within an historic district and may be
eligible for additional average roof height per compliance with
Section 39-185(g).
Sec. 39-185 CHARTER Sec. 39-185
C:967
(5) The minimum roof pitch of an accessory building shall be 3/12.
(6) The roof construction shall be such that the use of upper story or
attic space is not usable for any purpose other than light storage.
The bottom chord of the trusses or the ceiling joists shall be
designed for a live load not to exceed 20 pounds per square foot.
This Subsection (b)(6) shall not apply if the upper story is approved
as a second floor ADU.
(c) Accessory buildings in residential districts 50 feet or more from any
street line are permitted two feet from the lot line and, where such use
is contained within or constitutes an integral part of the main building
or is less than 50 feet from any street line, it shall meet all side yard
requirements except as modified in Subsections (d) and (e) of this
section.
(d) In the R-TRN District, accessory buildings and additions to principal
buildings that are located on corner lots and designed for the storage of
vehicles shall have a minimum front yard of 16 feet, except where
vehicle access to an accessory building on a corner lot is from a public
alley, the setback may be reduced to the minimum side yard on a side
street as a condition of a residential infill review.
(e) In the R-TRN District, all new accessory buildings and additions to
principal buildings that are located on corner lots will require a
residential infill review pursuant to Section 39-198.
(f) In the application of these and other residential standards to residential
properties within an historic district, the Zoning Board is hereby
authorized to modify such standards as special exceptions upon public
hearing thereon and a determination from evidence that:
(1) A certificate of appropriateness, conditioned upon zoning approval,
has been issued by the Historic District Commission.
(2) All other requirements of building, fire safety, or other applicable
codes have been met.
Sec. 39-185 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-185
C:968
(3) The granting of such exception would not be detrimental to the
health, safety, welfare, or reasonable use and enjoyment of
adjoining or nearby premises.
(g) Accessory dwelling unit.
(1) An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a separate, complete
housekeeping unit with kitchen, sleeping area, and full bathroom
facilities, which is a detached from a single-family structure. For
purposes of Section 39-210, a property with a single-family
residence with an ADU permitted by special exception shall be
deemed one single-family use permitted under Section 39-210(a).
(2) All structures designed and used as a temporary or permanent
dwelling detached from a single-family primary residence on a lot
shall be considered an accessory dwelling unit (ADU). ADUs with
not more than two occupants shall be permitted as a special
exception use by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) An attached ADU will be considered as a conversion, and shall fully
comply with the requirements of Section 39-189.
(4) ADUs shall not provide transient accommodations for periods of
less than one month.
(5) Establishment, regulations and conditions. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may grant a special exception to allow for the construction
of a building as an accessory dwelling unit when all of the following
conditions exist:
a. The ADU shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to the
residential infill regulations, Section 39-198, prior to Zoning
Board determination.
b. An applicant seeking permission to establish an accessory
dwelling unit shall submit a site plan of the lot indicating the
location of the accessory dwelling unit and delineating areas
designated for improved off-street parking. Approval by the
Zoning Board shall be conditioned upon strict compliance with
the site plan relating to parking and development.
c. The Zoning Board shall determine the amount and level of
required off-street parking as a condition to the grant of the
special exception, considering the increased use, density, and
safety of vehicular traffic movements on the proposed lot
pursuant to the requirements of Section 39-48.
d. The applicant shall submit a floor plan showing that the ADU
includes a kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area, and shall
meet all provisions of the Michigan Residential Code and
Chapter 14 of the Holland City Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 39-185 CHARTER Sec. 39-185
C:969
e. The ADU is compatible and harmonious with the established
character of adjoining and nearby residentially developed
lands, and no such ADU shall be approved which would, in the
opinion of the Board, have a detrimental effect on the
reasonable enjoyment of adjoining properties. In making a
determination of compatibility, the Zoning Board shall consider
such factors as:
1. The ADU shall not result in excessive traffic, parking
congestion, or noise.
2. The placement, orientation, and location, of windows and
doors of the ADU will not infringe on the privacy of the
surrounding neighborhood.
3. Adequate landscaping and/or a six-foot-high solid board
fence shall be installed to screen the ADU from the
surrounding neighborhood.
4. No more than two persons shall occupy an ADU.
5. The Zoning Board may approve an ADU subject to such
additional conditions or restrictions as it deems necessary
to assure compatibility with adjoining or nearby
residential property, or to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare.
f. The applicant shall present evidence that the principal
structure on the property is a single-family home.
g. No more than one ADU shall be permitted on a single parcel.
h. Where an ADU is located on a parcel, only one additional
accessory structure shall be allowed except as provided in
Section 39-185(b)(1) for lots exceeding two acres in size.
i. The finding of fact and conclusions of law of the Zoning Board
approving the ADU shall be recorded with the register of deeds
of Ottawa County or Allegan County in which the property is
situated. Any fees incurred for compliance with this section
shall be paid by the applicant.
(6) Development standards.
a. The ADU shall be connected to the City sewer and water
services.
b. An ADU may only be located in a residential zone district.
c. An ADU will not be permitted in the area defined as the Hope
Neighborhood Area.
d. The ADU will have a minimum living space footprint of 120
square feet and a maximum footprint of 720 square feet.
Sec. 39-185 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-185
C:970
Sec. 39-186. Site plan review. [Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; amended
3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
Due to the possible impact of certain developments on residential areas, the
Planning Commission shall conduct a site plan review in accordance with
the provisions of Article II of this chapter when required by Section 39-21.
Sec. 39-187. Minimum residential standards, except in PRD
Planned Residential Development District. [Ord. No. 801; Ord. No.
e. A detached ADU may be located on the first or second floor
level of a structure. If the ADU is located on the first floor level,
the ADU shall have a maximum average height of 12 feet. If the
ADU is located on the second-floor level of a structure, the
structure shall have a maximum average height of 24 feet.
f. The ADU shall not exceed 1/3 of the footprint of the main
structure.
g. An ADU shall not be located in any front yard.
h. The setback for the ADU to the side and rear yard property
lines shall meet or exceed the minimum setbacks established
for side yard setback of a principal structure in the zone
district in which it is located. On a corner lot, the full side yard
on a side street requirement shall meet or exceed the minimum
setback established for the principal structure in the zone
district in which it is located.
i. Before obtaining a building permit the property owner shall file
with the Zoning Administrator a copy of declaration of
restrictions, recorded with the county Register of Deeds,
containing a reference to the deed under which the property
was acquired by the present owner which will state the
following:
1. The use permit for the accessory unit shall be in effect only
so long as either the main residence or the ADU is
occupied as the principal residence by the owner.
2. The unit is restricted to the approved size.
3. The accessory unit shall not be sold separately.
4. All above declarations shall run with the land, and are
binding upon any successor in ownership.
5. The deed restriction shall only lapse on the demolition of
the ADU.
(7) A property with an ADU shall not also have a short-term rental on
the same parcel.
Sec. 39-185 CHARTER Sec. 39-187
C:971
975, 3-1-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; amended 6-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 1669]
(a) In order to assure a minimum degree of harmony among residential
structures, the following standards shall apply to residential structures
as specified:
(1) No principal structure shall have a habitable floor area of less than
720 square feet. For purposes of this subsection, the term
"habitable" shall include bathrooms, closets, halls and areas of
similar use.
(2) No principal structure shall have a minimum dimension of less than
24 feet along any horizontal elevation of the principal structure.
(3) No principal structure shall be erected which does not include a
pitched roof, having a slope of not less than three inches of rise for
each 12 inches of horizontal dimension, over at least 60% of the
principal structure.
(4) No principal structure shall be erected except upon and
permanently affixed to a solid and continuous foundation of brick,
block, concrete or wood, in accordance with building code
regulations of the City of Holland.
(5) No structure shall be erected or placed which does not comply in
all respects with the building code, the housing code, this chapter
and all other regulations of this Code applicable to the development
and maintenance of residential premises.
(b) For any development which is multiple-family in nature and numbers 12
dwelling units or more in any configuration, the development shall
include a minimum of 50% of the area to be green space. This green
space would be any land area not covered with impervious ground
cover, buildings, roadways, parking installations. The green space shall
be natural vegetation, grass, plantings, pedestrian walkways,
recreational facilities or natural water feature. Stones, wood chips,
walks, sculpture, or similar material or installation may be included as
accessory components of landscaped areas, but shall not in and of
themselves be considered as landscaping. The green space shall be
maintained to provide attractive landscaping and be in compliance with
the provisions of the Charter and Code of the City of Holland.
(c) The foregoing provisions of Subsection (a) above shall not be applicable
to mobile homes placed on rented sites in licensed mobile home parks,
so long as the state maintains jurisdiction for the licensing of such
parks and the operators thereof.
(d) It is not intended that the provisions of Subsection (a) above shall
inhibit or prevent quality design or innovation in housing styles. The
Zoning Board is hereby authorized to approve deviations from
Subsection (a) as special exceptions upon a determination that the
Sec. 39-187 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-187
C:972
Sec. 39-188. Premanufactured housing. [Ord. No. 801; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1310, 8-1-2001]
Sec. 39-189. Conversion of buildings and dwellings, except in PRD
Planned Residential Development District. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.12;
granting of such special exception shall not be materially detrimental to
the use, enjoyment or value of adjoining premises. In hearing appeals
for special exceptions, the Zoning Board shall consider whether the
specific structure has been designed for a specific site by an architect
or other competent design professional, or incorporates solar heating
or other design innovations which would make strict adherence to the
provisions of Subsection (a) impractical.
(a) Generally. In recognition of improved technology, the need for economic
housing and changing legislative and judicial attitudes toward the
regulation of housing, it is understood that some housing needs may be
met by structures which are constructed in part or in full off-site, and
are transported to a building site for permanent placement.
Premanufactured housing shall be permitted as permanent dwellings in
accordance with the requirements of Section 39-187 and all other
applicable ordinances or statutes. In addition, the exterior of any such
dwelling shall be free of any visible apparatus or equipment relating to
means of transport, including, but not limited to, towing tongues,
undercarriage, wheels, bumpers, lifting hooks or vehicular lighting.
(b) Aesthetic standards. Premanufactured homes shall be constructed and
placed on residential lots in conformance with community aesthetic
standards. The Zoning Board, upon application and public hearing
thereon, shall determine if the proposed mobile home is in conformity
with community aesthetic standards. The Zoning Board shall consider
and prepare findings of fact regarding each of the following criteria:
(1) Whether the type, structure and architectural design of the
proposed mobile home is compatible with the type, structure and
architectural design of reasonably adjacent and contiguous
residential structures;
(2) Whether the exterior appearance, style, roof overhang, window
placement and door arrangement of the proposed mobile home is
compatible with reasonably adjacent and contiguous residential
structures; and
(3) Whether the proposed location of the mobile home and accessory
structures shall be injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the
proposed mobile home or surrounding property.
(c) Exemption. All premanufactured housing that is certified by the State of
Michigan, pursuant to MCLA § 125.1519 Section 19.(1), shall be exempt
from Section 39-188(b).
Sec. 39-187 CHARTER Sec. 39-189
C:973
Ord. No. 885; Ord. No. 910, 9-3-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1415, § 4, 6-1-2005; amended 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1669]
The conversion of an existing building into a dwelling, or conversion of
any existing dwelling to increase the number of dwelling units, shall be
permitted only as a special exception use, approved by the Zoning Board
following a public hearing, and upon the finding of compliance with the
following criteria and standards:
(a) An applicant seeking a conversion of a building or dwelling shall submit
a site plan of the lot delineating areas designated for improved offstreet
parking. Approval by the Zoning Board shall be conditioned upon
strict compliance with the site plan relating to parking and
development.
(b) An applicant seeking exterior alterations or additions to the building or
dwelling shall submit drawings or renderings specifically describing
and delineating the proposed improvements. Approval by the Zoning
Board shall be conditioned upon strict compliance with the drawings or
renderings relating to exterior alterations or additions.
(c) The Zoning Board shall permit the conversion of a building or dwelling
if:
(1) The applicant has presented reasonable evidence that the proposed
conversion will not adversely affect adjacent and adjoining
property because of the increased use, density, and proposed offstreet
parking layout.
(2) The conversion shall conform in all respects with housing, building,
plumbing, heating, and electrical codes, including the historic
district regulations, zoning ordinances, and any other codes or
regulations of the City applicable to the creation, operation, or
rental of residential dwelling units.
(3) The proposed conversion conforms with the requirements of
Sections 39-282, 39-224, 39-234, 39-269, and 39-279 where
applicable and is a permitted use in the zone district in which the
dwelling shall be located.
(4) No conversion shall be allowed which involves exterior alterations
or additions which are not architecturally harmonious and
compatible with the structure being converted, or with other
residential structures in the general vicinity.
(5) The Zoning Board shall determine the amount and level of required
off-street parking as a condition to the grant of the special
exception, considering the increased use, density, and safety of
vehicular traffic movements on the proposed lot pursuant to the
requirements of Section 39-48.
Sec. 39-189 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-189
C:974
Sec. 39-190. Nonconforming uses of converted dwellings and
buildings. [Ord. No. 910, 9-3-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 39-189, no provision of this Code
shall be interpreted, construed, or determined to authorize or permit the
use of a dwelling or building for multifamily uses or occupancy which was
not lawfully existing and permitted on the effective date of the adoption of
Section 39-189.
Sec. 39-191. Rear dwellings, except in PRD Planned Residential
Development District. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.12; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 1650; 6-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 1669]
No accessory building, other than an accessory dwelling unit reviewed and
approved in accordance with Section 39-185, in the rear of a main building
on the same lot shall be used for residential purposes.
Sec. 39-192. Home occupations and home businesses. [Ord. No.
1366, § 2, 8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1525,
1-7-2009]
(6) The Zoning Board may approve the conversion of a building or
dwelling subject to such additional conditions or restrictions as it
deems necessary to assure compatibility with adjoining or nearby
residential property, or to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare.
(d) The findings of fact and conclusions of law of the Zoning Board
approving the conversion of a building or dwelling shall be recorded
with the register of deeds of Ottawa County or Allegan County in which
the property is situated. Any fees incurred for compliance with this
section shall be paid by the applicant.
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to protect residential areas from any
significant impacts associated with home occupations and businesses,
and to establish criteria and standards for conducting home
occupations and businesses within residential zone districts. The intent
of this section is also to allow and encourage residents to pursue
greater business and financial independence and resources through the
creation of home occupations and home based businesses. Home
occupations and businesses provide a wide range of business
opportunities for the residents of this community as well as being
potential incubators for larger future commercial businesses that may
enhance the economic development of the City of Holland and the
larger Holland area.
(b) Home occupation and home business special exception permit
procedures and enforcement.
Sec. 39-189 CHARTER Sec. 39-192
C:975
(1) Approval procedure for home occupations. A home occupation is
permitted by right subject to the conditions of Section 39-192(c).
No special exception permit is required.
(2) Special exception permit procedure for Type 1 home businesses.
a. Applications for Type 1 home businesses shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a special exception
permit for such a home business that complies with Section
39-192(d) within 15 calendar days. This review period may be
extended upon mutual consent of the Zoning Administrator
and the applicant.
c. Appeals of a Zoning Administrator decision shall be made to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall affirm, overturn, or modify the original decision of the
Zoning Administrator after holding a public hearing and
conducting a thorough review of the record.
(3) Special exception permit procedure for Type 2 home businesses.
a. Applications for Type 2 home businesses shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing and
shall evaluate and make a decision regarding the application
pursuant to Section 39-192(e).
c. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a special exception
permit for a Type 2 home business upon approval by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Enforcement.
a. Inspections. All home occupations and Type 1 and Type 2 home
businesses are subject to inspections.
b. Violations. Violation of the applicable requirements set forth in
Section 39-192(c) through (e) shall be deemed as a violation of
this section and shall constitute grounds for revocation of a
Type 1 or Type 2 home business special exception permit.
c. Notice. Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that
there has been or is a violation, or that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been or is a violation, of any
provision of this section he shall give notice of such violation or
alleged violation to the person responsible therefore. Such
notice shall:
1. Be in writing;
Sec. 39-192 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-192
C:976
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
3. Specify the violation which exists, the remedial action
required, and the penalty for noncompliance being the
revocation of the special exception permit; and
4. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
d. Noncompliance with specified required remedial action;
required hearing. In case any violation is not remedied within
the time set forth in the notice, the Zoning Administrator may
schedule a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals to
consider revoking the special exception authorizing a home
business. The person subject to the required remedial action
may appear and present evidence in response to the
enforcement notice. During the hearing, the Zoning
Administrator or designated representative shall specify the
violation(s) that exists and the remedial action required, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall then determine whether to
revoke the special exception permit, allow additional time to
remedy the violation or impose additional conditions to remedy
the violation(s).
e. Civil infraction. In addition to revocation described in
Subsection d., of this section, a person who violates or fails to
comply with any provisions of this section is responsible for a
class II municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines
set forth in the schedule of fees and charges adopted in Section
2-118 of this Code or any other relief that may be imposed by
the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(5) Registration of Type 1 and Type 2 home business special exception
permits. Commencing one calendar year after the initial approval
of the Type 1 and Type 2 home business special exception permits,
and then every two calendar years thereafter, the permit holder
shall be required to register their home based business with the
City on a form to be supplied by the City. Said form will state the
terms and conditions of the original special exception permit and/
or attach a copy of said permit, and require the permit holder to
attest their compliance with the terms and conditions of the special
exception permit. Failure on behalf of a special exception permit
holder to file the required registration may result in the
termination of the Type 1 or Type 2 home business special
exception permit.
(6) Expiration of Type 1 and Type 2 home business special exception
permits. Upon the cessation of a home business for a period of 180
Sec. 39-192 CHARTER Sec. 39-192
C:977
days, the Type 1 or Type 2 home business special exception permit
shall expire and be of no further effect.
(c) Home occupation general requirements and performance criteria. All
home occupations shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the principal residential use of the dwelling.
(2) Within the home, a home occupation shall be conducted solely by
persons residing in the dwelling. Off-site employees are permitted.
(3) All home occupation activities, including storage, shall be
conducted entirely within the interior of the dwelling and/or
accessory building. No outside storage is permitted. Materials,
supplies, and merchandise shall be stored in a manner that does
not pose a safety hazard to the dwelling, dwelling occupants, or
adjoining properties and occupants, and shall not result in a change
of use of the property or an activity prohibited by the Michigan
Building Code.
(4) There shall be no exterior alteration in the residential character of
the premises in connection with the home occupation.
(5) The home occupation shall not generate noise, vibrations, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, or glare which are detectable beyond the property
lines. Furthermore, the home business shall not generate any
electrical interference with radio or television transmission in the
area that would exceed that which is normally produced by a
dwelling unit in a residential zoning district used for residential
purposes.
(6) Except for music students, there shall be no client, customer, or
employee traffic generated by the home occupation and the home
occupation shall not require additional on-street or off-street
parking. The delivery and pickup of goods and materials used and/
or produced in the operation of the home occupation shall be
limited to the customary delivery and pickup of mail and packages
by the United States Postal Service, or by alternative private
delivery services common to residential property in which the
home occupation is located. Such deliveries and pickups shall not
require a vehicle larger than a step-type van.
(7) No signage is permitted.
(8) More than one home occupation is allowed on the premises if the
additional home occupation meets all of the standards of this
section.
(9) Compliance with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws
and regulations.
Sec. 39-192 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-192
C:978
(d) Type 1 home business general requirements and performance criteria.
All such home businesses shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The home business shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal residential use of the dwelling.
(2) A home business shall be conducted solely by persons residing in
the dwelling. Off-site employees are permitted.
(3) All home business activities, including storage, shall be conducted
entirely within the interior of the dwelling and/or accessory
building. No outside storage is permitted. Materials, supplies, and
merchandise shall be stored in a manner that does not pose a safety
hazard to the dwelling, dwelling occupants, or adjoining properties
and occupants, and shall not result in a change of use of the
property or an activity prohibited by the Michigan Building Code.
(4) There shall be no exterior alteration in the residential character of
the premises in connection with the home business.
(5) The home business shall not generate noise, vibrations, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, or glare which are detectable beyond the property
lines. Furthermore, the home business shall not generate any
electrical interference with radio or television transmission in the
area that would exceed that which is normally produced by a
dwelling unit in a residential zoning district used for residential
purposes.
(6) On-site customer sales and the pick up of merchandise by clients,
customers, or other business related individuals shall be limited to:
a. Items commonly collected or traded, and occasionally sold by
hobbyists such as coins, stamps and antiques;
b. Artistic or craft type products produced on the premises;
c. Incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct
of such home business;
d. The pickup of merchandise produced on-site by the home
business.
(7) The home business shall be limited to a maximum of 50% of the
floor area of one story of the dwelling, and 50% of the floor area of
a detached accessory building.
(8) No more than two clients, customers, or other business related
individuals shall be received at any one time. No clients, customers,
or other business related individuals shall be permitted on-site
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(9) Customers and clients shall not generate in excess of 10 total
vehicle trips per day (a trip is composed of a passenger vehicle
Sec. 39-192 CHARTER Sec. 39-192
C:979
arriving at and then leaving the premises and/or on-street area
near the premises).
(10) In addition to regular United States postal letter carrier service,
the delivery and pickup of goods and materials used and/or
produced in the operation of the home business shall be limited to
one combined delivery and pickup per day averaged over the
course of a calendar week. Such deliveries and pickups of mail and
packages shall be done by the United States Postal Service, and by
alternative private delivery services common to residential
property in which the home business is located. Such deliveries and
pickups shall not require a vehicle larger than a step-type van.
(11) A minimum of two parking spaces shall be available for the home
business either on-site and/or on the street immediately in front of
the premises.
(12) No signage is permitted.
(13) Compliance with a housing inspection conducted in accordance
with Section 14-4.32 of the City Code.
(14) There shall be a maximum of one home business per dwelling.
(15) Compliance with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws
and regulations.
(e) Type 2 home business general requirements and performance criteria.
(1) General requirements.
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall use the Type 1 home
business general requirements and performance criteria as an
impact guide when evaluating a Type 2 home business special
exception permit request.
b. The home business shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the principal residential use of the dwelling.
c. A home business shall be conducted solely by persons residing
in the dwelling, plus not more than one nonresident employee/
independent contractor or other person engaged in the
conduct of the business on the premises at one time. Off-site
employees are permitted.
d. There shall be no exterior alteration in the residential
character of the premises in connection with the home
business.
e. The home business shall not generate noise, vibrations, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, or glare which is detectable beyond the
property lines, except outdoor recreational lessons/instruction
pursuant to the following Section 39-192(e)(2)f., may produce
Sec. 39-192 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-192
C:980
noise generated by a person's voice or noise produced by a
person's recreational activity that is detectable beyond the
property lines. Furthermore, the home business shall not
generate any electrical interference with radio or television
transmission in the area that would exceed that which is
normally produced by a dwelling unit in a residential zoning
district used for residential purposes.
f. On-site customer sales and the pick up of merchandise by
clients, customers, or other business related individuals shall
be limited to:
1. Items commonly collected or traded, and occasionally sold
by hobbyists such as coins, stamps and antiques;
2. Artistic or craft type products produced on the premises;
3. Incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the
conduct of such home business;
4. The pickup of merchandise produced on-site by the home
business.
g. The authorizing of such special exception will not be of
substantial detriment to the surrounding neighborhood and
will not materially impair the intent and purposes of this
chapter or the public health, safety and welfare.
h. No signage is permitted.
i. Compliance with a housing inspection conducted in
accordance with Section 14-4.32 of the City Code.
j. There shall be a maximum of one home business per dwelling.
k. Compliance with all other applicable local, state, and federal
laws and regulations.
(2) Performance criteria.
a. All home business activities, including storage, shall be
conducted entirely within the interior of the dwelling and/or
accessory building, unless the Zoning Board of Appeals
approves outdoor business and/or storage activities pursuant
to the following Subsection f. Materials, supplies, and
merchandise shall be stored in a manner that does not pose a
safety hazard to the dwelling, dwelling occupants, or adjoining
properties and occupants, and shall not result in a change of
use of the property or an activity prohibited by the Michigan
Building Code.
b. The home business shall be limited to a maximum of 50% of the
floor area of one story of the dwelling, and 50% of the floor
Sec. 39-192 CHARTER Sec. 39-192
C:981
area of a detached accessory building. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may allow a greater amount of the floor area of a
detached accessory building to be used for a home business if
they determine such greater amount would still keep the home
business incidental and secondary to the principal residential
use of the dwelling.
c. The number of clients or customers that shall be allowed at any
one time shall be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
No clients, customers, or other business related individuals
shall be permitted on-site between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
d. The number of allowable vehicle trips per day by customers
and clients to the premises shall be determined by the Zoning
Board of Appeals. In addition to regular United States postal
letter carrier service, the number of allowable deliveries and
pickups per day of goods and materials used and/or produced
in the operation of the home business shall also be determined
by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said deliveries and pickups of
mail and packages shall be completed by the United States
Postal Service, and by alternative private delivery services
common to residential property in which the home business is
located. Deliveries and pickups shall not require a vehicle
larger than a step-type van.
e. On-site parking shall be provided in an amount as determined
necessary by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with
Article IV of this chapter.
f. Permitted outdoor business, sales, and storage activities such
as but not limited to recreational lessons/instruction, sales of
horticultural products, and sales of arts and crafts produced
on-site may be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals with
the following additional requirements:
1. Recreational lessons/instruction. Instruction areas shall be
limited to rear and side yard areas and shall be enclosed
with a fence as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Sale and display of horticultural products and arts and
crafts.
(a) Products for sale shall be limited to horticultural
products of flowers, fruits or vegetables, and
homemade arts and crafts.
(b) Sales shall be limited to one continuous three-week
period each calendar year per parcel; the dates are to
be specified by the Zoning Board of Appeals in its
findings of fact approving the home business.
Sec. 39-192 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-192
C:982
Sec. 39-192.1. Possession, cultivation, acquisition, etc., of
marihuana for medical use. [Ord. No. 1564, 6-1-2011; amended
3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
(c) Once initially approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the applicant must annually obtain review
and approval by the Zoning Administrator for the
second and any subsequent years. The Zoning
Administrator shall approve the seasonal home
business if (i) the Zoning Administrator determines
that the seasonal home business will be operated
under the same terms and conditions as originally
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals and (ii) no
written complaints have been received by the Zoning
Administrator concerning the operation of the
seasonal home business during the prior year. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that there are
changes in the seasonal home business or received
written complaints during the past year, the applicant
must apply for review and approval by the Zoning
Board of Appeals for continued operation of the
seasonal home business.
g. Such other reasonable conditions and limitations as may be
imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals to protect nearby
residential premises and persons.
(f) Prohibited home occupations and businesses. The following shall not be
permitted as a home occupation or a home business:
(1) Any repair of motorized vehicles such as engine repair, painting, or
body work to automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, heavy equipment,
and lawn/landscaping equipment.
(2) Parking and storage of heavy equipment.
(3) Any of the uses listed in Section 39-72 of this chapter.
(g) Home occupation and home business exemptions. The following shall
not be classified as a home occupation or home business and are
exempt from the provisions of this Section 39-192.
(1) Sale of horticultural products grown on the premises.
(2) Garage/yard sales that occur three or fewer times per year, and last
four or fewer consecutive days per event.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
MARIHUANA — This term shall have the meaning given to it in Section
7601 of the Michigan Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.7106, as is referred to in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA
2008, Initiated Law (the "Act"), at Section 3(e), MCLA § 333.26423(e).
Sec. 39-192 CHARTER Sec. 39-192.1
C:983
MEDICAL USE OF MARIHUANA — The acquisition, cultivation,
manufacture, transfer or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia
relating to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a
person's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with
the debilitating medical condition, as defined under the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, MCLA
§ 333.262423(h).
PRIMARY CAREGIVER — A person who qualifies as a primary caregiver
as defined in MCLA § 333.26423(k).
QUALIFYING PATIENT — A person who qualifies as a qualifying patient
as defined in MCLA § 333.26423(1) and (p).
(b) Medical use of marihuana. No property in any zone district shall be
used for the medical use of marihuana except as provided in this
Section 39-192.1. The Zoning Board of Appeals may not grant a
variance from the requirements of this section.
(c) Medical use of marihuana by a qualifying patient.
(1) A qualifying patient may use his or her principal residence, but only
for the qualifying patient's own medical use of marihuana. There
shall not be more than 12 marihuana plants per qualifying patient
residing in a single dwelling. There shall not be more than a total of
72 marihuana plants in a dwelling for all resident qualifying
patients.
(2) The medical use of marihuana by qualifying patients shall comply
with all of the general requirements listed in Subsections (f)(1)
through (6), (9) through (12), (14) and (15).
(d) Medical use of marihuana by a primary caregiver. A primary caregiver
may engage in the medical use of marihuana only as a medical
marihuana home occupation as authorized in this Section 39-192.1. A
primary caregiver may also be a qualifying patient.
(e) Procedure for allowing the medical use of marihuana by a primary
caregiver; confidentiality of information; appeals.
(1) A primary caregiver that meets the criteria for a medical
marihuana home occupation under Subsections (f), (g) and (h) of
this section shall be allowed only if the property owner or tenant
first obtains a special exception permit for the property, subject to
ongoing compliance with Subsections (f), (g) and (h) of this section.
(2) An application for special exception to allow a medical marihuana
home occupation shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
a. The application shall not require the name or address of a
qualifying patient or primary caregiver. The application shall
require the consent of a property owner. The application shall
be on a form prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
Sec. 39-192.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-192.1
C:984
b. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a special exception
permit for a medical marihuana home occupation within 15
calendar days if the Zoning Administrator determines that:
1. The application is complete;
2. The applicant complies with Subsections (f), (g) and (h) of
this section; and
3. This review period may be extended upon mutual consent
of the Zoning Administrator and the applicant.
c. Pursuant to MCLA § 333.26426, the name and address of a
qualifying patient and primary caregiver, as such, shall not be
released to the public but shall be kept confidential, except to
the extent authorized or required by the Act, or to the extent
required by the Michigan Freedom of Information Act or by
other law. The location of a medical marihuana home
occupation may be disclosed to law enforcement personnel.
This section shall not be interpreted to require that the name
of a tenant or property owner be kept confidential.
d. Appeals from the Zoning Administrator's decision shall be
made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall affirm, overturn, or modify the original decision
of the Zoning Administrator after holding a public hearing and
conducting a thorough review of the record. The name of a
qualified patient and the primary caregiver, as such, shall not
be disclosed during the course of appeal but the appeal shall
only be in the name of an aggrieved party, unless otherwise
required by law.
(f) General conditions applicable to medical marihuana home occupations.
(1) A medical marihuana home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and secondary to the principal residential use of the dwelling.
(2) The medical marihuana home occupation shall be limited to a
maximum of 50% of the floor area of one story of the dwelling.
(3) All activities of the medical marihuana home occupation, including
storage, shall be conducted entirely within the interior of the
dwelling. No outside storage is permitted. Materials, supplies, and
merchandise shall be stored in a manner that does not pose a safety
hazard to the dwelling, dwelling occupants, or adjoining properties
and occupants, and shall not result in a change of use of the
property or an activity prohibited by the Michigan Building Code.
(4) There shall be no exterior alteration in the residential character of
the premises in connection with the medical marihuana home
occupation.
Sec. 39-192.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-192.1
C:985
(5) The medical marihuana home occupation shall not generate noise,
vibrations, smoke, dust, odor, heat, or glare which are detectable
beyond the property lines and not in other dwelling units on the
same parcel of property. Furthermore, the home business shall not
generate any electrical interference with radio or television
transmission in the area that would exceed that which is normally
produced by a dwelling unit in a residential zoning district used for
residential purposes.
(6) No signage is permitted for a medical marihuana home occupation.
(7) There shall be a maximum of one medical marihuana home
occupation per dwelling.
(8) There shall be not more than one primary caregiver engaged in the
medical use of marihuana per dwelling. A primary caregiver shall
not have more than five qualifying patients and shall only serve
qualifying patients.
(9) There shall be no more than 12 marihuana plants kept in the
dwelling for each qualifying patient assisted by the primary
caregiver, and in no event shall there be more than a total of 72
marihuana plants kept in the dwelling. Any incidental amount of
seeds, stalks, and unusable roots shall also be allowed to the extent
allowed under state law and shall not be included in this amount.
(10)No marihuana may be kept on site for persons other than qualifying
patients a) who have currently designated the primary caregiver as
their primary caregiver; or b) who currently reside in the dwelling.
(11) Marihuana shall be kept in a fully enclosed, locked room or
enclosure accessible only by the primary caregiver.
(12) If a room with windows is utilized as a marihuana growing location,
any lighting methods that exceed usual residential use between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall employ shielding methods,
without alteration to the exterior of the residence, to prevent
ambient light spillage that causes or creates a distraction or
nuisance to adjacent residential properties.
(13) An owner or tenant shall arrange for, and comply with, an
inspection conducted to determine compliance with this Section
39-192.1, prior to operation of a medical marihuana home
occupation.
(14) A medical marihuana home occupation shall not have employees
who do not reside in the dwelling.
(15) A medical marihuana home occupation shall comply with all other
applicable local and state laws and regulations, including, but not
limited to, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and
Sec. 39-192.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-192.1
C:986
maintenance codes and permit requirements under such codes and
with the Act.
(g) Medical marihuana home occupation special requirements. All medical
marihuana home occupations shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) There shall be no visits by qualifying patients or other medical
marihuana users generated by the medical marihuana home
occupation (other than persons who reside in the dwelling). There
shall be no on-site pickup or delivery of medical marihuana by
qualifying patients, other medical marihuana users or others.
There shall be no deliveries in public rights-of-way or on public
property.
(2) The home occupation shall not require additional on-street or offstreet
parking.
(3) The delivery and pickup of goods and materials used and/or
produced in the operation of the medical marihuana home
occupation shall be limited to the customary delivery and pickup of
mail and packages by the United States Postal Service, or by
alternative private delivery services common to residential
property in which the medical marihuana home occupation is
located. Such deliveries and pickups shall not require a vehicle
larger than a step-type van.
(4) The home occupation shall not be within 1,000 feet of the real
property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational, or
secondary school or a public or private college, junior college, or
university, or a playground, or housing facility owned by a public
housing authority, or within 100 feet of a public or private youth
center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility. The
distances in this subsection shall be interpreted to be the same as
under 21 U.S.C. § 860.
(h) Renewal of special exception, inspections. A special exception for a
medical marihuana home occupation shall expire on April 30 of each
year but may be renewed upon determination that the medical
marihuana home occupation continues to comply with the criteria of
this Section 39-192.1. The applicant for renewal under this section shall
arrange for, and comply with, an inspection conducted to determine
compliance with this Section 39-192.1.
(i) Additional inspections. A medical marihuana home occupation is
subject to inspection to determine compliance with this Section
39-192.1, and state or federal law upon receipt of a complaint for
violation of this section or state law relating to the use of medical
marihuana by the Holland Department of Public Safety or the Holland
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services.
Sec. 39-192.1 CHARTER Sec. 39-192.1
C:987
Sec. 39-193. House trailers. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.12; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
House trailers are not considered dwelling units or as an accessory to a
permitted use; provided, however, that single house trailers may be allowed
on a temporary basis in accordance with Chapter 35.
Sec. 39-194. Bed-and-breakfast homes. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.12; Ord.
No. 1006, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1738]
The use, conversion, or expansion of existing residences for bed-andbreakfast
accommodation, formerly known as tourist homes, may be
permitted in residential zone districts, subject findings of compliance with
the following standards.
(j) Enforcement. Violations of this section shall be enforced in the manner
provided in Section 39-192(b)(4).
(k) No immunity from prosecution. Nothing in this section, nor any
companion regulatory provision or other provision of the Holland City
Code, is intended to grant, nor shall be construed as granting, immunity
from criminal prosecution for the cultivation, sale, consumption, use,
distribution or possession of marihuana which is not in strict
compliance with the Act and the general rules and this subsection.
(l) Federal preemption.
(1) Since federal law is not affected by the Act, nothing in this chapter,
or in any companion regulatory provision or any other provision of
this Code, is intended to grant, nor shall they be construed as
granting, immunity from criminal prosecution under federal law.
Neither this ordinance nor the Act protects users, caregivers or
owners of properties on which the medical use of marihuana is
occurring from federal prosecution, or from having their property
seized by federal authorities under the Federal Controlled
Substances Act.118
(2) In the event that it is determined by judicial or other legal action
that the provisions of the Act are preempted by federal law and/or
invalid, all the rights granted under this section shall be deemed
null and void.
(m) City regulations. The Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services may adopt or amend rules pursuant to Section 1-7 of the
Holland City Code, subject to approval by the City Council, as necessary
to govern the procedures and interpretation of this Section 39-192.1.
(a) One to four guest rooms shall receive administrative approval by the
zoning administrator providing the following conditions are met:
118. Editor's Note: See 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq.
Sec. 39-192.1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-194
C:988
(1) All criteria set forth in Section 39-189 for conversion of buildings
and dwellings shall apply to the conversion of a residence or
structure to a bed-and-breakfast establishment, including
requirements for hearing, requisite findings of fact, and
attachment of reasonable conditions to any such approval.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the following additional criteria shall
apply:
a. Bed-and-breakfast establishments may be approved only for
owner-occupied premises which are the principal residence of
the owner operator, and shall be limited to not more than four
guest rooms or 12 guests in addition to resident family
members.
b. Approval shall be conditioned upon compliance with all
licensing fees, inspections, and approvals of Chapter 26
applicable to public lodging facilities.
c. Full bathroom facilities shall be available at a ratio of not less
than one bathroom for every two guest rooms, in addition to
separate full bathroom facilities for the owner. Separate
cooking facilities shall not be available to bed-and-breakfast
guests.
d. In reaching a determination on required parking, not less than
one improved space shall be provided for each guest room, in
addition to not less than one space for the owner resident.
Each such space shall be independently accessible to a street,
or to an unobstructed driveway leading to a street. The parking
required for guests may be provided on other private sites
within 300 feet if such space conforms to all applicable
requirements of this Code; a written agreement with the owner
of such space is provided insuring its availability for the
licensing period; and the terms of the agreement permit
renewal for subsequent annual relicensing of the bed-andbreakfast
establishment. Irrespective of the terms of the
original approval, any subsequent reduction of available
parking shall cause corresponding reduction in the number of
guest rooms as may be necessary to assure compliance with
this regulation.
e. A bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be permitted one
freestanding identification sign not exceeding four square feet
in area nor three feet in height to be located not less than 15
feet from the public right-of-way or one identification sign not
exceeding six square feet in area which shall be affixed flat
against the residence.
f. Maximum length of stay of any guest of the bed-and-breakfast
shall not exceed 21 consecutive days.
Sec. 39-194 CHARTER Sec. 39-194
C:989
Sec. 39-195. Private swimming pools. [Ord. No. 492; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Private swimming pools may be constructed as accessory uses in residential
districts; provided, that all such pools, together with required fencing, shall
be located and constructed in accordance with the City building code, being
Chapter 6 of this Code. In no case shall any such pool or its fencing protrude
into the required front yard or side street side yard area.
Sec. 39-196. Division of residential lots. [Ord. No. 587; Ord. No.
714; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, it is the intent of this
division that the dividing of any property for purposes of residential
development be such that any lot created by division have direct and
immediate frontage on a public street, unless otherwise approved in a
recorded subdivision, planned residential development or mobile home
development. It is recognized, however, that owning to hills, streams or
other topographical features or to utility installations or easements, certain
undeveloped or partially developed properties may exist which cannot be
reasonably developed or divided so as to provide all lots with direct and
immediate frontage on a public street. The division of such properties so
as to situate one lot behind another, in its relation to a public street, may
be approved as a special exception by the Zoning Board, subject to public
hearing thereon and compliance with the following criteria:
(b) Five to eight guest rooms shall require a special exception by the
Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the following conditions being met:
(1) All regulations set forth in Section 39-194(a)(1) and (2) above;
(2) The lot size shall not be less than 15,000 square feet;
(3) Landscaping and screening in the form of natural vegetation and/or
fencing shall be provided to buffer and soften the view from
neighboring residential properties between parking areas and
adjacent residential uses;
(4) The applicant agrees that the Zoning Board of Appeals will
determine the number of guests allowed.
(a) Any rear lot shall have access to a public street as required by Section
39-16. Said lot shall comply in all respects with the lot area and width
requirements of the zone district in which it is located, and shall be
subject to determination by the Zoning Board as to appropriate front
and rear lot lines for setback purposes, based on the particular
conditions applying to the property and to surrounding area.
(b) Approval of any such division shall be conditioned upon the submission,
by the applicant, of a plot plan drawn to scale and indicating the
relationship of the proposed divisions to adjoining streets and
neighboring properties. In addition to its review by the Board, such plan
Sec. 39-194 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-196
C:990
Sec. 39-197. Accessory uses of residential yards. [Ord. No. 818;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1374, § 2, 11-19-2003; Ord. No.
1459, § 3, 8-2-2006; amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 1650; 10-7-2015
by Ord. No. 1655; 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1758]
The following uses or encroachments shall not be deemed inconsistent with
the intent and purpose of maintaining open unoccupied residential yard
spaces, and may be permitted in required residential yard areas. In no case,
however, shall any residential yard area be used for any purpose or in any
manner which would adversely affect a reasonable enjoyment of adjoining
properties, or which would be likely to create or increase a nuisance.
shall be reviewed by the planning office with respect to the Plat Act,
Master Plan, street plan, utility plan or other plans or ordinances of
the City applicable to the use or division of land, and shall not be in
nonconformity with any of the provisions thereof.
(c) Any rear lot approved in such division shall be accessible to, and
developed with connections to, City sewer and water services. When
any such division creates lots which are not included in a utility
assessment district, or in excess of the number of benefits assessed,
such lots shall be subject to utility service assessment at the prevailing
rate in effect at such time as the division is approved by the Board.
(d) Such division shall be found by the Zoning Board to be compatible and
harmonious with the established character of adjoining and nearby
residentially developed lands, and no such division shall be approved
which would, in the opinion of the Board, have a detrimental effect on
the reasonable enjoyment of adjoining properties. In making a
determination of compatibility, the Zoning Board shall consider such
factors as:
(1) The width, depth and lot area of established lots in the
neighborhood in which such division is proposed.
(2) The proposed development of lots and dwellings in relation to other
lots, whether developed or undeveloped, in the neighborhood.
(3) The effect of additional curb cuts and traffic resulting from the
proposed division.
(a) The following residential accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Open, uncovered steps, landings, patios or decks not exceeding
three feet above the adjoining grade, and encroaching no further
than 50% into a required yard area.
(2) Arbors, trellises, yard ornaments, statuary, flagpoles.
(3) Laundry drying lines or devices.
(4) Eaves or awnings projecting not more than three feet beyond the
face of a wall, but in no case closer than one foot to property line.
Sec. 39-196 CHARTER Sec. 39-197
C:991
Sec. 39-198. Residential infill regulations. [Ord. No. 1234,
12-16-1997; Ord. No. 1282, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 1359, 3-5-2003; Ord.
No. 1415, § 6, 6-1-2005; Ord. No. 1422, § 1, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 1461,
(5) Plantings, shrubs, landscaping and indigenous vegetation.
(6) Parking of passenger vehicles in approved parking areas.
(7) Pole-mounted yard lights.
(8) Brick veneer or other new exterior wall surfacing to existing
buildings.
(9) Signs which are permitted by Article IX of this chapter.
(10) Architectural features, such as bay windows and chimneys not
exceeding 25% of the wall length, and projecting not more than
three feet from the face of a wall and encroaching no closer than
three feet to any property line.
(11) Mailboxes in accordance with federal law.
(12) Fences as allowed by Section 39-11.
(13) Sandboxes, swings, picnic tables, barbecues and similar accessory
recreational equipment.
(14) Pad-mounted air-conditioning, heating or ventilating equipment,
when located in front or rear yards or when located a minimum of
two feet from any side yard lot line.
(15) Accessory buildings as permitted by this chapter.
(16) Swimming pools as permitted by Section 39-195.
(17) Refuse storage facilities, in accordance with Chapter 27 of this
Code.
(18) Outdoor game courts in rear yards.
(19) Uses not specifically itemized, but which are similar in nature to
any of the foregoing uses.
(b) In addition to the foregoing, fences of unrestricted height, playground
equipment, shelters or pavilions, fountains, sculpture and similar
installations of a scale not commonly found in residential yards shall be
permitted in conjunction with permitted nonresidential uses in
residential zone districts.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fence, hedge, vegetation or other
obstruction shall be permitted or maintained which materially impedes
traffic visibility across a corner lot, or otherwise obstructs required
open spaces in a manner that constitutes a hazard to the safe use of
public streets and sidewalks as determined by the Police Department.
Sec. 39-197 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-198
C:992
9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1478, § 2, 6-6-2007; Ord. No. 1486, 12-19-2008;
Ord. No. 1576, 1-18-2012; amended 1-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1599;
7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 1612; 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 1632; 6-3-2015
by Ord. No. 1650; 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1671]
(a) Preamble.
(1) An infill development places a newly constructed or moved
dwelling into an established residential context that may reflect
architectural styles, design features, use of materials, or placement
of structures that are clearly indicative of a particular era, and
which help define the visual character and preserve the economic
stability of a given neighborhood. The neighborhoods listed in
Subsection (b) are such established residential areas.
(2) In order to protect the public welfare in such established
residential areas, to preserve and protect property values, to
assure architectural compatibility within neighborhoods, to
prevent visual conflict, and to promote complementary design,
residential infill development as defined herein shall be subject to
the procedures and standards set forth in this section.
(2.1) In order to encourage the development of housing units for
persons with disabilities or limited mobility, the infill review shall
allow reasonable deviation from the stated standards of review in
Section 39-198(g) where necessary to include features that
facilitate access to buildings and structures.
(3) This section is intended to promote quality development and
eliminate conditions of gross design incompatibility that have the
potential for enduring a century or more. It is not intended to stifle
individuality or compel rigid conformity. Recognizing that great
diversity of style, often between homes side by side, is one of
Holland's central neighborhood strengths, this article is created
and adopted with the intention that the acceptable level of
compliance with these standards will be the minimum necessary to
assure compatibility. This section's enforcement is premised upon
achieving compatibility, not conformity.
(4) In the Central Park Neighborhood area, the combination of small
lot sizes, the distinctive cottage character, the narrow streets and
rights-of-way and the compact geography of the neighborhood
create a residential neighborhood that is relatively fragile in
nature. Existing nonresidential structures are imbedded within and
immediately adjacent to the residential properties which may tend
to amplify the nonresidential characteristics of noise, vehicle traffic
and parking, and lighting needs on the surrounding cottage
residential properties. Therefore, there is a heightened concern
regarding the compatibility of existing and future nonresidential
structures on the character of this historic residential
neighborhood.
Sec. 39-198 CHARTER Sec. 39-198
C:993
(b) Applicability. It is the intent of this section to regulate the placement,
presentation and character of new dwellings, accessory buildings and
the enclosure of existing open front porches built in residential areas of
established, discernible, and relatively homogeneous character; to
regulate the moving of any building into such an area; and in the area of
Subsection (b)(2) below to regulate the placement, presentation and
character of any new nonresidential building, and additions to existing
nonresidential buildings. For purposes of this section, the procedures
and standards herein shall apply to new or relocated residential
structures; new or relocated accessory buildings; new nonresidential
buildings or additions to existing nonresidential buildings; existing
buildings where it is proposed to lift the first floor elevation above the
height of the existing first floor elevation; and the enclosure of existing
open front porches proposed on the following lots:
(1) Any lot within a residential zone which is situated in the Central
Neighborhood District, as defined in Section 39-2, with the
exception of any lot located in one of the City's historic districts
that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness;
(2) Any residential or nonresidential lot located within the Central Park
Neighborhood area bounded by East End Drive, West End Drive,
South Shore Drive and Lake Macatawa, together with those
properties with frontage on the west side of West End Drive;
(3) Any lot within a residential zone district throughout the City onto
which a dwelling is proposed to be moved from another location;
(4) Any lot within a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone District which
is proposed to be used for the construction or placement of a new
or relocated residential structure;
(5) Where 50% or more of the exterior shell of a residential structure
on a lot specified above is to be demolished and reconstructed or
substantially altered in a manner different than the existing (or
previously existing structure, if damaged by fire, storm or other
condition) residential structure, the reconstruction or alteration
shall be subject to review under this section;
(6) Any new accessory building or addition to an existing principal
building located on a corner lot in the R-TRN Traditional
Residential Neighborhood District; and
(7) Any new or addition to an accessory dwelling unit.
(c) Restrictive covenants. It is not intended that review under this section
in any way abrogate or supersede the valid application of restrictive
covenants that may be in effect at the time of adoption of this section.
To the extent that an applicant demonstrates that the requirements of
this section are inconsistent with or made impractical due to those
restrictive covenants, the applicant shall not be required to comply with
Sec. 39-198 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-198
C:994
conflicting standards of this section but must comply with the
restrictive covenants.
(d) Required filings. Any person intending to either construct, reconstruct
or move a dwelling or accessory structure on or onto a lot, enclose an
existing open front porch, or construct a new nonresidential building,
make additions to an existing nonresidential building, or an accessory
dwelling unit regulated by this section shall file with the Department of
Community and Neighborhood Services an application accompanied by
an accurately dimensioned site plan showing the placement of all
structures, and detailed scaled elevation sketches or photographs of
the front and side elevations of all proposed structures. The applicant
may be required to furnish such additional information or supporting
detail as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the
standards herein. Upon receipt of an application for infill approval, the
following procedures are required:
(1) For proposed new or relocated buildings of 256 square feet or less,
other than an accessory dwelling unit, where no horizontal exterior
dimension of the building exceeds 16 feet, there shall be no review
required under this section of the chapter.
(2) For other requests, notice of the application shall be provided in
accordance with Section 39-4.1 and MCLA § 125.3503.
(e) Procedures.
(1) The Department of Community and Neighborhood Services shall
review and approve, approve with conditions or deny an application
for infill unless it receives a request for Planning Commission
review. A request for Planning Commission review shall be filed
with the City Clerk with a copy to the Department of Community
and Neighborhood Services.
(2) The Department shall make a decision on the application for infill
within 21 days, but not sooner than 15 days, after notice is given.
This time may be extended upon mutual agreement of the applicant
and the City. In the absence of a decision within the specified time
period, as may be extended, an application shall be denied without
prejudice.
(3) At the initiative of the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services or upon the request of the Planning
Commission, applicant, a real property owner whose real property
is assessed within 300 feet of the property, or the occupant of a
structure located within 300 feet of the property, a public hearing
shall be held by the Planning Commission.
(f) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the determination of an application for
infill by the Department may appeal the decision within 10 days, in
writing, to the Planning Commission. An appeal shall be filed with the
City Clerk with a copy to the Department of Community and
Sec. 39-198 CHARTER Sec. 39-198
C:995
Neighborhood Services. An appeal shall stay all further proceedings
and shall be heard by the Commission at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, at which time the Commission shall sustain or modify the
determination of the Department. Any appeal of a determination by the
Commission may be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(g) Standards. Since each infill development is unique to its immediate
context, it is essential that standards be applied with due consideration
to the placement, height, scale, proportion, direction emphasis, design
details, texture, and materials of new or moved dwellings; new or
moved accessory buildings; new nonresidential buildings, additions to
nonresidential buildings; and the enclosure of existing open front
porches or an accessory dwelling unit in a manner compatible with
established dwellings in the immediate vicinity of the proposed
development.
(1) Placement. No new or moved building shall be located any closer or
any farther away from a street property line than the building
situated on either side thereof. Building separation shall be
consistent with the general character of the neighborhood which,
unless otherwise defined, shall be deemed to be the prevailing
character of buildings within 300 feet in either direction along
street frontages, irrespective of intervening streets. Unless
otherwise characteristic of a neighborhood, dwellings shall be
oriented with the front facade and primary entrance facing a street.
Garages and accessory dwelling units shall be located consistent
with the character of garage location in the neighborhood, and any
lot located on an alley and situated between dwellings that have
vehicular access only to said alley shall be developed with driveway
access to the alley only. A review and approval of building
placement under this section shall be consistent with other setback
regulations and exceptions of this chapter and other building code,
fire or safety code, or other setback regulation established outside
of this chapter.
(2) Height, scale and proportion. The height of any new or moved
building or open front porch enclosure shall be consistent with the
character of the neighborhood. Finished floor elevations, height of
exposed basement walls, and front yard grade elevations shall be
similar to those of adjacent dwellings. Overall height, width, scale
and general proportions shall be similar to or consistent with the
character of the neighborhood. When lifting the first floor elevation
of an existing building or when determining the height of the first
floor elevation of a new or expanded or altered building, the height
shall be no higher than the average height of the first floor
elevations of the residential buildings on each side of the subject
property. The height of the first floor elevation shall be measured as
the height above the public sidewalk elevation directly in front of
the residential structure.
Sec. 39-198 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-198
C:996
(3) Form, massing and directional emphasis. Where a neighborhood
character clearly includes either a horizontal or vertical emphasis,
and a discernible consistent building form and mass, any new or
moved building or open front porch enclosure shall conform to the
established character. Roof style and pitch shall be architecturally
consistent with the proposed or moved building and with the
prevailing neighborhood character.
(4) Facade, materials and detail. Where neighborhood character
includes discernible patterns of detail including, but not limited to,
door and window trim, corner boards, cornice details, railings and
shutters, any new or moved building and open front porch
enclosure shall be compatible with such character. Where
prevailing neighborhood character includes open or enclosed front
porches, any new or moved house shall include a similar porch;
however, this shall not be construed to mean that the enclosure of
an open front porch will not be allowed when the prevailing
character of the neighborhood includes open front porches. The
materials and relative proportions of doors and windows shall be
compatible with neighborhood character. Siding width shall
conform to neighborhood character. Exposed wood on any new or
moved building shall be painted or stained in a manner generally
compatible with other buildings on the property and with
neighborhood character.
(5) Rear and side yard paving. The amount of paved areas for vehicle
access and parking located in rear and side yard areas shall be
generally consistent with that of adjoining properties and
neighboring properties on the same block. Plans to provide paved
areas for vehicles that are determined to be greater in area than
the paved areas generally consistent with that of adjoining
properties and neighboring properties on the same block may be
permitted:
a. In one side yard only covering an area up to 75% of the side
yard area or at a minimum paved area width of 10 feet, if
landscaping and screening in the form of natural vegetation
and/or fencing are provided to buffer and soften the view from
neighborhood properties to side yard paving which exceeds a
ten-foot-wide paved area in the side yard; and
b. On up to 50% of the rear yard if landscaping and screening in
the form of natural vegetation and/or fencing are provided to
buffer and soften the view of the side and rear yard paved
surfaces from neighborhood properties.
(h) Interpretation. This section of the Code may be interpreted and
augmented from time to time by the adoption of rules and regulations in
the manner provided by Section 1-7 of this Code.
Sec. 39-198 CHARTER Sec. 39-199
C:997
Sec. 39-199. Central Park Neighborhood special exception.119
[Added 1-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1600]
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to protect the existing residential
cottage character of the Central Park Neighborhood area from
residential and nonresidential development that is deemed to be
detrimental in character to the existing neighborhood. The Central Park
Neighborhood area is that area bounded by East End Drive, West End
Drive, South Shore Drive and Lake Macatawa, together with those
properties with frontage on the west side of West End Drive.
(b) Findings and purpose.
(1) The combination of small lot sizes, the distinctive cottage
character, the narrow streets and rights-of-way and the compact
geography of the neighborhood create an historic residential
neighborhood that is relatively fragile in nature. New residential
and nonresidential structures as well as additions to the same if not
done in a careful manner that respects and does not diminish the
character of adjoining properties and the entire neighborhood
should be discouraged.
(2) Because the scale and size of development projects many times
have a direct correlation to the establishment of negative impacts
on adjoining properties, if not done carefully, this section
establishes a special exception procedure requiring review of all
new proposed residential and nonresidential structures that are
greater than 2,500 square feet in size, excluding basements, and all
proposed additions to existing residential and nonresidential
structures that will create a structure that is greater than 2,500
square feet in size, excluding basements.
(c) Special exception required; procedures and review standards.
(1) The construction and expansion of residential and nonresidential
structures in the Central Park Neighborhood area is allowed only if
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals as a special exception.
The following structures are exempt from this section:
a. New structures that are less than 2,500 square feet;
b. Notwithstanding Subsection (c)(1)(a) of this section, a new
structure greater than 256 square feet but less than 2,500
square feet shall require a special exception and not be exempt
if there are additional structures on lot or contiguous lots
under common ownership or control that, with the new
structure, total more than 2,500 square feet.
119. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-199, a moratorium on housing demolition, construction
and conversion, adopted 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 1568, and amended 12-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 1575, was repealed 1-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1578.
Sec. 39-199 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-199
C:998
c. Expansions that result in a structure that is less than 2,500
square feet;
d. Structures that are subject to site plan review under Article II
of this Chapter 39;
(2) In addition to supplying the information required by the Zoning
Board of Appeals general application, the applicant shall submit
photos, drawings and elevation plans that specifically describe and
delineate the new or expanded structure and all related
improvements.
(3) Nonresidential building and site review standards.
a. A special exception for a nonresidential structure shall be
granted only if the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that:
1. The applicant has established that the proposed structure
or expanded structure (including any seasonal, temporary
or accessory structures), and uses associated with such
structures, will not adversely affect adjacent and adjoining
properties with respect to the emission and transmission
of noise, smoke, dust, dirt, litter, odor, vibration, light
glare, traffic congestion, ease of routine and emergency
services, drainage, erosion, light and ventilation, surface
and groundwater quality, overcrowding of persons,
sanitation, property values, general appearance and
character, and other similar considerations.
2. The project will comply with the site design, landscaping,
setback, buffering and lighting of off-street parking area
requirements described in Sections 39-53, 39-54 and
39-54.1(a).
3. The City Engineer has approved drainage plans for the
proposed structure or expansion.
4. The project has been approved under the infill review
process pursuant to Section 39-198.
5. The applicant has provided sufficient off-street parking for
the proposed uses of the property.
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the special
exception subject to such additional conditions or restrictions
as it deems necessary to assure compatibility with adjoining or
nearby residential property, or to protect the health, safety,
and general welfare of the neighborhood and community,
including, but not limited to, the maximum number of vehicles
allowed on-site.
Sec. 39-199 CHARTER Sec. 39-199
C:999
Sec. 39-200. Pilot program - nonowner-occupied short-term rental
in R-TRN, R-1, and R-2 Zone Districts. [Added 4-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 1735]
Sec. 39-201. through Sec. 39-209. (Reserved)
(4) Residential building and site review standards: A special exception
for a residential structure shall be granted only if the Zoning Board
of Appeals determines that:
a. The project has been approved under the infill review process
pursuant to Section 39-198.
b. The applicant establishes that the project will not adversely
affect the adjoining properties and surrounding neighborhood.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the special
exception subject to such additional conditions or restrictions
as it deems necessary to assure compatibility with adjoining or
nearby residential property, or to protect the health, safety,
and general welfare of the neighborhood and community.
(a) This pilot program is established to:
(1) Study the proper regulation of nonowner-occupied short-term
rentals in residential zone districts;
(2) Determine what impact these short-term rental units have on
neighborhoods; and
(3) Assess how these short-term rentals contribute to the local
economy.
(b) Nonowner-occupied short-term rentals shall be allowed in R-TRN, R-1,
and R-2 Zone Districts during the two-year pilot program with the
following regulations:
(1) There shall be a maximum of 25 short-term rental units total within
the R-TRN, R-1, and R-2 zone districts.
(2) There shall be a 500-foot separation distance between each
nonowner-occupied short-term rental unit within the R-TRN, R-1,
and R-2 zone districts.
(3) Compliance with the regulations of Chapter 14, Housing, shall be
met, inclusive of Division 12 that specifies pilot program
regulations.
(4) If the pilot program is not renewed or incorporated into the
ordinance, the short-term rental shall not continue.
Sec. 39-199 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-201
C:1000
DIVISION 2
R-1 One-Family Residential District
Sec. 39-210. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.15; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 609; Ord. No. 617; Ord. No. 936, 1-6-1988; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1366, § 3, 8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1415, § 5,
6-1-2005; Ord. No. 1460, 9-6-2006]
The R-1 One-Family Residential District is intended primarily for singlefamily
residential use, but also allows church, school and public uses. The
following uses are permitted therein:
Sec. 39-211. Child care; family day care home; group day care
home. [Ord. No. 1013, 7-10-1991; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
(a) One single-family residence on each lot used as a single dwelling unit.
In addition, no more than a total of two roomers and boarders are
permitted when approved as a special exception under Section 39-407.
(b) Church uses and other places of worship.
(c) Public and private preschool, K-12, and community education-type
school uses.
(d) Municipal administrative and municipal service uses.
(e) Municipal parks, municipal recreation areas, municipal community
centers and gardens.
(f) Gardening or other farming, excluding the keeping of animals or fowl
contrary to the provisions of Section 4-1.
(g) Public library, public museum, and public art gallery.
(h) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) through (g) of this section; provided,
however, that such uses are in conjunction with an existing permitted
principal use on the premises; and provided further, that such
accessory uses shall not constitute, create or increase a nuisance in fact
which adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or nearby premises.
Such accessory uses shall include home occupations and home
businesses as defined and limited in Section 39-2 and regulated in
Section 39-192, and signs as specified in Article IX of this Code.
(i) Family day care home. A private family home in which not more than six
minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. This
home must comply with the provisions of Act No. 116 of the Public Acts
of 1973, as amended, and the regulations adopted pursuant to said
Act.120
120. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.111 et seq.
Sec. 39-210 CHARTER Sec. 39-211
C:1001
(a) Definitions.
(1) FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — A private home in which one but less
than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family
by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a
home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four
weeks during a calendar year.
(2) GROUP DAY CARE HOME — A private home in which more than six
but not more than 12 minor children are received for care and
supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a
parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day
care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor
child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
(b) Family day care home; permitted. A family day care home shall be
permitted in all residential zone districts as long as the applicant shall
comply with the provisions of Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of 1973, as
amended. (MCLA § 722.111 et seq.).
(c) Family and group day care; registration. In addition to compliance with
Act 116, it shall be the responsibility of any licensed provider of day
care, whether as a family or group day care home, to register the use
and location of such home with the "911" central dispatch office within
30 days after the issuance of a license, provided that this requirement
may be satisfied by the periodic registering of all licensed day care
facilities on behalf of the individual licensees by the State Department
of Social Services, Four C's, or other agency that may be qualified to
provide and maintain current such information.
(d) Group day care; allowable as special exception. The use, conversion, or
expansion of an existing residence or a family day care home to a group
day care home may be permitted in all residential zone districts as a
special exception use, subject to a public hearing before the Zoning
Board, and findings of compliance with the following standards:
(1) An applicant seeking permission to operate a group day care home
shall file an application, in a form approved by the Zoning Board,
with the City Clerk, and shall pay the fee as prescribed for a special
exception use. A public hearing shall be conducted by the Zoning
Board and notice mailed to interested parties in accordance with
Section 39-409 of this chapter and applicable provisions of state
law.
(2) The applicant shall file with the application for a special exception
use a sketch site plan, sufficient in scale and detail to indicate all of
the following:
a. The overall shape and size of the parcel;
Sec. 39-211 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-211
C:1002
b. A sketch floor plan of floors and rooms proposed for use in the
day care operations;
c. Location of drives and parking areas serving the premises;
d. Location of all outside play areas to be used in the day care
program, and identification of any portion of the exterior
premises which will be specifically excluded from use or access
by day care activities;
e. Location and heights of any walls, fences, or landscape
barriers, including location of gates and types of construction
material.
(3) The Zoning Board may grant a special exception permitting the use
of the residence as a group day care home if it finds, based upon
the evidence submitted by the applicant and at the public hearing,
that all of the following exist:
a. The applicant and premises comply or will comply with Act 116
of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended,121 prior to the
commencement of operations.
b. The group day care home shall be located on a site with at least
5,000 square feet of gross lot area and the proposed site must
contain not less than 100 feet per child of usable out-of-doors
play area. For purposes of this section, usable out-of-doors play
area shall be defined as the area located on the lot behind the
established front yard setback of the home which is available
or devoted to outdoor activities, exclusive of any area occupied
by a swimming pool. The area shall be free from sharp gravel,
glass, or cinder, and shall be well drained.
c. The access drive for the group day care home shall not be a
joint or shared driveway unless the applicant shall file the
written consent of the abutting property owner.
d. The proposed group day care home shall be inspected for
compliance with the Housing Property Maintenance Code of
the City. Additional code inspection may be required as is
necessary to determine compliance with regulations that are
now or may be determined to be specifically applicable to
group day care, and for which the City is determined to be the
enforcing agency.
e. The proposed use of the residence for group day care shall not
change the essential character of the surrounding residential
area, and shall not create a nuisance in fact or law relating to
vehicular parking, noise, additional congestion, or density in
excess of residential uses of the property in the zone district.
121. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.111 et seq.
Sec. 39-211 CHARTER Sec. 39-211
C:1003
Sec. 39-212. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.15; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Within any R-1 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by Section
39-210.
Sec. 39-213. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.15; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Off-street parking shall be provided in R-1 Districts in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59.
Sec. 39-214. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.15;
Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1232, 12-16-1998]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within R-1 Districts:
Sec. 39-215. (Reserved)122
Sec. 39-216. through Sec. 39-219. (Reserved)
f. The grant of the special exception shall not impair the health,
safety, welfare, or reasonable enjoyment of adjacent or nearby
residential properties.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 35 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet from the
street line.
(c) Side yard. For single-family dwellings there shall be two side yards
totaling at least 18 feet, and no side yard shall be less than seven feet;
provided, that where a side lot line adjoins a side street, a minimum
yard of 20 feet is required. For all other buildings, minimum side yards
of 20 feet on each side are required.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. There shall be a lot area of at least 8,400 square
feet, and a minimum lot width along the front building line of 70 feet.
(f) Exceptions. For height and area exceptions, see also Section 39-185.
122. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-215, adopted by Ord. No. 464, as amended by Ord. No.
609, Ord. No. 723, 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, 9-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1262 and 9-19-2001
by Ord. No. 1315, was repealed 8-20-2003 by Ord. No. 1366.
Sec. 39-211 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-216
C:1004
DIVISION 3
R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential District
Sec. 39-220. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.16; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 609; Ord. No. 1185; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No.
1366, § 4, 8-20-2003]
The R-2 One- and Two-family Residential District allows two-family
dwellings and certain other residential uses in addition to the uses
permitted in the R-1 District. The following uses are permitted:
Sec. 39-221. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.16; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Within any R-2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by Section
39-220.
Sec. 39-222. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.16; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Off-street parking shall be provided in R-2 Districts in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59.
Sec. 39-223. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.16;
Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1232, 12-16-1998]
The following height and area regulations shall apply in R-2 Districts:
(a) The uses permitted by Section 39-210.
(b) A single residential building containing not more than two dwelling
units on each lot. In addition, no more than a total of two roomers and
boarders are permitted within the single residential building when
approved as a special exception under Section 39-407.
(c) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) and (b) of this section; provided, however,
that such uses are in conjunction with an existing permitted principal
use on the premises; and provided further, that such accessory uses
shall not constitute, create or increase a nuisance in fact which
adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or nearby premises. Such
accessory uses shall include home occupations and home businesses as
defined in Section 39-2 and regulated in Section 39-192, and signs as
specified in Article IX of this Code.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 35 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet from the
street line.
Sec. 39-220 CHARTER Sec. 39-223
C:1005
Sec. 39-224. Conversions. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.14; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Conversion of existing single-family homes from one-family to two-family
use is permitted in R-2 Districts with a lot area of at least 4,800 square feet
for each family, and a minimum lot width along the front building line of
80 feet. In addition, a conversion must be approved by the Zoning Board
pursuant to Section 39-189.
Sec. 39-225. (Reserved)123
Sec. 39-226. through Sec. 39-229. (Reserved)
(c) Side yard. For one- and two-family residences there shall be two side
yards totaling at least 15 feet, and no side yard shall be less than six
feet; provided, that where a side yard adjoins a side street, a minimum
yard of 16 feet is required. For all other building, minimize side yards of
20 feet on each side are required.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. There shall be a lot area of at least 7,200 square
feet for each new single-family dwelling hereafter erected, and a
minimum lot width along the front building line of 60 feet. Two-family
dwellings may be erected with a lot area of at least 4,800 square feet
per family, and a minimum lot width along the front building line of 80
feet.
(f) Exceptions. For height and area exceptions, see also Section 39-185.
123. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-225, which pertained to exceptional uses in R-2
Districts, adopted by Ord. No. 575, as amended 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, was repealed
10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 1371.
Sec. 39-223 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-226
C:1006
DIVISION 4
R-3 Residential District
Sec. 39-230. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.17; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 609; Ord. No. 617; Ord. No. 636; Ord. No. 937, 1-6-1988;
Ord. No. 1366, § 5, 8-20-2003; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
The R-3 Residential District allows certain residential uses in addition to
those permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts. The following uses are
permitted in this district:
(a) The uses permitted by Section 39-220, except that family day-care
homes located within structures enclosing two or more dwellings
sharing a common entrance and hallway shall be an exceptional use
subject to the conditions set forth in Section 221. Further, those family
day-care homes licensed as of the effective date of this ordinance
(January 27, 1988) are permitted uses.
(b) A building for the boarding or lodging, or both, of not more than five
persons in the building in addition to family members when approved as
a special exception under Section 39-407.
(c) Convalescent or nursing home; nursery school.
(d) Hospital, provided that the building occupies not more than 30% of the
lot area and is located at least 50 feet from each lot and street line.
(e) Group dwellings as limited by Section 39-235.
(f) Adult foster-care facilities and residential facilities for the care,
treatment, counseling or rehabilitation of persons with physical, mental
or social-emotional disorders, subject to the following conditions:
(1) All laws of the City regarding occupancy and maintenance of
residential premises shall be complied with. In addition, any such
residential facility which is subject to state or other governmental
licensing shall comply with requirements set forth for such
licensing.
(2) Any residence so used shall have a gross floor area, exclusive of
unfinished basement or attic, of at least 200 square feet per
occupant, and a lot area of at least 1,000 square feet per occupant.
(3) Improved off-street parking shall be provided in sufficient amount
to accommodate all vehicles belonging to, or available for the use
of, occupants, but in no case less than one space for every two
occupants.
(4) The establishment and operation of any such residential care
facility shall be subject to approval and licensing of an individual or
organization as set forth in Chapter 26, which individual or
organization shall be directly responsible for the care and
maintenance of the residence.
Sec. 39-230 CHARTER Sec. 39-230
C:1007
Sec. 39-231. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.17; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Within any R-3 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by Section
39-230.
Sec. 39-232. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.17; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Off-street parking shall be provided in R-3 Districts in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59.
Sec. 39-233. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.17;
Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 967, 11-2-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1232, 12-16-1998]
The following height and area regulations shall apply in R-3 Districts:
(g) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) through (f) of this section to the extent
that such accessory uses do not constitute, create or increase a
nuisance in fact which adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or
nearby premises. Such accessory uses shall include home occupations
and home businesses as defined in Section 39-2 and regulated in
Section 39-192, and signs as specified in Article IX of this chapter.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 45 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet from the
street line.
(c) Side yard. For one- and two-family residences, rooming houses and
conversions there shall be two side yards totaling at least 13 feet, and
no side yard shall be less than five feet; provided, that where a side yard
adjoins a side street a minimum side yard of 12 feet is required. For all
other buildings, minimum side yards of 20 feet on each side are
required.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. There shall be a lot area of at least 5,000 square
feet for each new single-family dwelling hereafter erected, and a
minimum lot width along the front building line of 50 feet. Two-family or
group buildings may be erected with a minimum lot area of at least
4,200 square feet for each dwelling unit, and a minimum lot width along
the front building line of a two-family or group dwelling of 60 feet.
(f) Exceptions. For height and area exceptions, see also Section 39-185.
Sec. 39-230 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-234
C:1008
Sec. 39-234. Conversion of buildings. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.17; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
In R-3 Districts, conversions of existing buildings into additional dwelling
units are not permitted on lots having a width along the front building line
of less than 60 feet.
Conversion of existing dwellings into not more than four dwelling units
is permitted with a minimum lot area of at least 3,000 square feet per
dwelling unit. In addition, a conversion must be approved by the Zoning
Board pursuant to Section 39-189.
Sec. 39-235. Group dwellings. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.17; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
In R-3 Districts, the erection of two or more residential buildings upon a plot
in common ownership is permitted, when such dwelling groups conform to
all provisions of this division, even though the location of the buildings to
be erected and the front, side and rear yard spaces do not conform in all
respects to the requirements stipulated in other parts of this chapter for a
single building on a single lot; provided, that the proposed dwelling group
shall meet all the following conditions and requirements:
Sec. 39-236. (Reserved)124
(a) The lot area requirements of the zone district shall be met.
(b) Every dwelling in such dwelling group shall front either on a street or
other permanent public open space, common yard or outer court at
least 50 feet wide, and no building may be built in the front or rear yard
space that would be required for a single building on a single lot.
(c) The distance between buildings or between any building and the
nearest lot line shall not be less than the height of the building, nor less
than 20 feet in any case.
(d) No building length may exceed its width by more than six times.
(e) Every dwelling in such dwelling group shall be within 500 feet of a
public street.
(f) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59, and such parking facilities
may be provided in the required side or rear yards.
124. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-236, which pertained to exceptional uses in R-3
Districts, adopted by Ord. No. 576, as amended 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, was repealed
10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 1371.
Sec. 39-234 CHARTER Sec. 39-237
C:1009
Sec. 39-237. Exceptional uses—Offices. [Ord. No. 670; Ord. No.
1153, 9-20-1995; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1371, § 3,
10-15-2003]
Upon application and a public hearing thereon, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may permit an office use of premises, subject to the following limitations:
Sec. 39-238. Same—Family day-care homes. [Ord. No. 938,
1-6-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Family day care homes (as defined in Section 39-211) shall be permitted
following public hearing by the Zoning Board determining that such use will
not be detrimental to adjoining properties or the neighborhood with respect
to:
Sec. 39-239. through Sec. 39-249. (Reserved)
(a) The property shall be located on 16th Street east of Waverly Road.
(b) Any building then or thereafter located thereon shall conform to the
residential character of the neighborhood.
(c) No part of the principal building shall be more than 125 feet from 16th
Street, nor shall any new principal building be placed closer than 30
feet to the next adjoining residentially zoned property on which an
office use is not permitted by this division.
(d) Uses accessory to such principal use shall not extend more than 200
feet from the 16th Street right-of-way line.
(e) All height, area and sign requirements, and required conditions of the
R-3 Residential District shall be met, except that the Zoning Board may
reduce side yard requirements as to any side yard adjoining premises
on which an office use is permitted by this division.
(f) Such other reasonable conditions and limitations as may be imposed by
the Zoning Board to protect nearby residential premises.
(a) Density of similar uses;
(b) Characteristics of the neighborhood;
(c) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic and parking.
Sec. 39-237 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-239
C:1010
DIVISION 5
R-4 Mobile Home Development and Residential District
Sec. 39-250. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 626; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
The R-4 District allows mobile home developments and other residential
uses. The following uses are permitted:
Sec. 39-251. Definitions. [Ord. No. 626; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Sec. 39-252. Development requirements. [Ord. No. 626; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
The following requirements shall apply to mobile home developments:
(a) The uses permitted by Section 39-230.
(b) Mobile home developments in accordance with the provisions of this
division, including any accessory structures and uses customarily
incident to such developments.
(a) ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structural addition to a mobile home,
including awnings, cabanas, carports, patios, Florida rooms, porches,
ramadas, storage cabinets and other similar structures.
(b) COMMON AREA — Any area or space designed and intended for
common use by tenants and residents of mobile home developments.
(c) MOBILE HOME — A manufactured, relocatable residential unit
providing complete, independent living facilities for one family,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
(d) MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land which has been
designed, planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes.
(e) MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land within a mobile home
development designed, planned and improved for the placement of a
mobile home and for the exclusive use of its occupants.
(f) MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of a mobile home lot designed,
planned and improved for the specific placement of a mobile home.
(a) The minimum land area for a mobile home development shall be 10
acres and there shall be no less than 50 mobile home lots per
development.
(b) Not less than 5% of the land area of a mobile home development shall
be devoted to recreational areas for common tenant use. Recreation
Sec. 39-250 CHARTER Sec. 39-252
C:1011
Sec. 39-253. Streets and parking. [Ord. No. 626; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
The following requirements regarding streets and parking shall apply to
mobile home developments:
areas may include space for pedestrian greenbelts, playgrounds or play
areas, common buildings, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming
pools, hobby and repair shops.
(c) No portion of any mobile home stand, mobile home or accessory
structure shall be located closer than 25 feet to any property line of the
mobile home development or shall be located closer than 10 feet to any
other mobile home lot or street.
(d) Any portion of a mobile home development located adjacent to
industrial or commercially zoned property shall be fenced or screened
to at least six feet in height.
(e) The maximum density of mobile home lots and of mobile homes in a
mobile home development shall not exceed 10 lots or mobile homes per
acre.
(f) Mobile home development signs shall comply with the provisions of
Section 39-355 of this Code.
(g) No portion of any recreational, utility, service or administrative building
shall be closer than 20 feet to any exterior property line, nor closer than
10 feet to any mobile home lot.
(a) Where off-street parking is provided on individual mobile home lots,
such mobile home lots shall be provided with paved vehicular access
connecting the lot to an improved street with the development.
(b) Primary streets within a development which provide direct access to a
public street shall be paved and drained in accordance with street
improvement standards applicable to public streets.
(c) Parking shall be provided for at least two improved parking spaces for
each mobile home lot. Such parking may be provided by curbside
parking, parking lots or a combination thereof.
(d) Internal circulatory streets within a development shall be curbed and
drained and shall comply with the following width standards:
(1) Circulatory streets with parking both sides: 36 feet.
(2) Circulatory streets with parking one side: 32 feet.
(3) Circulatory streets with no parking: 28 feet.
(e) Courts, culs-de-sac and other limited thoroughfare streets within a
development serving not more than 12 mobile home lots shall be
Sec. 39-252 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-253
C:1012
Sec. 39-254. Mobile home lots, facilities and installation. [Ord. No.
626; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Sec. 39-255. Additional requirements. [Ord. No. 626; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727]
The requirements of Act 96 of 1987, The Mobile Home Commission Act,
MCLA § 125.2301 et seq., as amended, applicable to trailer parks, are made
a part of this division the same as if set out herein, and no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued until such requirements have been met. All
provisions of this Code, including Chapter 35, which apply to residential
property within the City not in conflict herewith shall apply to mobile home
developments.
Sec. 39-256. through Sec. 39-264. (Reserved)
provided with an improved surface and be not less than 20 feet in
width.
(f) Except for streets within a development which are publicly dedicated,
the responsibility for street maintenance shall be that of the
development management and shall be adequate to assure access by
police, fire and other emergency and surveillance vehicles at all times.
(a) Any mobile home installed in a mobile home development shall comply
with the construction standards of all state and local authorities
applicable to the construction of mobile homes. In addition, every
mobile home installed in the City shall comply with the current
standards of the American National Standards Institute for the
construction and safety of mobile homes.
(b) Every mobile home stand shall be provided with supporting concrete
piers or a concrete surface and a minimum of eight tie-down anchors
suitable to prevent uplift or overturning, and capable of withstanding a
withdrawal force of 4,800 pounds without failure.
(c) Every mobile home lot shall be provided with municipal water and
sewer service and with electrical and telephone connectors. Any utility
service, including fuel supply, shall be installed underground.
(d) Every mobile home shall be fully skirted within 30 days of installation
on the mobile home stand.
(e) No mobile home shall be occupied within a development unless located
on a mobile home stand and until all provisions of this division have
been complied with.
Sec. 39-253 CHARTER Sec. 39-256
C:1013

DIVISION 6
R-5 Apartment District
Sec. 39-265. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.18; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 609; Ord. No. 617; Ord. No. 636; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1366, § 6, 8-20-2003]
R-5 Apartment District allows more intensive residential use and certain
regulated office uses in addition to all uses permitted in the R-3 Residential
District. The following uses are permitted:
Sec. 39-266. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.18; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Within any R-5 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by Section
39-265.
Sec. 39-267. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.18; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
Off-street parking shall be provided in R-5 Districts in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59.
(a) The uses permitted by Section 39-230.
(b) Multiple dwelling units.
(c) Rooming and boarding houses, and fraternities and sororities, when
approved as a special exception under Section 39-407.
(d) Hospital; provided, that the building occupies not more than 40% of the
lot area and is located at least 40 feet from each lot and street line.
(e) Adult foster care facilities and residential facilities for the care,
treatment or rehabilitation of persons with physical, mental or socialemotional
disorders, in accordance with the conditions set forth in
Section 39-230(a) through (d).
(f) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) through (e) of this section to the extent
that such accessory uses do not constitute, create or increase a
nuisance in fact which adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or
nearby premises. Such accessory uses shall include home occupations
and home businesses as defined in Section 39-2 and regulated in
Section 39-192, and signs as specified in Article IX of this Code.
Sec. 39-265 CHARTER Sec. 39-268
C:1015
Sec. 39-268. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.18;
Ord. No. 685; Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 967, 11-2-1988; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1232, 12-16-1998]
The following height and area regulations shall apply in R-5 Districts:
Sec. 39-269. Conversions. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.18; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Existing buildings in R-5 Districts may be converted into additional dwelling
units; provided, that the following requirements are met: Two dwelling units
shall have a lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet, and a minimum lot
width along the front building line of 50 feet. Each additional dwelling unit
shall have an additional 2,000 square feet of lot area. No converted building
shall contain more than four dwelling units. In addition, a conversion must
be approved by the Zoning Board pursuant to Section 39-189.
Sec. 39-270. (Reserved)125
Sec. 39-271. through Sec. 39-274. (Reserved)
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 45 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet from the
street line.
(c) Side yard. For one- and two-family residences, rooming houses and
conversions, there shall be two side yards totaling at least 13 feet, and
no side yard shall be less than five feet; provided, that where a side yard
adjoins a side street, a minimum side yard of 12 feet is required. For all
other buildings, minimum side yards of 20 feet on each side are
required.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. Each new single-family dwelling hereafter erected
shall have a lot area of at least 5,000 square feet, and a minimum lot
width along the front building line of 50 feet. Each new building
hereafter erected to house two dwelling units shall have a lot area of at
least 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit, and minimum lot width along
the front building line of 60 feet. Each new building hereafter erected to
house three or more dwelling units shall have a lot area of 3,000 square
feet for each dwelling unit and a minimum lot width along the front
building line of 60 feet.
(f) Exceptions. For height and area exceptions, see also Section 39-185.
125. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-270, which pertained to exceptional uses; officers in R-5
Districts, adopted by Ord. No. 464, as amended 11-16-1994 by Ord. No. 1130 and
2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, was repealed 10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 1371.
Sec. 39-268 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-271
C:1016
DIVISION 7
R-6 Central Apartment District
Sec. 39-275. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 552; Ord. No. 609; Ord. No.
617; Ord. No. 636; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1366, § 7,
8-20-2003]
The R-6 Central Apartment District allows more intensive residential use
and certain regulated office uses in addition to all uses permitted in the R-5
Residential District. The following uses are permitted:
Sec. 39-276. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 552; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Within any R-6 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended
or designated to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by
Section 39-275.
Sec. 39-277. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 552; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Off-street parking shall be provided in R-6 Districts in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59; provided, however, that required
off-street parking for apartment dwelling units shall be not less than 1.5
spaces per unit.
(a) The uses permitted by Section 39-230.
(b) Multiple dwelling units.
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Hospital; provided that the building occupies not more than 40% of the
lot area and is located at least 40 feet from each lot and street line.
(e) Adult foster care facilities and residential facilities for the care,
treatment or rehabilitation of persons with physical, mental or socialemotional
disorders, in accordance with the conditions set forth in
Section 39-230(a) through (d).
(f) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) through (e) of this section to the extent
that such accessory uses do not constitute, create or increase a
nuisance in fact which adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or
nearby premises. Such accessory uses shall include home occupations
and home businesses as defined in Section 39-2 and regulated in
Section 39-192, and signs as specified in Article IX of this Code.
Sec. 39-275 CHARTER Sec. 39-278
C:1017
Sec. 39-278. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 552; Ord. No.
685; Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 967, 11-2-1988; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1232, 12-16-1998]
The following height and area regulations shall apply in R-6 Districts:
Sec. 39-279. Conversions. [Ord. No. 552; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Existing buildings in R-6 Districts may be converted into additional dwelling
units; provided, that the following requirements are met: Two dwelling units
shall have a lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet, and a minimum lot
width along the front building line of 50 feet. Each additional dwelling unit
shall have an additional 2,000 square feet of lot area. No converted building
shall contain more than four dwelling units. In addition, a conversion must
be approved by the Zoning Board pursuant to Section 39-189.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 45 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet from the
street line.
(c) Side yard. For one- and two-family residences, rooming houses and
conversions, there shall be two side yards totaling at least 13 feet, and
no side yard shall be less than five feet; provided that, where a side yard
adjoins a side street, a minimum side yard of 12 feet is required. For all
other buildings, minimum side yards of 20 feet on each side are
required.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. Each new single-family dwelling hereafter erected
shall have a lot area of at least 5,000 square feet, and a minimum lot
width along the front building line of 50 feet. Each new building
hereafter erected to house two dwelling units shall have a lot area of at
least 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit, and minimum lot width along
the front building line of 60 feet. Each new building hereafter erected to
house three or more dwelling units shall have a lot area of 3,000 square
feet for each dwelling unit and a minimum lot width along the front
building line of 60 feet.
(f) Exceptions. For height and area exceptions, see also Section 39-185.
Sec. 39-278 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-279
C:1018
DIVISION 7.1
R-TRN Traditional Residential Neighborhood District
Sec. 39-280. Purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 6-1-2005; Ord.
No. 1576, 1-18-2012]
(a) This district provides for an urban residential zoning district that is
characteristic of the primarily single family residential neighborhoods
located in the central area of the City. Some of these neighborhood
areas are truly historic in nature and possess a charm and urban form
that is not yet duplicated in other areas of the City. This district
provides area and height requirements that closely match the status of
the existing built conditions. It also provides flexibility that allows the
existing urban character to remain through remodeling and
redevelopment efforts, and provides flexibility on a performance basis
for limited additional densities and mixture of land uses as is
characteristic of vibrant urban neighborhoods and places, when it can
be demonstrated that potential negative impacts are mitigated and
minimized through careful and creative site planning and design.
(b) There exists an area of Holland's Central neighborhoods defined as the
Hope Neighborhood Area where historically there has been a balance of
long-term owner-occupied homes and transitory short-term student
rental homes in the immediate vicinity of Hope College and Western
Seminary that has sustained the desire of each population to remain
and sustain the neighborhood. This area is now being challenged by
significant pressures for change in housing stock and density of activity.
Proximity to the college, recent student enrollment increases, and
minimal housing growth coupled with increased deterioration in old
housing stock have combined to increase pressure to convert (either
through conversion or replacement) long-time single-family owneroccupied
residential units or properties into short-term transitory
student occupancy with the greatest density of occupancy that
ordinances will allow.
(1) These changes challenge the desirability and sustainability of this
neighborhood as a single-family neighborhood. This has been
problematic due to the accompanying high density of individuals
often with divergent lifestyles, activity patterns, and schedules; and
an atypically high density of automobile possession and use where
need is typically to accommodate one vehicle per occupant thereby
increasing noise, traffic, paving demands, and loss of green yard
space.
(2) Due to the transitory nature of student housing (normally for less
than a full twelve-month period), opportunities for developing
relationships between short-term occupants and long-term
residents are diminished, and the sense of cohesive neighborhood
is hard to achieve where there is limited opportunity or effort to
establish a sense of belonging to, investing in, and committing to a
cohesive neighborhood.
Sec. 39-280 CHARTER Sec. 39-280
C:1019
Sec. 39-281. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 6-1-2005; Ord. No.
1576, 1-18-2012]
(3) It is the intention of the City to encourage and sustain opportunities
for single-family occupancy as a stabilizing force within all areas of
this zone district while acknowledging the opportunities under
certain conditions to support quality higher density housing such
as housing that accommodates the needs of those major
educational institutions that adjoin this zone district.
(4) Preservation and enhancement of the City's neighborhoods for the
benefit of all is a significant City objective.
(a) One single-family residence on each lot used as a single dwelling unit
subject to the procedures and review standards of Section 39-198.
Additionally, no more than a total of two roomers or boarders are
permitted when approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals as a special
exception pursuant to Section 39-407.
(b) Two but no more than four dwelling units in a single residential building
on an individual lot subject to the procedures and review standards of
Section 39-198. Additionally, no more than one roomer or boarder is
permitted per dwelling unit when approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as a special exception pursuant to Section 39-407. This
subsection shall not apply to areas of the R-TRN zone district that are
within the Hope Neighborhood Area.
(c) Church uses and other places of worship.
(d) Public and private preschool, K-12, and community education type
school uses.
(e) Municipal administrative and municipal service uses.
(f) Municipal parks, municipal recreation areas, municipal community
centers and gardens.
(g) Public library, public museum, and public art gallery.
(h) Family day care home. A private family home in which not more than six
minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. This
home must comply with the provisions of Act No. 116 of the Public Acts
of 1973, as amended, the regulations adopted pursuant to said act, and
the applicable provisions of Section 39-211.
(i) Group day care homes pursuant to the special exception requirements
of Section 39-211.
(j) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) through (g) of this section; provided,
however, that such uses are in conjunction with an existing permitted
principal use on the premises; and provided further, that such
Sec. 39-280 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-281
C:1020
Sec. 39-282. Conversions. [Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 6-1-2005]
Existing buildings may be converted into additional dwelling units, provided
that the following requirements are met:
Sec. 39-283. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 6-1-2005]
Within any R-TRN District, no building, structure or premises shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended
or designed to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by
Sections 39-281 and 39-282.
Sec. 39-284. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 6-1-2005; Ord.
No. 1576, 1-18-2012; amended 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1637;
10-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1658; 4-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1665; 3-7-2018
by Ord. No. 1726; Ord. No. 1738]
Sec. 39-285. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 1415, § 1,
6-1-2005]
The following height and area regulations shall apply in R-TRN districts:
accessory uses shall not constitute, create or increase a nuisance in
fact which adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or nearby premises.
Such accessory uses shall include home occupations and home
businesses as defined and limited in Section 39-2 and regulated in
Section 39-192, and signs as specified in Article IX of this chapter.
(a) A conversion must be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals
pursuant to Section 39-189.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum lot area of 4,800 square feet
and a minimum lot width along the front building line of 60 feet.
(c) Converted buildings shall not contain more than four dwelling units.
(d) Compliance with Section 39-198(d).
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 39-45 through 39-59, and Section
39-198(g)(5) when applicable, except 50% of the required parking for
permitted nonresidential and institutional uses are required for this
district.
(b) Paving and parking in the Central Neighborhood District overlay area
portion of the R-TRN residential district shall be in accordance with
Section 39-62 of this chapter.
(c) Bed-and-breakfasts shall have separate parking requirements as stated
in Section 39-194(a)(2)d.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 45 feet in height.
Sec. 39-281 CHARTER Sec. 39-285
C:1021
Sec. 39-286. through Sec. 39-299. (Reserved)
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 10 feet from the
street right-of-way line, and in no case shall a front yard be greater than
25 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(c) Side yard.
(1) For all residential buildings, there shall be two side yards totaling
at least 13 feet, and no side yard shall be less than five feet;
provided, that where a side yard adjoins a side street a minimum
side yard of seven feet from the street right-of-way line is required,
and in no case shall a side yard on a side street be greater than 25
feet from the street right-of-way line.
(2) For all other buildings, a minimum side yard of 10 feet on each side
is required.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. There shall be a lot area of at least 5,000 square
feet and a minimum lot width along the front building line of 40 feet for
each new single-family dwelling, church, school, municipal building and
other public and/or private institutional building. For new two-family
and multifamily dwelling unit buildings, and conversions of existing
buildings into additional dwelling units, a minimum lot area of 4,800
square feet shall be required for each dwelling unit, and a minimum lot
width of 60 feet shall be required along the front building line.
(f) Area exceptions. In addition to the height and area exception
procedures of Sections 39-10 and 39-185, after due notice and a public
hearing pursuant to the noticing requirements for a site plan review,
the Planning Commission may approve larger front and side yard
setbacks for churches, schools, municipal buildings and other public
and/or private institutional uses either as a singular issue, or as a
component of a site plan review, if it determines the following: that such
larger building setback is necessary to allow the reasonable
improvement of the site, that the larger building setback will not be
detrimental to adjacent residential properties, and the larger setback
will be compatible with the urban design of the neighborhood.
(g) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall comply with Section
39-185, except the maximum yard restrictions of this district shall not
apply.
(h) Additions to existing structures. Additions or alterations to existing
buildings, conforming in use, that reduce nonconforming front yards or
side yards on a side street shall be permitted without compliance with
the maximum yard requirements of this section, but must comply with
the minimum yard requirements of this section.
Sec. 39-285 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-286
C:1022
DIVISION 8
PRD Planned Residential Development District
Sec. 39-300. Findings and intent. [Ord. No. 786; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1450, 4-26-2006]
There exists in the City properties adjacent to or near established
residential subdivisions or properties which by virtue of their proximity to
industrial or commercial districts, or major thoroughfares or by virtue of
their unusual or challenging environmental or economic conditions have
not been developed for individual residences or individual lots. There also
may exist in the City properties which have been identified in the City
Master Plan for residential developments with mixed densities and housing
types on which creative and flexible zoning can present more intensive yet
compatible and desired development than the basic by-right zoning found
in nonplanned development zones. It is the intent of this division to allow
the residential development of such areas so as to promote flexibility and
creativity in design, offer a variety of housing types and styles, encourage
the preservation of open space and natural amenities when those features
may be integrated into the project design, and encourage the development
of publicly and privately owned gathering spaces, while at the same time
assuring general compatibility with existing or potential residential
development in adjacent areas.
Sec. 39-301. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 786; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1366, § 11, 8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1387, § 6,
6-2-2004; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727; Ord. No. 1732]
(a) The following uses are permitted in a PRD District: Cooperative,
condominium or apartment residences, single-family dwellings,
duplexes, cluster housing, row housing, townhouses, zero-lot-line
dwellings, nursing homes, retirement homes and senior citizen housing
projects. In addition, all nonresidential uses and accessory uses allowed
in the R-1 District (Section 39-210) shall be permitted in accordance
with the regulations of such section.
(b) In addition to those nonresidential uses permitted in Section 39-78, the
following uses may be permitted in a PRD District upon a finding that
they are all architecturally and physically integrated within a
development, rather than along the borders thereof, and are intended
primarily to serve the needs of residents within the development:
(1) Golf courses, tennis clubs, athletic clubs and fitness centers;
(2) Clinics, dispensaries, therapy or treatment centers;
(3) Convenience, retail sales and services, sidewalk and outdoor cafes
pursuant to Chapter 32;
(4) Signs for Subsection (b)(1) through (3) above which are
permanently affixed to a building.
Sec. 39-300 CHARTER Sec. 39-301
C:1023
Sec. 39-302. Establishment. [Ord. No. 786; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
PRD Districts may be established by initiative of the Planning Commission
and the City Council or may be established by application and approval, in
accordance with procedures of this Code. In either case, the residential use
of any lands, within a PRD District shall be contingent upon the submission
and approval of a development plan and the faithful adherence of such
development to that plan. The development plan approval of a PRD
development shall supersede and be in lieu of any other site plan review
process of this chapter. In the case of an application for rezoning to a PRD
District, the approval of a zone change and the approval of a development
plan shall proceed concurrently. In cases where a PRD District is existing,
a development plan shall be approved by the Planning Commission prior to
development. In the event of a proposed subdivision within a PRD District,
the preliminary plat submitted and approved shall be deemed the
development plan, irrespective of other requirements of this chapter.
Except for lot size and area requirements, all applicable provisions of
Chapter 33 shall apply to a subdivision within a PRD District. In considering
approval or disapproval of a development plan, the standards set forth in
Section 39-24 shall be applied.
Sec. 39-303. Review of development plan. [Ord. No. 1188,
§ 2-19-1997]
All developments in a PRD zone district shall be reviewed in accordance
Article II of this chapter.
Sec. 39-304. Compliance with overlay district requirements. [Ord.
No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001]
The portions of a property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay
district per Article VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the
requirements of the applicable overlay district.
Sec. 39-305. Minimum residential densities. [Ord. No. 1354, § 3,
11-20-2002]
Where the lot is served by, or is otherwise available to, a public sewer
system, there shall be a minimum allowable residential density of greater
than three dwelling units per acre. Where the lot is not served by, or is not
otherwise available to, a public sewer system, there shall be a minimum
allowable density of greater than two dwelling units per acre.
Sec. 39-306. through Sec. 39-314. (Reserved)
(c) Short-term rentals as allowed in Chapter 14 with a certificate of
compliance if this use has been approved by the Planning Commission
as part of the site plan.
Sec. 39-301 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-306
C:1024
ARTICLE VIII
Other District Regulations
DIVISION 1
AG Agricultural District
Sec. 39-315. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.19; Ord. No. 601;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1354, § 1, 11-20-2002; 3-7-2018
by Ord. No. 1727]
The AG Agricultural District is intended for agricultural and large lot
residential uses. The following uses are permitted therein:
(a) One single-family residence on each lot used as a single dwelling unit.
In addition, no more than a total of two roomers and boarders are
permitted when approved as a special exception under Section 39-407.
(b) Municipal parks, recreation areas and community centers, provided
that any building or structure shall be located at least 50 feet from each
lot and street line.
(c) Farming and agricultural uses.
(d) Public or private nonprofit parks, recreation areas and wildlife
sanctuaries or preserves.
(e) Family day-care home. A private family home in which not more than six
minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. This
home must comply with the provisions of Act No. 116 of the Public Acts
of 1973, as amended, and the regulations adopted pursuant to said Act.
(f) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use
permitted by Subsections (a) through (e) of this section to the extent
that such accessory uses do not constitute, create or increase a
nuisance in fact which adversely affects a legal use of adjoining or
nearby premises. Accessory farm uses shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
(1) The sale, on farm premises, of farm products produced thereon if
not more than one person not an inhabitant of the principal
building is employed in such sales.
(2) The housing of farm employees on the farm where employed,
provided that such buildings comply with the requirements of this
district with respect to the residential use of land.
(3) The housing of seasonal farm laborers and their families on the
farm where employed, subject to Sections 39-317 and 39-318 and
the provisions of Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of 1917, as
amended.
Sec. 39-315 CHARTER Sec. 39-315
C:1025
Sec. 39-316. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.19; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1354, § 1, 11-20-2002]
Within any AG District, no building, structure or premises shall be used and
no building or structure shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part for any use not permitted by Section
39-315.
Sec. 39-317. Required conditions. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.19; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1298, § 2, 5-23-2001; Ord. No. 1354, § 1,
11-20-2002]
The following conditions are required in AG Districts:
Sec. 39-318. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.19;
Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1354, § 1,
11-20-2002]
The following height and area regulations shall apply in AG Districts:
(4) Home occupations, as defined and limited in Section 39-192, are
accessory uses.
(a) Storage of trucks and farm machinery. All trucks and farm machinery
either shall be stored within a building or not less than 100 feet from
any street or property line.
(b) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of Sections 39-45 to 39-59.
(c) Compliance with overlay district requirements. The portions of a
property that fall within the boundaries of an overlay district per Article
VIII, Division 5 of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of the
applicable overlay district.
(a) Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 45 feet in height.
(b) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet from the
street line.
(c) Side yard. Each side yard shall be at least 20 in width; provided, that
where a side yard adjoins a street the front yard requirements shall
apply.
(d) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
(e) Lot area and width. Where the lot is served by, or is otherwise available
to a public sewer system, single-family residential lots shall have a
minimum lot area of 14,000 square feet, and a minimum lot width of
100 feet. Where the lot is not served by, or is not otherwise available to
a public sewer system, single-family residential lots shall have a
minimum lot area of 21,600 square feet, and a minimum lot width of
120 feet. For all other uses, there shall be a lot area of at least 35,000
Sec. 39-315 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-318
C:1026
Sec. 39-319. (Reserved)126
Sec. 39-319.1. (Reserved)127
square feet, and a minimum lot width along the front building line of at
least 165 feet for each principal building.
126. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-319, which pertained to exceptional uses regarding
motels and professional offices, adopted by Ord. No. 464, as amended by Ord. No. 601 and
2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, was repealed 4-18-2001 by Ord. No. 1295.
127. Editor's Note: Former Section 39-319.1, which pertained to moratorium on development in
specified AG Agricultural Districts, adopted 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1291, was repealed
6-6-2007 by Ord. No. 1478.
Sec. 39-318 CHARTER Sec. 39-319.1
C:1027

DIVISION 2
ED Education District
Sec. 39-320. Intent and permitted uses. [Ord. No. 834; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1576, 1-18-2012]
Sec. 39-321. Height and area regulations. [Ord. No. 834; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1370, 10-15-2003; Ord. No. 1557,
2-2-2011]
The following height and area regulations shall apply within ED Districts:
(a) The ED Education District is established primarily to recognize the
widely varied and highly concentrated land uses and activities
associated with Hope College and Western Seminary, but may be
applied to other public or private school campuses as well, if public
purpose is advanced thereby. In designating such districts, it is
intended that educational institutions shall enjoy maximum latitude and
flexibility in development and utilization of land and facilities, as is
consistent with their educational objectives and with preservation of
the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
(b) When established as an integrated element of the educational program,
a full range of academic, administrative, assembly, residential,
recreational and supportive services are permitted, including, but not
limited to, the following: Classroom, laboratory, library, gymnasium,
student center, office, store, clinic, gallery, greenhouse, parking areas,
chapel, theater, auditorium, dining hall, dormitory, apartment,
residence, museum, playing fields and courts, signs, sculpture and
monuments. For the purposes of this division, all such buildings or uses
which are customary or incidental to an educational function may be
referred to as "institutional uses," as distinguishable from privately
owned residential premises which may be included within an ED
District.
(c) In addition to the foregoing, such installations or uses as may be
necessary or incidental to utility or mechanical services, maintenance
and operations, and safety and security shall be permitted.
(d) It is understood that properties within this zone district are
characterized by the diverse building uses, institutional activities and
programs, and student activities and lifestyles, within general oversight
by the particular institution.
(a) Height. Educational and related buildings shall not exceed 75 feet in
height; provided, that where such buildings adjoin private residential
premises, the height of a building shall not exceed the setback to the
common property line with such premises. For all other uses a
maximum height of 45 feet shall be established.
(b) Minimum building setbacks.
Sec. 39-320 CHARTER Sec. 39-321
C:1029
Sec. 39-322. Special conditions. [Ord. No. 834; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1576, 1-18-2012; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1726]
The following special conditions shall apply in an ED District:
(1) Side and rear yards adjacent to institutional uses. Within an ED
District, institutional use separation shall be unregulated by
zoning, but shall be subject to such building, fire and safety codes
as may be applicable.
(2) Front yard, side yard on a street. There shall be a minimum setback
of zero feet from a public street for institutional uses. Where an
institutional use is immediately adjacent to noninstitutional-owned
property, the minimum setback from the street shall be equal to the
setback of the existing structure on the adjacent property (not to
exceed 25 feet) for that part of the institutional use within 50 feet of
the noninstitutional-owned property.
(3) Side and rear yards adjacent to noninstitutional uses. There shall
be a minimum setback of 25 feet from other privately and publicly
owned premises (other than a public park), unless a greater
amount may be required due to building height as set forth in
Subsection (a) of this section. For side and rear yards adjacent to a
publicly owned park, the minimum setback shall equal the height of
the building.
(a) Singularity of uses. Educational institutions within an ED District shall
be considered singular uses, notwithstanding the fact that they may be
comprised of several and separate component uses on one or more
individually described parcels of land. In addition, an educational
institution shall be considered singular and unified irrespective of
streets, alleys, rail lines or rights-of-way which may run through or
among various parcels comprising an educational campus.
(b) Residential premises. For the purposes of mapping and description
clarity, residential premises may be included in describing an ED
District. Such properties may be used or developed in accordance with
the regulations of the R-TRN Traditional Residential Neighborhood
District.
(c) Parking generally. Off-street parking shall be provided in the amount
set forth in Article IV of this chapter. As singular unified uses,
educational institutions shall not be obligated to provide individual
parking accommodations on individual building plots, but are
encouraged to develop perimeter parking lots to minimize vehicular
activities within a campus area. Paving and parking in the Central
Neighborhood District overlay area portion of the ED Education District
shall be in accordance with Section 39-62 of this chapter.
(d) Special housing requirements. Student housing designed in the manner
of on-campus apartments which could, under other circumstances, be
Sec. 39-321 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-322
C:1030
Sec. 39-323. through Sec. 39-329. (Reserved)
divested from the campus and occupied as private residential premises
shall be so designed as to assure the availability of not less than
a twenty-foot setback from any property line, either actual or
hypothetical, and shall further retain sufficient open space immediately
adjacent to such buildings to permit future development of parking at a
ratio of not less than one space per dwelling unit.
(e) Additional parking requirements; applicability of other chapters of
Code to institutional uses. Except for the provisions of Subsection (c) of
this section with respect to the location of parking areas, all other
applicable requirements for the establishment and operation of parking
areas shall apply within an ED District. In addition, institutional uses
within such districts shall be subject to all other chapters of this Code
which may be applicable thereto.
(f) Expansion or alteration. The initial establishment of an ED District on
the Zoning Map is not intended to limit or prohibit the growth of
educational institutions within such districts, and the boundaries of
such a district may be expanded or altered in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and state law.
Sec. 39-322 CHARTER Sec. 39-323
C:1031

DIVISION 3
Airport Zoning Regulations
Sec. 39-330. Intent and purpose of article. [Ord. No. 984,
8-16-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1700]
Sec. 39-331. Definitions. [Ord. No. 984, 8-16-1989; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1314, 9-19-2001]
(a) An ordinance establishing airport zoning regulations restricting the
height of structures and objects of natural growth and otherwise
regulating the use of property in the vicinity of the West Michigan
Regional Airport; providing for the allowance of variances from such
regulations; designating the Community and Neighborhood Services
Department staff responsible for the administration and enforcement of
such regulations; establishment of the Zoning Board of Appeals to
render decisions to property owners desiring to erect any structure or
increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or
otherwise utilize the property in violation of the airport zoning
regulations adopted under this district.
(b) This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
provisions of the Act No. 23 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan
for the year 1950 (Extra Session128 and, as amended, Act No. 158 of the
Public Acts of the State of Michigan for the year 1976 for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the counties of Ottawa and Allegan by preventing the establishment of
airport hazards and thereby protecting the general public, users of the
West Michigan Regional Airport and occupants of land in its vicinity,
and preventing the destruction and impairment of the utility of said
airport and the public investment therein.
(a) AIRPORT — Refers to the Tulip City Airport and all appurtenances used
or acquired for airport buildings or other airport facilities and all other
appurtenances rights-of-way or other interests either heretofore or
hereafter established.
(b) AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or tree within the airport hazard
area which exceeds height limitations established by this ordinance, or
any use of land or of appurtenances thereto within the airport hazard
area which interferes with the safe use of the airport by aircraft.
(c) AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN — A plan, or an amendment to a plan, that
shows current or proposed layout of the Tulip City Airport and that is
approved by the Michigan Aeronautics Commission. [On file in the
office of the City Clerk.]
128. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 259.431 et seq.
Sec. 39-330 CHARTER Sec. 39-331
C:1033
Sec. 39-332. Planning Commission. [Ord. No. 984, 8-16-1989; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1700]
The Planning Commission is designated by the City of Holland and the
Michigan Aeronautics Commission for the express purpose of establishing
airport zoning regulations. Community and Neighborhood Services staff
are charged with the responsibility of administering the provisions of this
section in conjunction with applicable City departments and services. The
Planning Commission Staff establishes land uses within the designated
airport protection zone as depicted on Figure 1 and Figures 2a and 2b
[not set out herein], according to the provisions of this ordinance.129 Land
uses are suggested with regard to noise, traffic, pollution and other adverse
impacts associated with the land use of the airport.
Sec. 39-333. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 984, 8-16-1989;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1700]
The Zoning Board of Appeals is designated by the City of Holland and
the Michigan Aeronautics Commission for the express purpose of providing
relief in the event of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, if not
contrary to the public interest and safety, height limitations or land use
restrictions imposed by administrative approval in accordance with this
(d) AIRPORT PROPERTY — Refer to any property owned by the City of
Holland, whether in fee or easement, used directly or indirectly for the
purposes of the Tulip City Airport.
(e) AIRPORT PROTECTION ZONE — The zone or area wherein certain
types of land uses are not recommended due to noise, vibration, fumes,
dust, fuel particles and other effects that may be caused by the
operation of aircraft landing, taking off, or operation at or on the
airport. Depicted herewith on Figure 1 [not set out herein].
(f) ABOVE MEAN SEA LEVEL — When used in this ordinance or on the
accompanying maps, denotes elevations above sea level as based upon
and determined by reference to United States Coastal and Geodetic
Survey data.
(g) NONCONFORMING USE — Is any structure, tree or use of land which
does not conform to regulations prescribed in this ordinance or any
amendment thereto as of the effective date of this ordinance
[September 6, 1989].
(h) STRUCTURE — Any object constructed or installed by man, including
but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, overhead
transmission lines, radio and television aerials and antennas, but not
including highways and their appurtenances.
(i) TREE — Any object of natural growth.
129. Editor's Note: Figures 1, 2a, 2b, 3, and 4 are on file in the City offices.
Sec. 39-331 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-333
C:1034
chapter. Thus, any person adversely affected by the provisions of this article
may apply for a variance from the provisions herein according to the
procedures set forth in Article XII of this chapter, the terms of which are
incorporated herein by reference.
Sec. 39-334. Nonconforming structures and uses. [Ord. No. 984,
8-16-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Sec. 39-335. Airport hazard area. [Ord. No. 984, 8-16-1989; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
There is hereby established an airport hazard area, Figure 4 [not set out
herein], which area or zone consists of all the lands within Allegan and
Ottawa County lying beneath the approach, transitional surface 150 feet
horizontal, and land being located within a circle having a radius extending
horizontally three miles from the established center of the usable landing
area of the airport and the boundaries of which surfaces are shown on
Figure 4. The airport hazard area includes the aviation easement areas
existing and future to be maintained at ground zero, meaning no structure
of any description is permitted within the easement area.
Sec. 39-336. Land use. [Ord. No. 984, 8-16-1989; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
(a) Existing nonconforming structures. Notwithstanding the provisions of
the Article III of this chapter, this ordinance does not affect existing
structures, the height of which exceeded the limits imposed by this
ordinance as of the effective date hereof [September 6, 1989]. New
construction, and construction increasing the height of existing
structures, within three miles of the airport, must conform to the
provisions on height limitations. This ordinance also restricts such use
of land within the vicinity of the airport as will interfere with radio
communications systems and other navigational aids or devices used by
the airport and aircraft, or would reduce visibility or would create
confusing lights.
(b) Existing nonconforming uses. Notwithstanding the provisions of the
Article III of this chapter, legal height limitations of this ordinance shall
not apply to structures, trees, or other nonconforming uses in the
airport hazard area existing on the effective date of this ordinance,
[September 6, 1989], unless subsequent to the effective date of the
ordinance the Building Inspector of the City of Holland determines the
structure or tree to be abandoned more than 50% destroyed,
deteriorated or decayed. Any changes or alterations in existing
structures, trees or other nonconforming uses after the effective date of
this ordinance are subject to all provisions of this ordinance with the
same force and effect as though the same were new uses.
(a) Legal height limitations. From the effective date of this ordinance
[September 6, 1989], it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any
Sec. 39-333 CHARTER Sec. 39-336
C:1035
Sec. 39-337. Administration and site plan review. [Ord. No. 984,
8-16-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1314, 9-19-2001;
Ord. No. 1514, 8-20-2008; Ord. No. 1552, 10-20-2010; Ord. No.
1700]
structure or allow any tree to grow to a height in excess of the limitation
prescribed by the terms of this ordinance and the attached maps; or to
establish any use of lands contrary to the provision of this ordinance.
This would include any structure at or exceeding 150 feet in height
within the airport hazard area.
(b) Unlawful land use. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
ordinance, it shall be unlawful to put any lands within the airport
hazard area to any use which would:
(1) Create electrical interference with radio communication between
the airport and aircraft or create interference with navigational
aids employed by aircraft;
(2) Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
other lights or result in glare in the eyes of fliers using the airport;
(3) Create air pollution in such amounts as to impair the visibility of
pilots in the use of the airport;
(4) Endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft;
(5) Attract birds.
(a) Administration. Community and Neighborhood Services Department
staff of the City of Holland is charged with the duty of administering
and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The duties of staff shall
include those of issuing permits as hereinafter required. The Building
Official shall not issue a building permit prior to receiving a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration regarding a
site plan required under § 39-337, and may adopt such other
administrative procedures as may be necessary in connection with the
administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
(b) Site plan review. A site plan review conducted by Community and
Neighborhood Services Department staff in accordance with Article II
of this chapter will be required. Staff shall review the site plan in
accordance with aviation protection zones as set forth in the current
airport layout plan as adopted by the City, the use complies with all the
provisions of Section 39-336, and the proposed use does not unduly
interfere or restrict the development of the Master Plan of the West
Michigan Regional Airport. Staff shall request and receive a written
recommendation on the site plan from the West Michigan Airport
Authority or its staff prior to acting on the plan. With the exception of
construction or alteration on airport property, which will be reviewed
by the West Michigan Airport Authority, and with the exception of
accessory buildings that have a maximum height of 12 feet and
Sec. 39-336 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-337
C:1036
maximum floor area of 200 square feet that will be reviewed by the
Zoning Administrator, this section shall apply to the following
circumstances:
(1) New construction within 3,200 feet of any primary runway, such as
Runway 8-26 east-west, and within 2,500 feet of any secondary or
crosswinds runway, such as Runway 18-36 north-south, as depicted
in an approved airport layout plan (not set out herein);
(2) Alteration of an existing structure within 3,200 feet of any primary
runway, such as Runway 8-26 east-west, and within 2,500 feet of
any secondary or crosswinds runway, such as Runway 18-36 northsouth,
as depicted in an approved airport layout plan, exceeding
the height of the structure or any structural addition resulting in
the increase of the size of the structure.
(c) Approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be obtained for:
(1) Any structure equal to or exceeding 150 feet in height from any
point within the airport hazard area as delineated in the City's
current airport layout plan.
(2) Special exception permit. In the case of a property within 3,200
feet of any primary runway, such as Runway 8-26 east-west, and
2,500 feet of any secondary or crosswinds runway, such as Runway
18-36 north-south, as depicted in an approved airport layout plan, a
change of use of the property shall require a special exception
permit by the Zoning Board in accordance with the provisions
herewith and in Article XI. After a public hearing, the Zoning Board
may grant a special exception in accordance with the provisions
herewith, if the proposed use meets all of the following conditions:
(d) Federal permits. Federal permits may also be required for the
aforementioned categories of alteration or construction which must be
received for administrative review. Federal permits are required for any
construction on airport property or structures or trees exceeding 60
feet in height within the three-mile radius as depicted on Figure 4,
airport hazard area boundaries.130
(e) Fees. In the case of an application for rezoning of property within any of
the aforementioned areas, a site plan review may be conducted
concurrently with the rezoning hearing. The fee for a site plan review
and special exception permit shall correspond to the fee schedule as
described in the Code of the City of Holland. If rezoning is being applied
for concurrently with the site plan review process, a fee for rezoning
will be charged.
(f) Building permit. A building permit issued subsequent to the review
shall be effective for a period of six months from the date of issuance.
Thereafter, review as stipulated herewith would be required if
130. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is on file in the City offices.
Sec. 39-337 CHARTER Sec. 39-337
C:1037
Sec. 39-338. Regulations and enforcement. [Ord. No. 984,
§ 8-16-1989; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
substantial construction has not occurred within the six-month time
period. Substantial construction shall include the installation of one
or more underground utility systems, the installation of streets or the
installation of one or more building foundations.
(g) Emergency services. No application shall be required for the
emergency repair or replacement of nonconforming public utility
structures, other than buildings, when the height of such structures will
not be increased by such emergency repairs or replacement. It is
intended that in the application of this provision to any combination of
circumstances calling for immediate action or remedy in the repair or
replacement of such nonconforming public utility structures shall be
deemed an emergency.
(a) Regulations of ordinance. This ordinance establishes regulations on
land within a three-mile radius of the airport. This ordinance
establishes a huge air bowl with a maximum height limitation of 150
feet above the established elevation of the airport at the outer edge and
has a maximum height limitation of 60 feet above ground at some
locations in the approaches to the runways immediately adjacent to the
airport. The height limitations of this ordinance become less severe as
the distance from the airport is increased. Any structure or tree
constructed exceeding this height within the air bowl subsequent to the
adoption of this ordinance must complete the standard Federal Aviation
Administration review procedure.
(b) Judicial action. Any person, including the Michigan Aeronautics
Commission on behalf of and in the name of the state, aggrieved by any
decision of the Zoning Board, may appeal to the circuit court of the
County of Allegan as provided in Section 30 of Act No. 23 of the Public
Acts of the State of Michigan, 1950 (Extra Session).131
(c) Enforcement of ordinance. Any person who shall violate this ordinance
or any regulations, orders or rulings promulgated or made pursuant to
this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
prosecution. The City of Holland, in addition to criminal action taken,
may institute in the circuit court of Allegan County, an action to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this ordinance, or of
any airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance.
(d) Federal regulations. This ordinance is not intended to conflict with
existing federal airport protection regulations. In addition to the
provisions of this Division, a property owner shall comply with the
provisions of any federal or state statute, rule or regulation. The
Federal Aviation Administration requires property owners to give notice
of any construction or alteration:
131. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 259.460.
Sec. 39-337 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-338
C:1038
(1) More than 200 feet above ground level at its site.
(2) Above an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at 100
to one slope within 20,000 feet of the nearest point of a runway
more than 3,200 feet in length.
(3) Above an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at 50
to one slope within 10,000 feet of the nearest point of a runway less
than 3,200 feet in length.
Sec. 39-338 CHARTER Sec. 39-338
C:1039

DIVISION 4
(Reserved)
Sec. 39-339. (Reserved)
Sec. 39-339 CHARTER Sec. 39-339
C:1041

DIVISION 5
Overlay Zone Districts
Sec. 39-340. Purpose and definitions. [Ord. No. 1298, § 1,
5-23-2001]
Sec. 39-341. Specific area standards—M-40 Corridor/South End
Overlay Zone District. [Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 5-23-2001; Ord. No.
1567, 7-20-2011; amended 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 1647; 3-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 1727]
This overlay district is intended to require a measured amount of design,
safety, and developmental qualities for all properties within the district.
These qualities are meant to provide unifying elements and components
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this division is to describe certain overlay
zones used to impose special development requirements on identified
areas. The location of overlay zones is established by the City of Holland
based on the need for special protective and/or proactive measures in
that area. The uses permitted in the underlying zone district remain
undisturbed by the creation of the overlay zone. The overlay zone
imposes additional development standards, with the objective of
integrating development through an overall policy and elevating the
development quality of a whole specified area above the level of quality
achievable through the incremental and isolated development of
individual properties. If the provisions of the following overlay zone
districts conflict with other sections of the Zoning Ordinance, the
provisions of the overlay zone districts shall take precedence. The
provisions of this division shall also be held to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare. Among other purposes, such
provisions are intended to provide for adequate light, air, and
convenience of access to provide safety from fire and other dangers, to
provide for appropriate densities of development and population; to
regulate the size of yards and other open spaces; and regulate the
location of uses and buildings in relation to pedestrian, traffic, safety,
parking, and urban character needs.
(b) Definitions.
(1) FACADE — An exterior wall of a building.
(2) STREET REGULATING PLAN — The plan for existing and future
public street rights-of-way and alignments for the South End area
as depicted in the South End Master Plan.
(3) SOUTH END MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive land use and
physical improvements and design plan prepared and adopted by
the Planning Commission for the South End neighborhood area.
(4) WIDTH — A lineal dimension of a site or building measured on a
line parallel to the line of the street frontage.
Sec. 39-340 CHARTER Sec. 39-341
C:1043
that will elevate the overall quality of development for the entire area
to a level higher than the quality of development and design that may
otherwise be achieved for this area in the absence of these qualities. The
City of Holland deems these standards necessary in order to achieve the
goal of creating a high-quality gateway entrance to the City and a highquality
mixed-use neighborhood for these lands. The overlay district defines
gateway qualities; is supportive of commercial and industrial activities;
and assures a quality and character of the physical environment that will
be supportive of vehicular and nonmotorized access to those commercial
and industrial areas and supportive of nearby residential, neighborhood
commerce, and institutional development.
(a) Area. The M-40/South End Overlay District shall include those lands
along and adjacent to State Highway M-40 that are described as
follows: I-196 shall be the boundary line of the district to the north; the
City limits shall be the boundary line of the district to the south; a
boundary line to the east located 200 feet east of, parallel to and
measured at right angles to the right-of-way line of State Highway
M-40; and a boundary line to the west located 200 feet west of, parallel
to and measured at right angles to the right-of-way line of State
Highway M-40.
(b) Access management.
(1) All access onto M-40 shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and site plan
review by the Planning Commission based on standards in this
section and Sections 39-23 and 39-24 of this chapter.
(2) The Master Plan identifies major reconstruction and improvement
of M-40 through the South End, as illustrated on the street
regulating plan and as may be amended by the MDOT hereafter.
Upon construction of streets shown in the street regulating plan,
and upon major reconstruction of the M-40 corridor, all properties
within the overlay area shall receive access only via streets as
shown on the street regulating plan. On an interim basis, until such
street improvements are in place, access via temporary driveways
to M-40 or other existing public streets via shared or individual
driveways will be permitted. All such driveways onto M-40 shall be
strictly limited and may be limited to right turn in and right turn
out where safety concerns are evident. A temporary driveway
entrance off M-40 to a given parcel may be prohibited if there is
adequate access to the property by means of a connecting interior
drive from an adjoining parcel that has access to M-40.
(3) Driveways serving properties from adjoining streets other than
M-40 shall be at least 150 feet distant from the M-40 right-of-way,
measured from the center line of the driveway to the nearest edge
of the M-40 right-of-way.
(c) Building placement/required yards.
Sec. 39-341 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-341
C:1044
(1) For property with frontage on M-40 and all property in the M-40
corridor within 200 feet of the M-40 right-of-way line, all buildings
shall have a maximum yard requirement between the existing M-40
right-of-way and the building of 120 feet and a minimum yard
requirement of 40 feet.
(2) The maximum or minimum yard requirement from all other lot lines
including the right-of-way for public streets abutting the site shall
be per the requirements of the underlying zone district, or if the
property is zoned PUD Planned Unit Development District or PRD
Planned Residential Development District, as determined by the
Planning Commission in accordance with Section 39-25.
(d) Exterior building design. The following minimal window requirement is
meant to promote public safety by allowing occupants in a building to
see outside and monitor activities around at least a portion of the
building, and thereby reduce the potential for unlawful activities.
Windows shall be provided for at least 25% of the first 18 inches to
eight feet of height of the building elevations that face M-40.
(e) Lighting.
(1) All lighting shall comply with the standards of Section 39-25(d) of
this chapter.
(2) Areas designated for pedestrian activity shall be provided with
lighting fixtures that are pedestrian in size/scale, height, and
function.
(f) Parking. All parking requirements and arrangements shall comply with
Article IV, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning Ordinance.
(g) Signage. In addition to the base requirements of Article IX, Signs, of
this Zoning Ordinance, the following standards shall apply:
(1) All signage shall comply with the base underlying zone district
requirements of this chapter, unless the underlying zone district is
a PUD Planned Unit Development District or PRD Planned
Residential Development District, in which case the Planning
Commission shall determine the signage rights using the base
underlying zone district requirements as a guideline.
(2) New billboard and off-premises advertising signs shall not be
allowed in the overlay district area.
(h) Landscaping/screening/buffering.
(1) The objective of this subsection is to set and insure that a plentiful
yet flexible amount of landscaping is retained and introduced into
this highway oriented environment that serves as a major gateway
entrance into the Southside industrial areas and the larger city
beyond. Expectation levels will be high regarding the quantity and
quality of landscaping and other environmental treatments in both
Sec. 39-341 CHARTER Sec. 39-341
C:1045
the public right-of-way areas and those privately owned highvisibility
areas along the M-40 frontage, both as a means of
beautifying the lands on which the landscaping is actually placed,
and helping to create a special unifying identity for this area.
(2) Parking areas that are adjacent to a side property line, other than a
side yard on a side street, shall include a seven-foot-wide minimum
perimeter landscape strip. Two adjacent properties may each
evenly share in the joint development of a single ten-foot-wide
landscape strip along their common property line, if the properties
are developed concurrently.
(3) All perimeter landscape buffer strips required by this subsection
shall be continuous and unbroken except for driveways, streets, or
sidewalks that are meant to access interior portions of the property
as otherwise regulated. Such driveways, streets, or sidewalks that
cross the perimeter landscape strip shall by design minimize
interruption of the landscape buffer strip.
(4) All properties that have direct frontage on M-40 shall provide a
landscape buffer strip adjacent to the M-40 right-of-way per the
requirements of this subsection. Landscape buffer strips adjacent
to the M-40 right-of-way shall comply with the following
requirements:
a. When paved vehicle parking and/or circulation areas are
proposed between the right-of-way and a building, the
landscape buffer strip shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide. This
landscape buffer strip shall include either a continuous threefoot-
high landscaped berm or a continuous 2.5-foot (thirtyinch)
permanent masonry or brick wall, as measured by the
elevation of the edge of the closest portion of the parking lot, in
addition to the landscape plantings schedule of this section; or
a combination of a continuous three-foot-high landscape berm
and 2.5-foot (thirty-inch) permanent masonry or brick wall, in
addition to the landscape plantings schedule of this section, as
measured by the elevation of the edge of the closest portion of
the parking lot.
b. When there are no paved vehicle parking and/or circulation
areas proposed between the right-of-way and a building, the
landscape buffer strip shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide and
shall include landscaping per the landscape plantings schedule
of this section. A continuous three-foot-high landscaped berm,
or a continuous 2.5-foot (thirty-inch) permanent masonry or
brick wall may substitute for the required shrub plantings in
the following landscape planting schedule.
(5) Landscape planting schedule. The landscaping of landscape buffer
strips adjacent to the M-40 right-of-way shall be in accordance with
the following minimum standards at the time of planting:
Sec. 39-341 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-341
C:1046
Sec. 39-342. Specific area standards—I-196 Overlay Zone District.
[Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 5-23-2001]
This overlay district is intended to provide for a standard amount of
landscaping and screening in the highway frontage yard areas of properties
adjacent to I-196. These standards are above the screening requirements
of the underlying zone districts and are meant to: provide a consistent,
landscaped corridor character; help screen large parking areas, loading
docks, and outside storage and refuse/recycling areas from the direct view
of the passing motoring public; help alleviate glare and other forms of
stray lighting from adjacent properties onto the highway, thereby improving
driving conditions on the highway while enhancing the character and
Type of Planting
Minimum Quantity
per 100 Lineal
Feet Abutting
Street Minimum Sizes
Native deciduous 4 2.5 inches caliper
shade trees
Ornamental 3 1.5 inches caliper
understory trees
Shrubs 20 18 inches spread
(6) After reviewing the required landscape plan that includes an
inventory of existing on-site vegetation, the Planning Commission
may determine that existing natural vegetation may be credited
towards meeting the landscaping standards of this subsection.
Every effort shall be made to save and retain existing healthy and
compatible vegetation and integrate said vegetation with the
design of the project.
(7) Alternatives for a berm and wall. The requirement for a berm and
wall may be waived by the Planning Commission if they determine
that, based on information supplied to the Planning Commission, an
adjacent parking lot will be substantially screened from the view of
M-40 due to the final topography of the area.
(i) Sidewalks.
(1) The provision of sidewalks adjacent to all public streets throughout
this entire overlay district is of utmost importance and is hereby
required of all properties that have frontage on a public street.
(2) The minimum width of sidewalks shall be as follows:
a. Ten feet adjacent to M-40.
b. Six feet adjacent to all other streets.
c. Ten feet for properties with frontage in the Neighborhood
Center area.
Sec. 39-341 CHARTER Sec. 39-342
C:1047
privacy of private properties; and enhance the quality of appearance and
character of the roadside areas.
Sec. 39-343. Residential Rental Restriction Overlay District
(RROD). [Added 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1636]
The Residential Rental Restriction Overlay District is a zoning classification
which permits owners of property within R-1, R-2 and R-TRN residential
zoning districts to petition City Council to establish an overlay district,
and district use regulations in their residential neighborhood, which would
prohibit or restrict the rental uses of one-family and two-family dwellings
within the neighborhood. These districts establish a level of restriction
which operates to preserve the attractiveness, desirability, and privacy of
single-family residential neighborhoods by precluding all additional rental
properties and thereby precluding the deleterious effects that single-family
and two-family rental properties can have on a neighborhood with regard
to property deterioration, increased density, congestion, noise and traffic
levels and reduction of property values. The goal of the overlay district is
(a) Area. The I-196 Overlay District shall include those lands along and
adjacent to Interstate Highway I-196 that is described as follows: All
that property located within 30 feet of the I-196 right-of-way.
(b) Landscaping/screening/buffering. All properties that have direct
frontage on I-196 shall provide a perimeter landscape buffer strip per
the requirements of this section.
(1) The landscape buffer strip shall have a minimum width of 30 feet
running adjacent to the I-196 right-of-way.
(2) Existing significant natural vegetation within the buffer strip shall
not be disturbed, except the Planning Commission may approve a
pedestrian sidewalk or trail system in the area, as well as
environmentally sensitive on-site stormwater management
improvements as a component of a site or development plan
approval procedure.
(3) The intensity of vegetation in this buffer strip shall at a minimum
consist of one tree or shrub planting per 200 square feet of buffer
strip area with 50% of the vegetative plantings being trees at least
six feet high, and 50% of the plantings being shrubs or hardy
perennials at least 18 inches high at the time of planting.
(4) Existing natural vegetation shall be credited towards the
requirements of this section, where the Community Services and
Development Department determines the natural vegetation to be
healthy and of compatible high quality.
(c) Location of parking and structures. Parking spaces, paved surfaces, or
structures are prohibited in this buffer strip area, except this shall not
apply to a pedestrian sidewalk or trail system that includes pedestrian
benches and other similar amenities.
Sec. 39-342 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-343
C:1048
to allow owners of property within single-family and two-family residential
neighborhoods to control the types of rental properties, if any, that are
permitted in one-family and two-family dwellings within their neighborhood.
It is also the purpose of the districts to achieve the following objectives:
Sec. 39-343.1. Uses permitted in RROD. [Added 9-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 1636]
Uses permitted in the Residential Rental Restriction Overlay (RROD)
District include all uses in the underlying zoning district except the use or
occupancy of a one-family and two-family dwelling unit so as to require a
rental housing certificate pursuant to Section 14-4.27 of the Code of the
City of Holland.
Sec. 39-343.2. Procedures for establishing residential overlay
districts. [Added 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1636]
(a) To protect the privacy of residents and to minimize noise, congestion,
and nuisance impacts by regulating the types of rental properties;
(b) To maintain an attractive community appearance and to provide a
desirable living environment for residents by preserving the owneroccupied
character of the neighborhood;
(c) To prevent excessive traffic and parking problems in the
neighborhoods;
(d) To preserve the single-family housing stock for ownership
opportunities.
(a) The following procedures must be complied with in order to establish a
residential overlay district:
(1) A petition requesting an overlay district must be submitted to the
City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The petition
requirements are as follows:
a. At least two days prior to circulating a petition, the
circulator(s) of the petition must distribute a rental restriction
overlay district information sheet, approved and created by the
City, to each property owner shown on the City's tax rolls
within the area to be petitioned, a copy of which shall be
available in the City Clerk's office for review.
(2) Each petition must be circulated by a person who owns property
within the proposed district and be signed by the circulator.
(3) The petition must contain the signature and address of two-thirds
of the owners within the proposed boundary of the overlay district,
exclusive of public property. Jointly owned parcels will be
considered owned by a single person for purpose of petitioning and
any co-owner may sign a petition for such parcel. Only one owner of
Sec. 39-343 CHARTER Sec. 39-343.2
C:1049
each parcel will count towards the two-thirds requirement. If a
person owns more than one parcel of property within the proposed
district, he/she may sign the petition for each parcel he/she owns.
(4) Each person signing the petition must also enter, on the petition,
adjacent to his/her signature, the date that the person signed the
petition.
(5) The petition must accurately advise the signer of what restrictions
would be imposed on the property if the overlay district is
established. The circulator(s) of the petitions shall verify on the
petition that the required information sheet was distributed to each
property of record at least two days prior to circulation of the
petition and those signing the petition must acknowledge that they
received the required information sheet at least two days prior to
signing the petition by marking the appropriate box next to their
signature.
(6) The proposed boundaries of the overlay district must be described
in the petition and the boundaries must, if practicable, consist of
streets, alleys, platted subdivision boundaries or existing zoning
district lines which totally enclose the proposed district.
(7) There must be at least 48 separate lots or parcels within the
proposed district as described in the petition or two discernible
blocks or the proposed district must constitute a discrete
neighborhood geographic area. Within a proposed district, at least
20% of the existing one-family and two-family properties must have
an active rental certificate.
(8) The proposed boundaries of the overlay district must be entirely
within R-1, R-2, or R-TRN Zoning Districts and the parcels within
the proposed district must be contiguous.
(9) The proposed boundaries may not overlap a boundary of existing
overlay districts or the boundary of an overlay district that is
already the subject of an introduced ordinance pursuant to this
section.
(10) When submitted, no signature dated earlier than six months prior
to the time the petition is filed with the City Clerk shall be counted
in determining the validity of the petition.
(b) Upon presentation to the City Clerk for review, the Clerk shall verify
that the required numbers of signatures are obtained and that the
signatures on the petitions are of property owners within the proposed
district. If insufficient signatures are presented, the Clerk shall return
the petitions to the person filing the petitions and identify the valid and
invalid signatures. If sufficient valid signatures are presented, the Clerk
shall refer the petitions to the Zoning Department which shall then,
within 30 days, determine whether the petitions are in conformity with
the remaining conditions of this section.
Sec. 39-343.2 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-343.2
C:1050
(1) If the petition is determined to be in conformity with the
requirements of this section, the Department of Community and
Neighborhood Services shall draft an appropriate ordinance and
forward it to the City Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation to City Council in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Section 39-19. All procedures set forth in Section 39-19
for zoning changes by petition shall thereafter be followed.
(2) If the petition is not in conformity with the requirements of this
section, the Department of Community and Neighborhood Services
shall reject the petition and return it to the Clerk with a written
explanation as to why the petition does not meet the requirements
of this section. The Clerk shall then forward the petitions, and the
explanation, to the person who filed the petitions.
(3) If the petition is rejected for failure to comply with the boundary
requirements, it may be resubmitted with the proper boundary
lines if it is accompanied by certification that a copy of the petition
and written notice was mailed to each property affected by the
change, notifying them that their property was either added to or
deleted from the petition and if by the correction of the boundary
line the petition still meets all other requirements of the code.
(4) If the petition is rejected for an insufficient number of valid
signatures, it may be resubmitted with the additional signatures
necessary to have it comply as long as the other signatures remain
valid.
(5) If an ordinance is forwarded to City Council pursuant to this
section, after consideration of the petition and the
recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, if any, the City
Council may make additions or changes in the boundaries of the
proposed overlay district to prevent spot zoning, to include or
exclude areas that logically should have been included or excluded
in the petition, to make the boundaries of the proposed overlay
district abut boundary lines of other zoning districts and overlay
districts, and to adopt an alternate ordinance in conformity with
the suggested changes whether or not the two-thirds majority
requirement of property owners would still be met with the
proposed changes.
(6) If the City Council, in adopting an ordinance for an overlay district,
applies the ordinance to fewer parcels of property than the petition
sought, the owners of at least two-thirds of the parcels remaining in
the overlay district must have signed the original petition.
(c) No earlier than one year after the adoption of an ordinance establishing
an overlay district a petition for a change of the size or boundaries of
the overlay district may be submitted by following the procedures for
establishing an initial overlay district.
Sec. 39-343.2 CHARTER Sec. 39-343.3
C:1051
Sec. 39-343.3. Effect of overlay district ordinance. [Added
9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1636]
Sec. 39-343.4. Amendments to Zoning Use District Map. [Added
9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1636]
This section is derived from ordinances that amended the Zoning Use
District Map by rezoning specific properties into a Residential Rental
Restriction Overlay District.
Sec. 39-344. (Reserved)
(a) Upon introduction of an ordinance to create an overlay district and at
all times while the ordinance is pending final decision, there shall be a
moratorium on the issuance of initial annual basic housing permits to
the extent that no initial annual basic housing permit shall be issued
within the proposed overlay district to the owner of a one-family
dwelling unit that would be precluded if the overlay district was
adopted, regardless of whether the license was applied for prior to or
subsequent to the ordinance's introduction.
(b) Upon passage of an ordinance by City Council establishing an overlay
district, no initial rental unit license shall be issued to an owner of
property in the overlay district inconsistent with the restrictions of the
overlay district and it shall be unlawful to use or allow any property to
be used except in conformity with the requirements of the underlying
zoning district and overlay district. Any property in the overlay district
that has an existing rental housing license, or has had a rental housing
license within one year of adoption of the overlay district, shall be
allowed to continue its use and occupancy in accordance with the law
existing prior to the date of the adoption of the overlay district. If an
owner surrenders an existing license or allows, either intentionally or
unintentionally, a license to remain expired for more than one year, any
subsequent use of the property shall be subject to the restrictions
imposed by the overlay district.
Sec. 39-343.3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-344
C:1052
ARTICLE IX
Signs
Sec. 39-345. Intent and purpose. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993; Ord.
No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1729;
6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
Signs perform an important function in identifying and promoting
businesses, services, neighborhoods, events, economic development and
other matters of interest to the public. The intent of this article is to
regulate all signs within the City of Holland to ensure that they are
appropriate for their respective uses, in keeping with the neighborhood
characteristics as recognized and promoted by the City of Holland Master
Plan, to prevent traffic hazards, to provide safer conditions for pedestrians,
and protect public health, safety, and general welfare by:
Sec. 39-346. General sign provisions. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1208, 3-4-1998; Ord. No. 1356,
12-4-2002; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1427, 10-19-2005;
Ord. No. 1436, 1-4-2006; 9-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1634; Ord. No. 1729;
6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
(a) Setting standards and providing uniform regulations that permit
reasonable use of signs;
(b) Preserving the various characteristics found within the different zone
districts and neighborhoods throughout the City of Holland, regardless
of sign content. In preserving the character of the various
neighborhoods, signage must be scaled appropriately whereby
properties with frontage on wide streets with higher speed limits are
permitted larger signs than narrow streets with lower speed limits.
(c) Prohibiting the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, illumination,
and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians and motorists;
(d) Avoiding excessive amounts of signs so that the existing signs provide
adequate identification and direction while minimizing clutter,
unsightliness, and confusion; and
(e) Establishing a clear process for requiring permits for signs, allowing
some signs without permits, and allowing legally nonconforming signs
without jeopardizing the useful life of the sign.
(a) Location.
(1) Signs shall not be placed in, upon, or over a public right-of-way,
alley, or other public place, except:
a. With a revocable license approved by the City Council;
1. Flags located in C-1 and C-3 Zone Districts and in the I-1
Zone District, if it is for a retail or restaurant use and is
Sec. 39-345 CHARTER Sec. 39-346
C:1053
located west of College Avenue and north of 9th Street,
when appropriately attached to a wall of a building;
b. Temporary moveable freestanding signs located in C-1 and C-3
Zone Districts and in 1-1 Zone District, is a retail or restaurant
use and is located west of College Avenue and north of 9th
Street with a valid permit.
(2) No light pole, utility pole, or other supporting member of a building
or property shall be used for the placement of any sign unless the
owner of the pole or supporting member has given permission for
such use and the sign conforms to all requirements of this Article
IX.
(3) A sign shall not be erected in any place where it may, by reason of
its position, shape, color, or other characteristic, interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic
signs, signal, or device, or constitute a nuisance.
(b) Clearance and placement.
(1) Any sign not resting directly on the ground, exceeding six square
feet in area and set back less than 10 feet from the right-of-way,
shall have a minimum clear space of at least eight feet from the
bottom of the sign to the ground.
(2) Projecting signs, awnings, canopies and marquees which extend
over the City right-of-way shall have a clear space of eight feet from
the bottom of the sign, awning, canopy, or marquee to the ground.
A revocable license from City Council is required prior to obtaining
a permit.
(3) Signs shall be affixed flat to the face of the awning or canopy.
(4) For wall signs, the distance between the face of the wall and the
face of the sign shall not be more than 12 inches.
(5) Wall signs shall be contained within the boundaries of the wall and
shall not extend beyond the edge of the wall to which it is affixed,
nor extend above the roofline of a building.
(6) Reader boards are allowed on a wall or a freestanding sign, but not
on both signs at one parcel.
(c) Maintenance.
(1) All signs shall be maintained free of peeling paint or paper, sun
fading, staining, rust, or other conditions which impair the
legibility or intelligibility of such sign.
(2) Any signs permitted by the provisions of this article, including all
supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained in
Sec. 39-346 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-346
C:1054
conformance with this article and in such a manner so as not to
cause a hazard to the public.
(d) Illuminated and electronic signs.
(1) Except for moveable freestanding signs, all signs may be internally
or externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, the source of
the light shall be enclosed and directed to prevent the source of
light from shining directly onto traffic or residential property.
(2) All signs shall comply with the building and electrical codes of the
City of Holland. Underground wiring shall be required for all
illuminated signs, or signs requiring electrical connections except
for permitted temporary signs.
(3) Signs shall not scroll, flash, blink, oscillate or have any other
appearance of movement.
(4) Electronic reader board signs (also known as "EMCs") shall have an
instantaneous change between messages, with a minimum sevensecond
delay between displays.
(5) Electronic reader board signs are not permitted within the C-3
Central Business District and in the I-1 Zone District if it is for a
retail or restaurant use and is located west of College Avenue and
north of 9th Street.
(6) Electronic reader board signs are permitted on a wall or
freestanding sign, but not on both signs at one parcel.
(e) Removal of signs; penalty.
(1) If the Building Official, Zoning Inspector or their authorized
representative determines that any sign regulated by this article is
unsafe or constitutes a hazard to the public, such as obstructing
vision of vehicle drivers or pedestrians, or has been constructed,
erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article,
the official or inspector may remove the sign or require its
immediate removal.
(2) Any sign placed or erected in a public street, alley or right-of-way,
or other public place, which is not specifically permitted in such
place, shall be deemed an unlawful sign and the department of the
City having jurisdiction over the maintenance of such public place
shall remove such sign or require its immediate removal. Such
removal may be without written or other notice to the owner, lessee
or person of the property adjacent to the public street, alley or
right-of-way, or other public place upon which such sign is located.
(3) A person who violates or fails to comply with a notice to remove the
sign under this section is responsible for a Class II civil infraction
and is subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of fees and
charges adopted in Section 2-118 of this Code or any other relief
Sec. 39-346 CHARTER Sec. 39-346
C:1055
Sec. 39-347. Prohibited signs [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1208, 3-4-1998; Ord. No. 1366, § 9,
8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; 9-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1634;
Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 1-2-2019 by Ord. No.
1760; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
The following signs are prohibited:
Sec. 39-348. Nonconforming signs. [Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord.
No. 1274, 3-1-2000; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1443,
2-15-2006; Ord. No. 1459, § 2, 8-2-2006; Ord. No. 1478, § 2,
6-6-2007; 9-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1634; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each
day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.
(a) Pennants, streamers, banners, balloons, or feather signs as permanent
signs. Governmental use of such signs is permitted.
(b) Signs shall not employ any flashing, moving, oscillating, blinking, or
variable intensity light, such as rolling, fading, moving or animated
parts that are designed to give the appearance of movement.
(c) Roof signs.
(d) Billboards and off-premises advertising signs.
(1) A sign that is advertising for a business that is no longer open at the
location where the sign is displayed shall be considered an offpremises
advertising sign 60 days after the business has closed or
moved. A business that has been closed for 60 consecutive days
must ensure that all of its signs are removed from the property.
(e) Any vehicle (including trailers) which has the primary function of acting
as a sign, unless a temporary sign permit has been issued.
(f) Any sign not specifically permitted by this article.
(a) Nonconforming signs may not be expanded, enlarged, or extended;
however, said signs may be maintained and repaired so as to continue
the useful life of the sign.
(b) A nonconforming sign may be diminished in size or dimension, or the
copy of the sign amended or changed without jeopardizing the privilege
of the nonconforming use.
(c) Any nonconforming sign, sign structure, or frame that is substantially
destroyed by fire or other casualty loss (50% or more) shall not be
restored or rebuilt.
Sec. 39-346 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-348
C:1056
Sec. 39-349. Signs allowed without a permit. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003;
9-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1634; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No.
1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
The following signs may be installed or erected without a permit:
(d) When 50% or more of a nonconforming sign, sign structure or frame is
removed, it shall be replaced only with a sign that conforms to all
ordinance requirements.
(e) A sign that is removed for maintenance or repair, with a permit, shall be
reinstalled within 90 days or the right of nonconforming use shall be
deemed abandoned.
(f) Moveable freestanding signs and flags are not permitted as
nonconforming signs.
(a) Government signs.
(b) Placards.
(c) Historic markers placed under the authority of the local, state or
federal government.
(d) Address numbers.
(e) Hours of operation and other similar business information.
(f) Window signs applied to the interior of the window/door glass.
(g) Window signs applied to the exterior of the window/door glass where
the sign does not exceed 15% of the glass area. Windows that are
immediately adjacent, on the same wall face of the same building, may
be averaged together.
(h) Flags at residentially used properties.
(i) Flags at commercially used properties with a maximum size of 15
square feet, with one per business per street frontage. Flags in the C-1
and C-3 Zones that extend over the public right-of-way shall be attached
to the wall of the building at least six feet above the adjacent grade,
shall not project more than three feet from the face of the wall, and
shall maintain a clear space of eight feet from the bottom of the flag to
the ground.
(j) Signs in residential zone districts subject to the following:
Sec. 39-348 CHARTER Sec. 39-349
C:1057
Street
Frontage Number Total Size Height
Up to 60 linear
feet
No limit 12 square feet 6 feet
Over 60 linear
feet
24 square feet 6 feet
(k) Noncommercial signs in nonresidential zone districts subject to the
following:
Street
Frontage Number Total Size Height
Up to 300 linear
feet
No limit 32 square feet 6 feet
Over 300 linear
feet
64 square feet 6 feet
(l) One temporary sign per special event at nonresidentially used
properties in residential zone districts, provided that the sign is not
displayed for more than two weeks.
(m) Signage with the international symbol of accessibility or van accessible
recognized logo for Americans with Disability Act (ADA) compliance
and accessibility.
(n) Signs in conjunction with the construction of a new facility or site plan
approval for a new construction project, up to 24 square feet in
residential zones, and up to 32 square feet in other zones. These signs
shall not exceed six feet in height. These sign shall be removed at the
conclusion of the construction project or upon issuance of the
certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first.
(o) Signs at commercial properties that are intended to direct traffic flow
and are less than six square feet in area and six feet in height.
(p) Temporary signs for advancing a public interest, when authorized by
City Council for a prescribed amount of time.
(q) Signs in conjunction with activities of the Downtown Development
Authority.
(r) Writing or logos that are an integral part of a fabric umbrella, used
primarily to provide shade or cover to customers.
(s) Murals:
(1) Type 1 and Type 2 murals in all districts, subject to the restrictions
set forth in this subsection.
(2) Prior to installation of a mural, the property owner or tenant shall
apply for a determination of whether the proposed design or
Sec. 39-349 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-349
C:1058
representations is a sign, a Type 1 mural or a Type 2 mural and, if
the proposed design or representation is a Type 2 mural, whether
it complies with the requirements of this subsection.
(3) The application shall be to the Design Review Board (DRB) if the
proposed location of the design or representations is on property
within the C-3 Downtown Commercial Zone District and in the I-1
Zone District if it is for a retail or restaurant use and is located west
of College Avenue and north of 9th Street.
a. The application shall be to the Director of Community and
Neighborhood Services or his/her designee if the proposed
location of the design or representations is in any other
district.
(4) After the determination:
a. If the proposed design or representation is determined to be a
sign, the applicant shall comply with all further review and
requirements of this chapter for signs before creating or
installing the sign.
b. If the proposed design or representation is determined to be a
Type 1 mural, no further review or action is necessary before
creating or installing the mural.
c. If the proposed design or representation is determined to be a
Type 2 mural, the applicant shall obtain a determination of
whether the Type 2 mural complies with all requirements of
Subsection(s)(5) of this section before creating or installing the
mural.
(5) A Type 2 mural shall be allowed if:
a. The graphics, words, and/or symbols referencing the
establishment, product, or service are limited in scope and
dominance, and not readily construed as commercial
advertising. References must be subtle and integrated into the
overall mural.
b. For purposes of this subsection, "limited in scope and
dominance" shall mean not exceeding 20% of the wall area on
which it is located, integrated throughout the mural and not be
placed in a concentrated area or manner where it becomes, in
essence, a prominent advertisement.
c. The references to an establishment, product, or service are not
in the form of traditional building signage. Traditional signs on
the same wall will be reviewed separately under applicable
sign requirements.
Sec. 39-349 CHARTER Sec. 39-349
C:1059
Sec. 39-350. Sign permits and licenses required. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1208, 3-4-1998;
Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No.
1739;2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
(6) Where numbers of signs or maximum square footages apply to a
particular location, a mural shall not count as a sign nor figure into
the allowable sign area.
(7) An aggrieved applicant may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals
for review of a decision relating to a mural. The Board of Appeals
shall review the decision based on the criteria in this Subsection
39-349(s).
(a) Except as provided in Section 39-349, a sign permit is required to erect,
alter, place, or replace any sign structure, as regulated below and
required by this chapter, or by the Holland City Code. A permit is also
required for substantial maintenance or repair to an existing
nonconforming sign.
(b) In order to obtain a sign permit, an application shall be filed with the
Department of Community and Neighborhood Services on forms
provided by the Department.
(c) A sign erector's license is required for any permanently installed sign
with a vertical height greater than the horizontal distance from any
portion of the sign to any property line.
(1) Application shall be made to the City Clerk, on forms prescribed by
the Clerk, and the applicant shall pay the annual fee established by
City Council. Applications shall include public liability and property
damage insurance documentation in the amounts specified in
Chapter 10, from an insurer approved by the Commissioner of
Insurance of the state. Every policy of insurance required by this
section shall bear an endorsement to the effect that the insurer
shall notify the licensee and the City Clerk in writing at least 10
days prior to the expiration of such policy.
(2) If the licensee shall at any time fail to comply with the provisions of
this article or shall fail to comply with any written directions of the
Building Official and Zoning Inspector, based upon the provisions of
this article, the Building Official and Zoning Inspector or
authorized representative may proceed with legal action to
suspend or revoke the license.
Sec. 39-349 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-351
C:1060
Sec. 39-351. High density and nonresidential uses in Residential,
PRD, and Agricultural Zone Districts. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1525,
1-7-2009; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by
Ord. No. 1763]
The following high-density and nonresidential uses shall be allowed to
have permanent signage, in addition to other signs allowed by this article:
residential subdivisions, mobile home parks, multiple-family complexes with
six or more units, public lodging facilities as regulated by Chapter 26,
schools, churches and other nonresidential uses permitted in the
residential, PRD and agricultural zone districts.
Sec. 39-352. Education Zone District. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1309, 8-1-2001; Ord. No. 1373,
11-5-2003; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
All signs in this zone district shall require a permit, unless otherwise
exempted. Signs shall have no height or area restrictions and have a zero
setback from the property line. Signs in this zone district are intended
primarily to be of such size, scale and location to serve this pedestrianoriented
community.
Sec. 39-353. Commercial, PUD, and Industrial Zone Districts. [Ord.
No. 1100, 12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1206,
(a) Freestanding signs:
(1) Number: two signs maximum.
(2) Size: 32 square feet maximum for each sign.
(3) Location: Signs 16 square feet or less shall be set back 12 feet from
all property lines. Signs larger than 16 square feet shall be set back
at the minimum building setback for the zone district.
(4) Height: six feet maximum.
(b) Wall signs:
(1) Number: one per street frontage.
(2) Size: 12 square feet maximum.
(c) Identification signs for public lodging facilities allowed by Chapter 26:
(1) One freestanding sign measuring four square feet maximum in area
and three feet tall, located at least 15 feet from all property lines;
or
(2) One wall sign measuring six square feet in area affixed flat to the
residence.
Sec. 39-351 CHARTER Sec. 39-353
C:1061
12-17-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1508, 7-16-2008;
Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 1-2-2019 by Ord. No.
1760; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
The following signs shall be allowed:
(a) Temporary signs, such as pennants, streamers, banners, balloons,
balloon signs, feather signs and other similar temporary displays, are
allowed subject to a sign permit, provided that:
(1) They shall not be displayed for more than 14 consecutive days.
(2) No more than two permits will be issued per calendar year, per
parcel of land.
(3) Size and location. Signs shall comply with yard and height
requirements for other signs in the zone district.
(4) PUD Zone Districts shall comply with the yard and height
requirements as established for C-2 Zones.
(b) Permanent signs are allowed subject to a sign permit. The chart
below132 represents the type of permanent signs allowed in each zone
district, as well as the maximum number, size, placement, required
setback and any other district regulations. These signs are allowed in
addition to signs in Section 39-353(c) and other sections permitted by
this chapter.
(c) Other signs. The following other signs are allowed in addition to
temporary and permanent signs, with a sign permit.
(1) Signs at drive-through restaurant facilities are permitted (where
allowed by the Zoning Ordinance) in addition to other signs with
the following conditions:
a. Maximum size of 32 square feet.
b. Signs shall not be read from the public right-of-way.
c. Speakers shall be directed away from residential uses.
(2) Neighborhood Commercial District identifier sign.
a. The Director of the Community and Neighborhood Services
Department or a duly appointed designee shall approve an
application for a neighborhood district identifier sign if the
following findings are made:
1. Maximum of two signs, of similar design, located in the
established neighborhood commercial area.
132. Editor's Note: See the Table of Sign Regulations for Commercial, PUD and Industrial
Districts, included as an attachment to this chapter.
Sec. 39-353 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-353
C:1062
Sec. 39-354. C-3 Central Business District and the I-1 Zone District
if it is a retail or restaurant use and located west of College Avenue
and north of 9th Street — additional requirements. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1356, 12-4-2002;
Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1451, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 1509,
7-16-2008; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1601; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 1739; 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1760; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No.
1763]
2. The neighborhood commercial area shall be comprised of
two or more storefront businesses on two or more separate
properties.
3. The size, type and location of the sign(s) is compatible with
the neighborhood commercial district in which the sign
will be located.
4. The sign will enhance the identification of the established
neighborhood commercial area and benefit all businesses.
5. Signs shall be located on private property.
6. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a maximum of six feet
in height, 25 square feet in area and shall not create a
visibility hazard for motorists or pedestrians.
7. Wall signs shall not exceed a maximum of 25 square feet in
area and shall be placed on the front facade or side of a
building.
b. Notice of the application shall be published and given to all
owners as required by MCLA § 125.3502. The procedure for
reviewing the application shall be as set forth in MCLA
§ 125.3502.
c. Appeals for decisions made under this section shall go to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) A directional sign may be installed at commercial complexes for the
purpose of directing traffic, in addition to other signs, with the
following conditions:
a. The parcel shall contain two or more commercial/industrial
buildings.
b. Signs shall be placed at the interior of the parcel and shall not
be read from the public right-of-way.
c. One sign per parcel.
d. Maximum size of 12 square feet.
Sec. 39-353 CHARTER Sec. 39-354
C:1063
(a) Except for moveable freestanding signs and murals, all signs, awnings,
canopies, marquees, and strings of lights in the C-3 Central Business
District and in the I-1 Zone District if it is for a retail or restaurant use
and is located west of College Avenue and north of 9th Street must first
receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Design Review Board
(DRB) prior to receiving a permit for construction or installation.
(b) The DRB shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the
Downtown Development Authority (DDA). The DDA may act in this
capacity if it so chooses.
(1) Of the seven members, at least three shall be members of the DDA.
(2) If available, the DDA shall appoint up to three members of the DRB
who are members of the design profession, such as an architect or
designer.
(3) If the DDA appoints a DRB, membership on the DRB shall be
limited to two consecutive terms of four years each in duration.
Initial staggering of terms shall be arranged.
(c) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the DRB shall
find that all of the following standards are met. These findings shall be
documented by the DRB. Findings of the DRB are advisory and may be
appealed to the Zoning Board.
(1) For purposes of interpretation, the DRB shall use the Secretary of
the Interior standards and local design guidelines, as may from
time to time be amended, and the context of surrounding buildings
and signage in determining whether a proposed sign meets the
following standards.
a. A sign shall be consistent with the architectural characteristics
of the building upon which it is placed.
b. A sign shall not in any way obstruct or destroy unique
architectural features of the building upon which it is placed
nor of surrounding buildings.
(2) In the event of a denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the
applicant may file an appeal with the Zoning Board for a public
hearing. The Zoning Board will make a decision, based upon the
standards herewith, regarding the appropriateness of the sign.
(d) An awning, canopy or marquee shall not project more than four feet
beyond the face of a building, except that in the case of unique
character of the building, the Design Review Board may recommend, as
appropriate, the projection of an awning, canopy or marquee beyond
four feet from the face of the building, when installed in accordance
with state construction codes.
(e) Temporary moveable freestanding signs shall be removed from the City
sidewalk and/or public right-of-way one hour before a Tulip Time
Sec. 39-354 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-354
C:1064
Festival parade and shall not be redisplayed until one hour after such
parade.
(f) The total sign area permitted for all signs on a building in this zoning
district shall not exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street or
parking lot frontage of that building. For purposes of calculating total
signage area, include: existing signage on or about the building on
which the proposed sign(s) is (are) to be placed; those signs accessory
to uses within that building which may be located on adjacent buildings,
structures, or sites; and proposed signage, excluding moveable
freestanding signs, temporary signs, and open flags.
(g) Other similar types of signs not specifically listed as permitted in the
C-3 Central Business District and in the I-1 Zone District if it is for a
retail or restaurant use and is located west of College Avenue and north
of 9th Street and not specifically addressed in other provisions of this
article may be permitted upon review and approval by the Design
Review Board (DRB) for compliance with the following:
(1) Determination of most similar specified sign type. The DRB shall
review the proposed other sign to determine whether the proposed
other sign is similar to an allowed sign, and determine the most
similar specified sign type allowed in the zone district.
(2) Size. The maximum area of such other sign(s) shall not exceed the
maximum size permitted for the most similar specified sign type, as
determined under Subsection (g)(1).
(3) Number of signs. The maximum number of such other signs shall
not exceed the maximum number permitted for the most similar
specified sign type, as determined under Subsection (g)(1) less the
number of the most similar specified sign type on the property.
(4) Other requirements. Other signs shall satisfy the requirements of
Sections 39-346 and 39-347. Appeals from determinations under
this Section 39-354 shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Section 39-354(c).
(h) Wayfinding signs may be erected by the DDA, upon approval of the
DRB, without a sign permit, under the following conditions:
(1) The purpose of the sign is to describe the location of specific
businesses or areas in the C-3 Central Business District and in the
I-1 Zone District if it is for a retail or restaurant use and is located
west of College Avenue and north of 9th Street.
(2) Such signs shall not contain advertisements for individual business.
(3) Ground-mounted signs shall not exceed six feet in height and 24
square feet in total area.
(i) Strings of lights shall be allowed as permitted by Section 39-69 (17).
Such lights shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board before they
Sec. 39-354 CHARTER Sec. 39-354
C:1065
Sec. 39-355. Units of Measurement. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1233, 12-16-1998; Ord. No.
1366, § 10, 8-20-2003; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1415, § 3,
6-1-2005; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by
Ord. No. 1763]
Signs shall be measured as follows:
Sec. 39-356. Adverse impact of article. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1729;
6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
Any person adversely affected by the provisions of this article, with the
exception of those provisions contained in this article relating to licensing
and permits, may apply for a variance from the provisions herein according
to the procedures set forth in Article XII of this chapter, the terms of which
are incorporated herein by reference.
Sec. 39-357. Savings clause. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1427,
10-19-2005; Ord. No. 1459, § 1, 8-2-2006; Ord. No. 1478, § 2,
are installed in the C-3 Central Business District and the I-1 Zone
District if it is a retail or restaurant use and located west of College
Avenue and north of 9th Street. Such lights shall not be attached to any
City property, such as lamp posts, utility poles, planters, benches, etc.
(a) A single-faced sign shall be measured within a single, continuous
perimeter composed of either the smallest square, rectangle, or circle
which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem,
logo, frame (if part of the sign) or any other figure of similar character.
(b) Framing around a sign shall be included in the overall sign calculation if
it is an integral material or color to the sign.
(c) The support structure of a sign shall not be included in the overall area.
(d) A multifaced sign shall be calculated by measuring each sign face and
adding all of them together.
(e) If two sign faces are placed back-to-back, this shall be measured and
counted as one sign. If one of the sign faces is larger, the sign area shall
be calculated using the larger of the two faces.
(f) If two sign faces are placed back-to-back and separated by more than a
45° angle, each face shall be calculated independently, and they shall
be counted as a multifaced sign.
(g) The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the
highest point of the sign to the grade of the ground immediately
beneath the sign.
Sec. 39-354 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-357
C:1066
6-6-2007; 3-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1727; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1763]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Sign Ordinance
is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
validity of enforceability of the remaining portions of this Sign Ordinance.
The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the Sign
Ordinance in each section, subsection, sentence or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.
Sec. 39-358. Noncommercial messages on signs.. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003;
Ord. No. 1451, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 1487, 1-9-2008; Ord. No. 1501,
§ 1, 4-23-2008; Ord. No. 1729; 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1739; 2-6-2019
by Ord. No. 1763]
The provisions of this Article IX on signs shall not be construed to prohibit
the owner of a sign otherwise lawfully constructed or existing under this
Article IX to display noncommercial messages on a sign in any zone district.
Sec. 39-359. C-2 Highway Commercial District. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1145, 5-24-1995; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997;
Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1601]
(a) Wall signs: The maximum total area for wall signs on each wall shall not
exceed 10% of wall area of the wall upon which the sign or signs are
placed.
(b) Freestanding signs.
(1) Number: one per lot or parcel except where street frontage
exceeding 300 continuous linear feet, then two signs shall be
permitted on that lot or parcel.
(2) Size: The total sign area shall not exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of street frontage, and in no case shall the maximum
sign area for a freestanding sign exceed 75 square feet. Properties
located with street frontage on principal route U.S. 31 (excluding
business routes) or Chicago Drive east of Waverly Road may have a
freestanding sign which measures a maximum of 100 square feet.
(3) Location: Signs shall be located at least 12 feet from any property
line.
(4) Height: Signs shall be no higher than 25 feet from the grade.
(c) Awning, canopy, and marquee signs. The total sign area shall not
exceed one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage of the wall
upon which the awning, canopy, or marquee is located. Signs shall be
affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or marquee.
Sec. 39-357 CHARTER Sec. 39-359
C:1067
(d) Projecting signs:
(1) Number: one per building wall that faces a street or parking lot. A
building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more
than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage,
provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one
for each 25 feet of frontage and one per tenant.
(2) Size: Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign.
(3) Location:
a. Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the
building or wall, nor extend beyond the roof or eave line for a
one-story building.
b. Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from the
sidewalk.
c. Signs shall be located below the window sill of the second floor
window.
(e) Moveable freestanding signs:
(1) Permits:
a. No moveable freestanding signs shall be placed on private
property unless the property owner or occupant first obtains
an annual permit. Moveable freestanding signs shall not be
placed on private property after an annual permit expires.
b. No moveable freestanding sign shall be placed in a public
right-of-way.
c. An applicant shall apply for an annual permit. The permit shall
be issued for a one-year term on the following conditions:
1. The applicant submits a completed application, including
any addenda, on forms as required by the City and pays
the fee and submits proof of general liability insurance as
required by resolution of the City Council;
2. The applicant has not repeatedly violated the annual
permit or ordinances pertaining thereto; and
3. The applicant presents an application found to be in full
compliance with current zoning requirements.
d. The permit for a moveable freestanding sign is not a
permanent right and is subject to revocation by the City.
(2) Number: one moveable freestanding sign per ground floor
business.
Sec. 39-359 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-359
C:1068
Sec. 39-360. C-3 Central Business District. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1200, 10-22-1997;
Ord. No. 1251, 7-7-1999; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003]
(3) Attachment: The sign shall not be attached to a building, or secured
to or placed in the ground, nor attached or secured to any element,
including, but not limited to, trees, signs, light poles, planters, or
other similar objects.
(4) Size. No moveable freestanding sign shall exceed 30 inches wide by
48 inches high by 30 inches deep, with height of the sign measured
from the sidewalk or immediately adjacent grade.
(5) Location: At least one point of the sign shall be placed within one
foot of the building.
(6) Obstruction: There shall be provided, at all times, an unobstructed,
straight sidewalk aisle of not less than four feet in width. No
moveable freestanding sign shall be placed in a manner that
obstructs or impedes sidewalk snowplowing or cleaning. No
moveable freestanding sign shall be placed in such a way as to
create a visibility hazard for vehicular, bicycle and/or pedestrian
traffic.
(7) Construction: All moveable freestanding signs shall be constructed
of wood, metal, or other similarly durable material. Such signs shall
have adequate support to prevent tipping or movement of the sign,
and shall not present a tripping hazard to pedestrians. A moveable
freestanding sign shall be designed to be placed and removed
during certain hours.
(8) Illumination: Moveable freestanding signs shall not be illuminated.
(9) Limitations on display: Moveable freestanding signs shall be
displayed only during the hours the business it promotes is open.
The entire sign structure, including sign panel and supporting
structure, shall be removed and placed indoors during those hours
not on display.
(f) Open flags: open flags subject to the requirements of Section 39-354(f).
(a) Design Review Board. Except for moveable freestanding signs, all
signs, awnings, canopies, and marquees in the C-3 Central Business
District must first receive a certificate of appropriateness from the
Design Review Board ("DRB") prior to receiving a permit for
construction or installation.
(b) Membership. The DRB shall consist of seven members to be appointed
by the Downtown Development Authority (DDA). The DDA may act in
this capacity if it so chooses. [Amended 5-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1689[
(1) Of the seven members, at least three shall be members of the DDA.
Sec. 39-359 CHARTER Sec. 39-360
C:1069
Sec. 39-361. Signs permitted in the C-3 District. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1253, 8-4-1999;
Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1440, 2-1-2006; Ord. No. 1485,
11-20-2007; Ord. No. 1497, 3-19-2008; amended 9-4-2013 by Ord.
No. 1616]
The following signs are permitted in the C-3 District:
(2) If available, the DDA shall appoint up to three members of the DRB
who are members of the design profession, such as an architect or
designer.
(3) If the DDA appoints a DRB, membership on the DRB shall be
limited to two consecutive terms of four years each in duration.
Initial staggering of terms shall be arranged.
(c) Standards for certificate of appropriateness. Prior to the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness, the DRB shall find that all of the
following standards are met. These findings shall be documented by the
DRB. Findings of the DRB are advisory and may be appealed to the
Zoning Board.
(1) For purposes of interpretation, the DRB shall use the Secretary of
the Interior standards and local design guidelines, as may from
time to time be amended, and the context of surrounding buildings
and signage in determining whether a proposed sign meets the
following standards.
a. A sign shall be consistent with the architectural characteristics
of the building upon which it is placed.
b. A sign shall not in any way obstruct or destroy unique
architectural features of the building upon which it is placed
nor of surrounding buildings.
(2) In the event of a denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the
applicant may file an appeal with the Zoning Board for a public
hearing. The Zoning Board will make a decision, based upon the
standards herewith, regarding the appropriateness of the sign.
(d) [Size.] The total sign area permitted for all signs on a building in this
zoning district shall not exceed two square feet for each linear foot of
street or parking lot frontage of that building. For purposes of
calculating total signage area, include: existing signage on or about the
building on which the proposed sign(s) is (are) to be placed; those signs
accessory to uses within that building which may be located on adjacent
buildings, structures, or site; and proposed signage, excluding
moveable freestanding signs, temporary signs, and open flags.
(a) Wall signs.
Sec. 39-360 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-361
C:1070
(1) Size. The maximum area of wall signs may not exceed one square
foot of sign area for each one foot of building length of the wall
upon which the signs are to be located, not to exceed 32 square
feet. The DRB may approve additional signs or sign area where the
building has multiple ground floor tenants; where the character,
placement and size satisfy otherwise applicable compatibility
standards; and the total maximum area of wall signs on that wall
does not exceed 64 square feet.
(2) Location. Wall signs must be placed below the sill of a building's
second floor windows. The DRB may waive this limitation if it finds
that the proposed sign placed at a higher location on a building will
be compatible with the character and design of the building on
which it is placed and compatible with other legal and conforming
signage, both on the building and on adjoining properties. Wall
signs shall be contained within the boundaries of a wall.
(b) Projecting signs.
(1) Number: one per building wall which faces a street or parking lot.
A building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more
than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage,
provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one
for each 25 feet of frontage.
(2) Size. Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign.
(3) Location.
a. Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the
building or wall.
b. Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from the
sidewalk.
c. Signs shall be located below the window sill of the second floor
window. The DRB may waive this limitation if it finds that the
proposed sign placed at a higher location on a building will be
compatible with the character and design of the building on
which it placed and compatible with other legal and
conforming signage, both on the building and on adjoining
properties.
(c) Awnings, canopies and marquees and any signage integral with these
features.
(1) Projection. An awning or canopy shall not project more than four
feet beyond the face of a building, except that in the case of unique
character of the building, the Design Review Board may
recommend as appropriate the projection of an awning or canopy
beyond four feet from the building face, installed in accordance
with state construction codes.
Sec. 39-361 CHARTER Sec. 39-361
C:1071
(2) Location. The awning or canopy shall not extend over the vertical
columns on either side of the first floor level.
(3) Signage. One sign is permitted on a face of an awning, canopy, or
marquee. The total sign area shall not exceed two square feet for
each linear foot of street or parking lot frontage of the wall upon
which the awning, canopy, or marquee is located. Signs shall be
affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or marquee.
(d) Freestanding signs.
(1) Number: one sign per parcel.
(2) Size. Each sign shall be no greater than 32 square feet, except that
signs up to 36 square feet in area are allowed in the C-3 District
outside the area defined and enclosed by the center lines of 7th
Street, Lincoln Avenue, 9th Street and Pine Avenue.
(3) Location. Signs shall be set back at the minimum building setback
for the zone district, but in no case shall the sign obstruct
pedestrian movement in the C-3 Central Business District.
(4) Height: no higher than six feet from the grade, except that signs up
to nine feet in height are allowed in the C-3 District outside the
area defined and enclosed by the center lines of 7th Street, Lincoln
Avenue, 9th Street and Pine Avenue.
(e) Moveable freestanding signs.
(1) Permits.
a. No moveable freestanding signs shall be placed on public or
private property unless the property owner or occupant first
obtains an annual permit. Moveable freestanding signs shall
not be placed on public or private property after an annual
permit expires.
b. No moveable freestanding sign shall be placed in a public
right-of-way, except as allowed by an annual permit.
c. An application for a moveable freestanding sign will be filed
with the Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services. The permit shall be issued for a one-year term if the
following are satisfied:
1. The applicant submits a completed application, including
any addenda, on forms as required by the City and pays
the fee and submits proof of general liability insurance as
required by resolution of the City Council;
2. The applicant has not repeatedly violated the annual
permit or violated any ordinance of the City; and
Sec. 39-361 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-361
C:1072
3. The applicant presents an application found to be in full
compliance with the City's Zoning Ordinance.
The Department of Community and Neighborhood
Services shall approve or deny an application within 15
days of when it receives a completed application
satisfying these provisions.
d. The permit for a moveable freestanding sign is not a
permanent right and is subject to revocation by the City.
(2) Design. A moveable freestanding sign shall be designed to be
placed and removed during certain hours. A moveable freestanding
sign shall be of a scale and design intended for viewing from the
public right-of-way.
(3) Number: one moveable freestanding sign per ground floor
business. Businesses above the ground floor are permitted to have
a moveable freestanding sign as long the number of signs does not
exceed one sign per ground floor business in each building. For
example, if a building has three ground floor businesses, there may
be three moveable freestanding signs permits issued regardless of
whether they are for ground floor businesses or ones above the
ground floor.
(4) Attachment. The sign shall not be attached to a building, or secured
to or placed in the ground, nor attached or secured to any element,
including but not limited to trees, signs, light poles, planters, or
other similar objects.
(5) Size. No moveable freestanding sign shall exceed 30 inches wide by
48 inches high by 30 inches deep, with height of the sign measured
from the sidewalk or immediately adjacent grade.
(6) Location. At least one point of the moveable sign shall be placed
within one foot of the building. A moveable freestanding sign shall
be placed within the public right-of-way on the same side of the
street or alley and within lot line extensions of the business it
promotes or the building the business is located in, or on the parcel
of the business it promotes.
(7) Obstruction. There shall be provided, at all times, an unobstructed,
straight sidewalk aisle of not less than six feet in width. No
moveable freestanding sign shall be placed in a manner that
obstructs or impedes sidewalk plowing or cleaning. No moveable
freestanding sign shall be placed in such a way as to create a
visibility hazard for vehicular, bicycle and/or pedestrian traffic.
(8) Construction. All moveable freestanding signs shall be constructed
of wood, metal, or other similarly durable material. Moveable
freestanding signs shall have adequate support to prevent tipping
Sec. 39-361 CHARTER Sec. 39-361
C:1073
or movement of the sign, and shall not present a tripping hazard to
pedestrians.
(9) Illumination. Moveable freestanding signs shall not be illuminated.
(10) Limitations on display.
a. Moveable freestanding signs shall be displayed only during the
hours the business it promotes is open.
b. The entire sign structure, including sign panel and supporting
structure, shall be removed and placed indoors during those
hours not on display.
c. Moveable freestanding signs shall not be displayed one hour
before a Tulip Time Festival parade, during such parade, and
one hour after such parade.
(f) Open flags. Open flags subject to the requirements of Section 39-354(f).
(g) Other signs. Other similar types of signs not specifically listed as
permitted in the C-3 Central Business District and not specifically
addressed in other provisions of this article may be permitted upon
review and approval by the Design Review Board (DRB) for compliance
with the following:
(1) Determination of most similar specified sign type. The DRB shall
review the proposed other sign to determine whether the proposed
other sign is similar to an allowed sign, and determine the most
similar specified sign type allowed in the zone district.
(2) Size. The maximum area of such other sign(s) shall not exceed the
maximum size permitted for the most similar specified sign type, as
determined under Subsection (g)(1).
(3) Number of signs. The maximum number of such other signs shall
not exceed the maximum number permitted for the most similar
specified sign type, as determined under Subsection (g)(1) less the
number of the most similar specified sign type on the property.
(4) Other requirements. Other signs shall satisfy the requirements of
Section 39-360(c). Appeals from determinations under this Section
39-361(g) shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section 39-360(c).
(h) Directional signs.
(1) Directional signs describing the location of specific businesses in
the C-3 Central Business District may be erected by the DDA upon
approval by the DRB.
(2) Such signs shall not contain advertisements for business.
Sec. 39-361 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-361
C:1074
Sec. 39-362. C-4 Regional Shopping Center District. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003]
(3) Ground-mounted signs are permitted in the C-3 District only as
directional signs and shall not exceed six feet in height, 24 square
feet in total area.
(a) Wall signs: The maximum sign area for wall signs may not exceed 10%
of the wall area upon which the sign is placed.
(b) Freestanding signs:
(1) Number: One sign per lot or parcel, except for a street frontage
exceeding 300 continuous linear feet in which case two such signs
shall be permitted on that lot or parcel.
(2) Size: One square foot per each one foot of the street frontage along
which the sign(s) is to be located and in no case shall the maximum
sign area for a freestanding sign exceed 75 square feet. Properties
located with street frontage on principal route U.S. 31 (excluding
business routes); or Chicago Drive east of Waverly Road, may have
a freestanding sign which measures a maximum of 100 square feet.
(3) Location: A minimum of 25 feet from any property line or a distance
equal to the height of the sign, whichever is greater.
(4) Height: The sign shall be no higher than 25 feet from the grade.
(c) Awning, canopy, and marquee signs: The total sign area shall not
exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street or parking lot
frontage of the wall upon which the awning, canopy, or marquee is
located. Signs shall be affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or marquee.
(d) Projecting signs:
(1) Number: One per building wall which faces a street or parking lot.
A building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more
than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage
provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one
for each 25 feet of frontage and one per tenant.
(2) Size: Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign.
(3) Location:
a. Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the
building or wall, nor extend beyond the roof or eave line for a
one story building.
b. Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from the
sidewalk.
c. Signs shall be located below the window sill of the second floor
window.
Sec. 39-361 CHARTER Sec. 39-363
C:1075
Sec. 39-363. C-5 Professional Office Service District. [Ord. No.
1271, § 5, 2-2-2000; Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003; Ord. No. 1501, § 2,
4-23-2008]
The following provisions shall apply to signs in the C-5 Professional Office
Service District:
(a) Wall signs:
(1) Number: The maximum number of signs shall not exceed one per
tenant street frontage or parking lot frontage.
(2) Size: The maximum area for all wall signs per building may not
exceed one square foot of sign area for each one foot of building
length of the wall upon which the sign is to be displayed.
(b) Awning, canopy, and marquee signs:
(1) Size: The total sign area shall not exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of street frontage of the wall upon which the awning,
canopy, or marquee is located.
(2) Location: Signs shall be affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or
marquee.
(c) Projecting signs:
(1) Number: One per building wall that faces a street or parking lot. A
building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more
than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage
provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one
for each 25 feet of frontage and one per tenant.
(2) Size: Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign.
(3) Location:
a. Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the
building or wall, nor extend beyond the roof or eave line for a
one-story building.
b. Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from the
sidewalk.
c. Signs shall be located below the windowsill of the second floor
window.
(d) Freestanding signs:
(1) Number: One sign per property.
(2) Size: Properties with frontage on a street that has a posted speed
limit of 35 miles per hour or less shall have a maximum
freestanding sign area of 25 square feet. Properties with frontage
on a street that has a posted speed limit of greater than 35 miles
Sec. 39-363 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-363
C:1076
Sec. 39-364. I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts. [Ord. No. 1100,
12-15-1993; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1271, § 4, 2-2-2000;
Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003]
The following provisions shall apply to signs located in the I-1 and I-2
Industrial District:
per hour shall have a maximum freestanding sign area of 50 square
feet.
(3) Location: Signs shall be located a minimum of five feet from any
property line.
(4) Height: Signs shall be no higher than five feet from the grade.
(a) Maximum area: The maximum area for all signs shall not exceed two
square feet per each linear foot of street frontage.
(b) Temporary signs or banners: Temporary signs or banners for business
promotions are permitted subject to a sign permit provided:
(1) Signs be displayed no longer than 14 consecutive days;
(2) Signs occur not more than twice in any calendar year;
(3) Signs comply with yard and height requirements for other signs in
the zoning district;
(4) The total sign area for such signs shall not exceed an amount equal
to the maximum sign area permitted in the applicable zoning
district.
(c) Wall signs: The maximum area for wall signs may not exceed 10% of
wall area upon which the sign is placed.
(d) Freestanding signs:
(1) Number: One sign per lot or parcel, except for a street frontage
exceeding 300 continuous linear feet in which case two signs shall
be permitted along that frontage.
(2) Size: The sign shall not exceed one square foot for each one foot of
street frontage along which the sign(s) is to be located and in no
case exceed 75 square feet.
(3) Location: A minimum of 25 feet from any property line.
(4) Height: The sign shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(e) Awning, canopy, and marquee signs: The total sign area shall not
exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street or parking lot
frontage of the wall upon which the awning, canopy, or marquee is
located. Signs shall be affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or marquee.
Sec. 39-363 CHARTER Sec. 39-365
C:1077
Sec. 39-365. Adverse impact of article. [Ord. No. 1100, 12-15-1993;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1271, § 4, 2-2-2000; Ord. No.
1373, 11-5-2003]
Any person adversely affected by the provisions of this article, with the
exception of those provisions contained in this article relating to licensing
and permits, may apply for a variance from the provisions herein according
to the procedures set forth in Article XII of this chapter, the terms of which
are incorporated herein by reference.
Sec. 39-366. Noncommercial messages on signs. [Ord. No. 1309,
8-1-2001;133 Ord. No. 1373, 11-5-2003]
The provisions of this Article IX on signs shall not be construed to prohibit
the owner of a sign otherwise lawfully constructed or existing under this
Article IX to display noncommercial messages on a sign in any zone district.
Sec. 39-367. through Sec. 39-369. (Reserved)
133. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 39-366, which pertained to
billboards and off-premises advertising signs, adopted 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1100, as
amended 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1188, 3-4-1998 by Ord. No. 1208, and 2-2-2000 by Ord.
No. 1271.
Sec. 39-365 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-367
C:1078
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)134
Sec. 39-370. through Sec. 39-384. (Reserved)
134. Editor's Note: Former Article X, Which Pertained To Flood Damage Prevention, Adopted By
Ord. No. 724, As Amended 9-19-1990 By Ord. No. 1001 And 2-19-1997 By Ord. No. 1188,
Was Repealed 11-16-2011 By Ord. No. 1572.
Sec. 39-370 CHARTER Sec. 39-370
C:1079

ARTICLE XI
Administration And Enforcement Generally
Sec. 39-385. Building permit—required; prerequisites to issuance
of permits. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.20; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
No person shall commence excavation for, construction of, or demolition
of any building, structure or parking area, or make structural changes in
any existing building or structure, without first obtaining a building permit
from the Building Official. No permit shall be issued for the construction,
alteration or remodeling of any building or structure until an application
has been submitted in accordance with provisions of this chapter, showing
that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and with Chapter 6 and Article I of Chapter 14. No plumbing,
electrical, or mechanical permit shall be issued until the Building Official
has determined that the plans and designated use indicate that the
structure and premises, if constructed as planned and proposed, will
conform with the provisions of this Code.
Sec. 39-386. Same—Application; plans and specifications. [Ord. No.
464, § 9-1.20; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Every application for a building permit shall be made as required by the
building code of the City and shall designate the existing or intended use
of the structure or premises or part thereof which it is proposed to alter,
erect or extend, and the number of dwelling units, if any, to occupy it.
The application shall be accompanied by two ink, blueprint or photostat
copies of drawings, drawn to scale showing the actual lines, angles and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon or used, and the exact size and
location on the lot of all existing and proposed structures and uses, together
with specifications. The application shall contain other information with
respect to the structure, lot and adjoining property as may be required by
the Building Official. One copy of both plans and specifications shall be filed
in and retained by the office of the Building Official, and the other shall
be delivered to the applicant when the Building Official has approved the
application and issued the permit. In cases of minor alterations, the Building
Official may waive portions of the foregoing requirements obviously not
necessary for determination of compliance with this chapter.
Sec. 39-387. Powers and duties of Building Official. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.20; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Building Official shall
administer and enforce this chapter including the receiving of applications,
the inspection of premises and the issuing of building permits.
Sec. 39-385 CHARTER Sec. 39-388
C:1081
Sec. 39-388. Inspection and approval prerequisite to occupancy.
[Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.20; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or premises
hereafter altered, extended or erected until the Building Official shall have
made an inspection of the premises and shall have approved the same for
occupancy.
Sec. 39-389. Violations declared nuisances; penalty; continuing
offenses. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.20; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997]
Any building erected, altered, moved, razed or converted, or any use carried
on, in violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be
a nuisance per se. Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-10, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 39-390. Moratorium on the establishment of a medical
marihuana dispensary. [Ord. No. 1550, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 1560,
2-16-2011; Ord. No. 1563, 5-18-2011]
(1) Definition. For purposes of this Section 39-390, the term "medical
marihuana dispensary" shall mean real property used to engage in (a)
the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery,
transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to
the use of marihuana, or (b) otherwise assisting a qualified patient (as
defined in MCLA § 333.26423) or other person with the medical use of
marihuana. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a medical marihuana
dispensary shall not include real property used with the owner's written
consent if the property is (a) a primary caregiver's principal residence
and is used by only one resident primary caregiver, or (b) a qualified
patient's principal residence and is used only by qualified patients
residing at the property.
(2) Purpose and findings.
a. The state has adopted statutory provisions in MCLA § 333.26421,
et seq., that authorize the creation of "medical marihuana
dispensaries" for the delivery or sale of marihuana to persons with
"debilitating medical conditions" but subject to certain conditions
and restrictions.
b. Prior to adopting the statutory provisions, such activity was
deemed unlawful in Michigan and under federal law.
c. The City of Holland enacted a moratorium on medical marihuana
dispensaries for the period ending May 25, 2011. During the
moratorium, the City of Holland's Planning Commission conducted
Sec. 39-388 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-390
C:1082
Sec. 39-391. through Sec. 39-399. (Reserved)
a public hearing and recommended a zoning ordinance to the City
Council.
d. The City of Holland finds that it needs additional time to examine
the Planning Commission's recommendation and determine the
appropriate zoning regulations for medical marihuana dispensaries
including, but not limited to, determining (i) where such
dispensaries are permitted, and (ii) the appropriate terms of such
regulations to address the specific issues that arose with the
legalization of the use of medical marihuana.
e. The City of Holland finds that an additional three months is a
reasonable time for the moratorium.
(3) Temporary moratorium. For a period of three months from May 25,
2011, no medical marihuana dispensary shall be established or created
and no existing medical marihuana dispensary shall be expanded in any
zone district for the City of Holland. No permits shall be issued to
establish, create or expand a medical marihuana dispensary. Upon the
expiration of three months from May 25, 2011, this Section 39-390 shall
expire and shall be of no force and effect.
Sec. 39-390 CHARTER Sec. 39-391
C:1083

ARTICLE XII
Zoning Board Of Appeals
Sec. 39-400. Continued; composition; appointment and terms of
members; filling vacancies. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1555, 12-1-2010]
The Zoning Board of Appeals, consisting of six members, heretofore
established by Ordinance No. 358 of the City, as amended by Ordinance No.
454, pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006,
is hereby continued. The members of such Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be appointed by the City Council. The City Council may appoint alternate
members to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The members selected by the
City Council shall be representative of the population distribution and of
the various interests represented in the City. One of the regular members
of the City Planning Commission may be a member of the Zoning Board
of Appeals. One regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be a
member of the City Council, but shall not serve as chairperson of the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
The City Council may appoint not more than two alternate members for the
same term as regular members to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An alternate
member may be called as specified to serve as a member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member
will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may
also be called to serve as a member for purposes of reaching a decision on
a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict
of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a
final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as
a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Existing and future terms of office shall terminate on June 30 of each
respective year of expiration. Each term of office shall be for a period of
three years commencing with July 1 of the year of appointment, except
for appointments to fill vacancies which shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
Sec. 39-401. Officers. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21; Ord. No. 1188,
2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006; amended 10-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 1657]
At its first meeting in July of each year, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall elect from its membership a chairperson (except the chairperson shall
not be a member of the City Council), a vice-chairperson, and such other
officers as it may deem necessary. The Clerk of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be designated by Council, subject to the requirements of the Holland
City Charter.
Sec. 39-402. Rules; regulations; meetings; quorum; acting by
resolution; concurring vote required to reverse, etc.; minutes and
Sec. 39-400 CHARTER Sec. 39-402
C:1085
records; assistance from City departments. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21;
Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations
which shall include and supplement the following rules of procedure:
Sec. 39-403. Jurisdiction and powers generally. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.21; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
The Zoning Board of Appeals, in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, shall
have the jurisdiction and power to decide questions that arise in the
administration of the zoning ordinance, including the interpretation of the
Zoning Map. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also hear and decide
on matters referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals, or upon which the
Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass under a zoning ordinance
adopted under Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006. It shall herein decide
appeals from and review any administrative order, requirement, decision,
(a) Copies of regulations to be made available. Copies of such regulations
shall be made available to the public at the office of the City Clerk.
(b) Meetings. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held once
each month and at such additional times as Zoning Board of Appeals
may determine. The time of regular meetings shall be specified in the
rules and regulations. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all
hearings shall be open to the public.
(c) Quorum; to act by resolution; concurring vote required to reverse, etc.
The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum. In the
absence of a quorum at any regular or special meeting, a majority vote
of members present shall be sufficient to adjourn such meeting to a
later date. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act by resolution. The
concurring vote of four members of Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Building Official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass by this chapter, or to grant
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(d) Minutes and records. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes
of its proceedings showing the action of the Zoning Board of Appeals
and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote indicating such fact, and in the case of a failure to vote the
reasons therefore, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official action, all of which shall be filed promptly in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be a public record.
(e) Assistance from City departments. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
call on any City department for assistance in the performance of its
duties and it shall be the duty of such departments to render such
assistance to Zoning Board of Appeals as may reasonably be required.
Sec. 39-402 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-403
C:1086
or determination made by an administrative officer or body charged with
enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
Sec. 39-404. Variances generally—allegations, etc. [Ord. No. 464,
§ 9-1.21; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
The Zoning Board of Appeals, after public hearing shall have the power
to decide and grant use and non-use or dimensional variances. Non-use or
dimensional variances shall be only granted relating to the construction,
structural changes, or alteration of buildings or structures related to
dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance or to any other non-use
related standards in the ordinance if an applicant shows that there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the zoning
ordinance. The standards for non-use variance are delineated as follows:
(a) For dimensional and non-use variances: A dimensional variance or nonuse
variance may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals only when
the applicant demonstrates, in the official record of the public hearing,
that practical difficulty exists by showing all of the following:
(1) That the need for the requested variance is due to unique
circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such
as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not
due to the applicant's personal or economic difficulty.
(2) That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions
of the property owner or previous property owners (self-created).
(3) That strict compliance with regulations governing area, setback,
frontage, height, bulk, density, or other dimensional requirements
will unreasonably prevent the property owner from using the
property for a permitted purpose, or will render conformity with
those regulations unnecessarily burdensome.
(4) That the requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to
do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property
owners in the district.
(5) That the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact on
surrounding property, property values, or the use and enjoyment of
property in the neighborhood or zoning district.
Use variances or variances from uses of land may be granted if
an applicant shows unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the zoning ordinance. The standards for
granting use variances are delineated as follows:
(b) For use variances: a use variance may be granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official
record of the public hearing that undue hardship exists by showing all
of the following:
Sec. 39-403 CHARTER Sec. 39-404
C:1087
Sec. 39-405. Special exceptions generally. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21;
Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1374, § 1,
11-19-2003; Ord. No. 1422, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 1461, 9-6-2006; Ord.
No. 1510, 7-16-2008]
The Zoning Board of Appeals, after public hearing, shall have the power to
grant the special exceptions heretofore authorized by this chapter and, in
addition, may authorize the following:
(1) The building, structure, or land cannot be reasonably used for any
of the uses permitted by right or by special use permit in the zoning
district in which it is located.
(2) That the need for the requested variance is due to unique
circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such
as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not
due to the applicant's personal or economic hardship.
(3) That the proposed use will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood.
(4) That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions
of the property owner or previous property owner (self-created).
If the demand for appeal is for a variance, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the
application. The Appeals Board may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in writing and
reflect the reasons for the decision. At a minimum, the record of
the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall include formal
determination of the facts and the conclusions derived from the
facts (reasons for the decision); and the decision. Any person
aggrieved by such decision shall have the right to appeal to circuit
court within 30 days of the certified decision of the Zoning Board
of Appeals, as provided by law.
(a) The vertical extension of a building existing at the time of enactment of
this chapter to such height as the original drawings of such building
indicated, where such building was actually designed and constructed
to carry the additional stories necessary for such height limit;
(b) Permit the erection or structural alteration in a district where such use
is permitted of a grain elevator, gas holder or other industrial structure
to a height over the limit specified for such district;
(c) Permit additions or enlargements along or within existing setback lines
of existing buildings, conforming in use, in the side or rear yards only,
where such encroachment is in character with the existing
neighborhood and will not be detrimental to adjoining properties or to
Sec. 39-404 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-405
C:1088
Sec. 39-405.1. thorough 39-405.2. (Reserved)135
Sec. 39-406. Conversion of and accommodations within buildings
and dwellings: Roomers, boarders, fraternities and sororities. [Ord.
No. 1185, 9-6-1996; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord. No. 1461,
9-6-2006]
the neighborhood, and provided further that such construction shall
fully comply with the building code of the City.
(d) Permit reductions in fence setbacks for corner residential lots where
the rear yard of a property adjoins the rear yard of another property.
The Board may permit the reduction in setback requirements for fences
up to six feet in height in a rear yard or side yard on a side street to no
less than five feet when the following findings are made: Adequate sight
distance and safety can be maintained with respect to pedestrian and
street traffic; and no substantial detriment to neighboring properties
would be created thereby.
(a) The conversion of an existing building to allow for two or more roomers
or boarders or fraternities and sororities, and the accommodation of the
same within an existing building shall be permitted only as a special
exception, when approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals, following
notification of property owners in accordance with Section 39-408, and
upon the finding of compliance with the following criteria and
standards:
(1) An applicant seeking permission for a special exception shall
submit a dimensioned site plan delineating areas designated for
improved or unimproved off-street parking, and a dimensioned
building floor plan clearly delineating areas to be accessible by the
roomer(s) or boarder(s) or student(s) and physical changes which
will be made to the building in order to accommodate the roomer(s)
or boarder(s) or student(s). An applicant proposing exterior
alterations or additions to the building or dwelling shall submit
drawings or renderings describing and delineating the proposed
improvements. Approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
conditioned upon strict compliance with an approved plan covering
parking and building alterations.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the special exception if all
of the following are satisfied:
a. The property conforms in all respects with housing, building,
plumbing, heating, and electrical codes, including the historic
district regulations, zoning ordinances, and any other codes or
regulations of the City applicable to the creation, operation, or
135. Editor's Note: Former Secs. 39-405.1, Special exceptions to approve owner-occupied shortterm
rentals, added 8-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1674, and 39-405.2, Special exceptions to
approve non-owner-occupied short-term rentals in the C1, C-2, C-3, PRD, and PUD Zone
Districts, added 10-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1697, were repealed by Ord. No. 1732.]
Sec. 39-405 CHARTER Sec. 39-406
C:1089
rental of residential dwelling units. The property shall be
inspected prior to the approval of the special exception and
shall be inspected thereafter as required by the Housing
Property Maintenance Code of the City.
b. The floor area of the dwelling, exclusive of basement or attic
space, is at least 200 square feet per roomer, boarder or
student. Individual sleeping rooms shall have interior access to
common areas including living and kitchen areas.
c. For two or more roomers, boarders, or students, in addition to
the minimum lot area otherwise required for the use in the
specific zone, a lot area of at least 2,000 square feet is provided
for each roomer, boarder or student.
d. Utilities shall not be separately metered for each sleeping
room.
e. For existing residential structures, no structural or substantial
physical changes shall be made which prevent reasonable
conversion of the property to single-family or multifamily use
as otherwise permitted within this zone.
f. No special exception shall be allowed which involves exterior
alterations or additions which are not architecturally
harmonious and compatible with the structure which will
accommodate the roomer(s) and boarder(s) or student(s), or
with other residential structures in the general vicinity.
g. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine that the proposed
special exception is compatible with the uses of the adjacent
and adjoining property; because of the increased use, density,
and proposed off-street parking layout; that the proposed
special exception will not encourage such special exception
uses in the zone district to the detriment of existing and
established uses; and such other considerations deemed
relevant by the Zoning Board of Appeals based upon the
proposed special exception and the existing and established
uses in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
surrounding properties.
(3) In the event the Zoning Board of Appeals grants the special
exception, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine the
amount, placement, and specification of paving as a condition to
the grant of the special exception, considering the increased use,
density, and safety of vehicular traffic movements on the subject
property pursuant to the requirements of Section 39-27. No
parking shall be permitted within a front yard nor side yard on a
side street. A minimum of 50% of the remaining side and rear yards
shall remain as green space. No parking shall occur within two feet
of the property lines unless approved by the Zoning Board of
Sec. 39-406 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-406
C:1090
Sec. 39-407. Additional conditions for approval of variance or
exception. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord.
No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
In authorizing a variance or exception, the Zoning Board of Appeals may,
in addition to the specific conditions of approval called for in this chapter,
attach thereto such other conditions regarding the location, character,
landscaping or treatment reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the
intent and spirit of this chapter and the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
Sec. 39-408. Procedure generally; fee. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21; Ord.
No. 872; Ord. No. 940, 3-16-1988; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997; Ord.
No. 1461, 9-6-2006]
The following procedure shall be required:
Appeals. The access drive for the special exception use shall not be
a joint or shared driveway with an adjacent property.
(4) The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the special exception
subject to additional conditions or restrictions as it deems
necessary to assure compatibility with adjoining or nearby
residential property, or to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare.
(5) In the event the Zoning Board of Appeals grants the approval of the
special exception, the findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be recorded for the property with the register of deeds of Ottawa
County or Allegan County. A special exception shall not be deemed
effective until the applicant has recorded these findings and
presented evidence of the recording to the City Zoning
Administrator. No expansion or addition to the special exception
shall be permitted without prior approval of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Any fees incurred for compliance with this section shall be
paid by the applicant.
(b) The accommodation within an existing building of one roomer or
boarder shall be permitted only as a special exception, approved by the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, upon the finding of
compliance with the criteria and standards described in Subsections
(a)(1), (a)(2)a.—f., (a)(3), and (a)(4) above. For a single roomer or
boarder, the Zoning Administrator may waive specific submission
requirements where it is determined that such information is
unnecessary to reach a determination. The Zoning Administrator may
require an applicant applying for a single roomer or boarder to apply to
the Zoning Board of Appeals for determination of compliance.
(a) An application for a zoning appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk of
the City. Appeals can be filed by a person aggrieved or any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the State of Michigan, or of the City.
Sec. 39-406 CHARTER Sec. 39-408
C:1091
(b) Upon receipt of an application for appeal, the City Clerk shall refer the
application for appeal to the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning
Administrator shall review the application for appeal to ensure it is
complete and the required fee is paid. If the application is not complete,
the Zoning Administrator will return the application to the applicant
with a letter that specifies the additional material required. If the
application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the
demand for a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed,
unless the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Zoning Board of Appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would, in the opinion of the body or officer, cause eminent peril of
life or property, in which case proceedings may be stayed by restraining
order issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals or a circuit court.
(c) The notices of appeal of an administrative decision or a written request
seeking an interpretation of the zoning ordinance stating the time, date,
and place of the public hearing, shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City, and shall be sent to the person
requesting the interpretation not less than 15 days before the public
hearing. In addition, if the request for an interpretation or appeal of an
administrative decision involves a specific parcel, written notice stating
the nature of the interpretation request, and the time, date, and place
of the public hearing on the interpretation request shall be sent by first
class mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question,
and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of
the property in question. If a tenant's name is not known, the term
"occupant" may be used.
(d) If the written request of the Zoning Board of Appeals is for a variance,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the request. In addition, the notice of public hearing stating the time,
date, and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City. Notice shall also be sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being
considered. Notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the property and the occupants of all
structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the
property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. The notice
shall be given not less than 15 days before the public hearing. If the
name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in
making notification under this subsection.
(e) The notice shall do all of the following:
(1) Describe the nature of the request.
(2) Indicate the property that is subject to the request. The notice shall
include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property.
The street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such
Sec. 39-408 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 39-408
C:1092
Sec. 39-409. (Reserved)
Sec. 39-410. Stay of proceedings. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.2; Ord. No.
1188, 2-19-1997]
An appeal under this article stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the Building Official certifies to the Zoning
Board, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason
of fact stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning
Board or by the circuit court on application, after notice to the Building
Official and on due cause shown.
Sec. 39-411. Decisions of the Board. [Ord. No. 464, § 9-1.21; Ord.
No. 872; Ord. No. 1188, 2-19-1997]
The Zoning Board shall decide all applications and appeals within 30 days
after the final hearing thereon. A copy of the Board's decision shall be
transmitted to the applicant or appellant and to the Building Official. Such
decision shall be binding upon the Building Official and observed by him,
and he shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in the permit
to the applicant or appellant whenever a permit is authorized by the Zoning
Board. A decision of Zoning Board shall become final on the date the
decision is made.
addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street
addresses, other means of identification may be used.
(3) State when and where the request will be considered.
(4) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
(5) Any party may appear at such hearings in person or by agent or
attorney.
(f) Upon the day of the hearing of any application or appeal, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may adjourn the hearing in order to permit the
obtaining of additional information, or to cause such further notice as it
deems property to be served upon such other property owners as it
decides may be interested in such application or appeal. In the case of
an adjourned hearing, persons previously notified shall not be notified
of the time of the resumption of such hearing unless the Board so
decides.
Sec. 39-408 CHARTER Sec. 39-411
C:1093
Chapter 40
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES
Sec. 40-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities."
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which has a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade for sale
or rent, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following
items:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
pictures, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video tapes, any
material in digital format [including, but not limited to compact discs
(CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs)], greeting cards, or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations or electronic
media or other merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other stock-in-trade which does
not involve the offering for sale or rental of merchandise depicting or
describing "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"
and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store.
Such other stock-in-trade will not serve to exempt such a commercial
establishment from being characterized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store so long as a substantial portion of the commercial
establishment's stock-in-trade is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified merchandise which is predominantly
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual
activities."
The phrase "substantial portion of its stock-in-trade" shall be
construed with reference to all relevant factors, including, but not
limited to one or more of the following:
(2)
Sec. 39-411 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-1
C:1094
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, restaurant, or other similar commercial
establishment which regularly features or displays:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Twenty-five percent or more of the commercial establishment's
gross sales area is used for the sale of merchandise which is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas"
or "specified sexual activities." For purposes of this Division,
gross sales area is defined as the floor area within the inside
perimeter of the exterior walls of the commercial
establishment, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, storage,
stock, office, and shipping areas, without deduction for
corridors, display fixtures, stairways, public rest rooms, closets,
the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features.
(2) Twenty-five percent or more of the commercial establishment's
stock-in-trade (inventory) is comprised of merchandise which is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas"
or "specified sexual activities."
(3) Twenty-five percent or more of the commercial establishment's
gross revenues are generated by the sale or rental of
merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."
There is a rebuttable presumption that a commercial establishment
constitutes an adult bookstore or adult video store if the commercial
establishment (1) offers or advertises merchandise that is
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified
sexual activities" and (2) fails to make revenue and stock-in-trade
(inventory) or related business records available to the City upon
reasonable advance notice.
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
Live performances predominantly distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of any "specified anatomical areas" or by any
"specified sexual activities"; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, videotapes, any material in
digital format [including, but not limited to compact discs (CDs) or
digital video discs (DVDs)], slides, other photographic reproductions or
visual media which are predominantly distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any "specified
anatomical areas" or any "specified sexual activities."
(3)
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television (as distinguished
(1)
Sec. 40-1 CHARTER Sec. 40-1
C:1095
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, videotapes, any material in digital format [including, but not
limited to compact discs (CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs)], slides, or
similar photographic reproductions or visual media are regularly featured
which are predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical activities"
or "specified sexual activities." This definition includes, but is not limited to,
commercial establishments that offer individual viewing booths.
ADULT THEATER — An adult theater is a theater, concert hall, auditorium
or similar commercial establishment that regularly features a person or
persons who appear in a state of nudity and/or regularly features a person
or persons in live performances that are predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities."
ESCORT — A person who, for a fee, tip or any other form of consideration
and regardless of who pays that consideration, agrees to act or offers to
act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association that furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration. An escort agency is deemed
to be operated in the location where (1) a request for an escort is received,
or (2) the escort and the person requesting the escort are together.
MASSAGE — Any method of applying pressure on, friction against, stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external
parts of the body, for remedial or hygienic or other purposes, with the
hands, with or without the aid of any mechanical, magnetic or electrical
apparatus or appliances, with or without supplementary aids such as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparations.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, room, place or establishment
where body massage is regularly practiced on the human body, to club
members or to the general public, for a charge. The term "massage
establishment" includes, but is not limited to massage parlors, health clubs,
from commercial cable services) transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, videotapes, any material in digital format [including,
but not limited to compact discs (CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs)],
slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are
predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas"
or any "specified sexual activities"; and
Offers a sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or occupant of a
sleeping room to subrent the room, for a period of time that is less than
10 hours.
(2)
Sec. 40-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-1
C:1096
sauna baths and steam baths if massages are performed at those locations.
The term "massage establishment" shall not include:
MATERIAL — Anything tangible, whether through the medium of reading,
observation, sound, or in any other manner, including, but not limited to,
anything printed or written, any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet,
picture, drawing, pictorial representation, motion picture, photograph,
video tape, video disk, film, transparency, slide, audiotape, audiodisk,
computer tape, holographic images, or any other medium used to
electronically produce or reproduce images on a screen, or any mechanical,
chemical, or electronic reproduction. Material includes undeveloped
photographs, molds, printing plates, and other latent representational
objects whether or not processing or other acts are required to make the
content of the material apparent. This definition is intended to include
material which is the product of any technology, whether that technology is
available on the effective date of this Ordinance or becomes available after
that date.
MERCHANDISE — Material and novelties.
NOVELTY — Any instrument, device, or paraphernalia which depicts or
describes any "specific anatomical areas" or any "specific sexual activities,"
or which is designed for use, or commonly used, in connection with "specific
sexual activities," excluding condoms and other birth control and disease
prevention products.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who displays
"specified anatomical areas" is regularly provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude Model Studio
does not include either of the following:
(1) Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics;
The office of a state-licensed physician, surgeon, physical therapist,
osteopath or chiropractor;
(2)
The establishment of a barber, manicurist, beautician or cosmetologist
who is duly licensed under the laws of this state, or another state
within the United States, or the federal government, and who practices
within the established limits of his or her license, and who administers
a massage in the normal course of his or her duties in which massages
are administered only to the scalp, face, neck, hands, feet or shoulder;
(3)
The establishment of a myomassaologist who is a current member of
the American Massage Therapy Association or other national massage
therapy organization with comparable prerequisites for certification; or
(4)
A nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool,
tennis court or other educational, cultural, recreational or athletic
facility for the welfare of the residents of the area.
(5)
Sec. 40-1 CHARTER Sec. 40-1
C:1097
PREDOMINANTLY DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN
EMPHASIS ON — The dominant or essential theme of the object described
by such phrase.
PUBLIC NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY — Knowingly or intentionally
displaying in a public place, or in any other place for payment or promise
of payment by any person, including, but not limited to payment or promise
of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals, pubic area, vulva,
anus or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, a female
individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and
areola, or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. Public
nudity does not include any of the following:
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
establishment, except that which is part of the practice of and under the
supervision and control of a physician, psychologist or psychiatrist licensed
to practice in the State of Michigan, that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
establishment engaging in any of the following businesses: (a) adult arcade;
(b) adult bookstore or adult video store; (c) adult cabaret; (d) adult motel;
(e) adult motion-picture theater; (f) adult theater; (g) escort agency; (h)
nude model studio; or (i) sexual encounter center. Each of these businesses
shall constitute a separate sexually oriented business.
An educational institution funded, chartered or recognized by the State
of Michigan; or
(1)
Any modeling session for a local, nonprofit organization, that is not
open to the public or to any persons other than members of the
organization, that is for the purpose of instruction in the artistic
depiction in two-dimensional or three-dimensional media of the human
form, during which no "specified sexual activities" occur and during
which the model remains in a fixed pose.
(2)
A woman's breast-feeding of an infant shall not under any
circumstances constitute public nudity irrespective of whether the
nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding.
(1)
Any display of any part of the anatomy occurring as part of the regular
curriculum of an educational institution that is funded, chartered, or
recognized by the State of Michigan.
(2)
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or exposes
or displays any "specified anatomical areas."
(2)
Sec. 40-1 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-1
C:1098
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Sec. 40-2. Licenses; generally. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
Sec. 40-3. Application; contents; fee. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
A person desiring to obtain a license to operate a sexually oriented business
shall first obtain special exception approval pursuant to Division 8 of
Chapter 39 of this Code and then file an application with the City Clerk
along with a nonrefundable license fee in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. A massage establishment as defined in
Section 40-1 is not a sexually oriented business, and a person seeking to
establish, operate or maintain a massage establishment does not have to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. The application for a sexually
oriented business license shall be upon a form provided by the City Clerk
and shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. The application shall
contain the following information:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or a female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola, but not including any portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is
not exposed; and
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
(2)
The fondling or any other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
(2)
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in (1) or (2) above.
(3)
(a) A person shall not establish, operate or maintain a sexually oriented
business within the City of Holland without a valid sexually oriented
business license issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.
(b) A person who operates or maintains a sexually oriented business which
exists prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not continue to
operate or maintain said business unless that person obtains a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the City pursuant to this
chapter within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance.
(c) A person shall not establish, operate or maintain a sexually oriented
business within the City of Holland except in the manner authorized by
and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the licensee's
license.
Sec. 40-1 CHARTER Sec. 40-3
C:1099
(a) The full name, and present residential and mailing addresses of the
applicant.
(b) The date of birth and social security number of the applicant.
(c) The two previous residential addresses immediately prior to the present
residential address of the applicant and the dates of residence at each
residential address.
(d) Any other names, nicknames or aliases which the applicant has been
known by during the previous five years.
(e) A description of the services to be provided and the merchandise to be
offered for rent or sale.
(f) The location and mailing address of the sexually oriented business.
(g) The full name, any aliases and the present residential and mailing
addresses of each current employee and each known intended
employee (including, but not limited to, managers and supervisors).
(h) If the applicant is a corporation:
(1) The corporation's complete name and official business address;
(2) The full name and current business address of each of the officers
and directors of the corporation;
(3) The full name and current business address of each stockholder
who has a controlling or significant share in the business [more
than 20% of the corporation];
(4) The full name and current business address of each individual
responsible in whole or in part for the management and operation
of the sexually oriented business;
(5) Proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing and
authorized to conduct business in the State of Michigan; and
(6) The full name of the registered corporate agent and the address of
the registered agent office for service of process.
(i) If the applicant is a partnership or other business entity:
(1) The organization's complete name and official business address;
(2) The full name and current business address of each of the partners
(including limited partners) or members or each of the persons
entitled to share in the profits of the organization;
(3) The full name and current business address of each individual
responsible in whole or in part for the management and operation
of the sexually oriented business.
Sec. 40-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-3
C:1100
(4) Proof of a certificate of fact not cancelled with respect to a limited
partnership.
(5) Proof of a status certificate with respect to a limited liability
company.
(6) The full name of the resident agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process.
(j) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other business entity,
the following information shall be required with respect to each
individual responsible in whole or in part for the management of the
sexually oriented business and with respect to each individual
responsible in whole or in part for the operation of the sexually oriented
business:
(1) Height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair;
(2) Business, occupation, or employment history for the three years
immediately proceeding the application;
(3) All felony and misdemeanor convictions and all ordinance
violations other than minor traffic violations and the nature of the
offense (charge) for which the individual was convicted;
(4) Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the
individual is at least 18 years of age; and
(5) A complete set of fingerprints, recorded by the Police Department.
(k) If the applicant is an individual or a group of individuals, the following
information shall be required with respect to each individual applicant:
(1) Height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair;
(2) Business, occupation, or employment history for the three years
immediately preceding the application;
(3) All felony and misdemeanor convictions and all ordinance
violations other than minor traffic violations and the nature of the
offense (charge) for which the applicant was convicted;
(4) Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the
applicant is at least 18 years of age; and
(5) A complete set of fingerprints, recorded by the Police Department.
(l) One portrait photograph of at least two inches by two inches which
shall be taken by the Police Department, and the results of a criminal
history records investigation of the applicant completed within 30 days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application which shall
include all criminal history information on file at the State Police
Central Records Division pertaining to the applicant. (The applicant
shall provide his or her fingerprints to the Police Department for the
Sec. 40-3 CHARTER Sec. 40-3
C:1101
Sec. 40-4. Procedures for processing license application; issuance
of license. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
purpose of obtaining such criminal history information.) In the event
that the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other business entity,
the applicant shall submit the required photograph and results of a
criminal history records investigation of each individual responsible in
whole or in part for the management of the sexually oriented business
and each individual responsible in whole or in part for the operation of
the sexually oriented business.
(m) The history of the applicant in the operation of the sexually oriented
business or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to,
whether or not such applicant, in previously operating in the City or in
another jurisdiction, has had a sexually oriented business license
revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity
or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension.
(n) The amount of the establishment's gross sales area which will be used
for the sale of merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; and how
much of the establishment's stock-in-trade (inventory) will be
comprised of merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."
(o) Such other identification and information bearing on the application as
the City may reasonably require.
(a) Generally. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall
present to the City Clerk verification that special exception approval
pursuant to Division 8 of Chapter 39 of this Code has been obtained, the
application containing all the information, data and documentation
described in Section 40-3 and the license fee which shall be in an
amount established by resolution of City Council. An application shall
be deemed complete if the City Clerk has received verification that
special exception approval pursuant to Division 8 of Chapter 39 of this
Code has been obtained, the application contains all of the information,
data and documentation described in Section 40-3 and the license fee
has been paid ("completed application"). The City Clerk shall date a
completed application upon receipt with the date that it is received.
Applications which are not completely or correctly filled out; or are not
accompanied by special exception approval verification; or do not
contain the appropriate information, data and documentation; or are
not accompanied by the required application fee shall be rejected as
incomplete by the City Manager and shall be returned to the applicant.
All completed applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the
following procedure:
Sec. 40-3 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-4
C:1102
(1) Within three calendar days after receipt of a completed application,
the City Clerk shall forward a copy of the completed application to
the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and Building
Inspector for review in accordance with this section. The Chief of
Police, Fire Chief, and Building Inspector shall review the
application, conduct any inquiries or inspections, and, within 14
calendar days of the receipt of the application from the City Clerk,
report the findings of such inquiries and inspections to the City
Manager on whether the application and the proposed premises
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
a. The Chief of Police shall review the application to determine
whether the applicant, any individual in the management of the
corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating
the sexually oriented business or any employee has been
convicted of any criminal offenses other than minor traffic
offenses, has violated any provision of this article or has had a
sexually oriented business license or similar license denied or
revoked by the City or by another governmental body and the
reasons therefor.
b. The Fire Chief shall review the application to determine if the
premises and the proposed sexually oriented business comply
with all fire codes.
c. The Building Inspector shall review the application to
determine if the premises and the proposed sexually oriented
business comply with the zoning ordinance and all applicable
electrical, mechanical, building and plumbing codes.
(2) The City Manager, after receiving the reports of the Chief of Police,
the Fire Chief, and the Building Inspector, and after reviewing the
complete application, shall approve or deny a license to the
sexually oriented business in accordance with the standards set
forth in Subsection (b) of this section. If no report is received from
any one or more of the officials, then the City Manager shall
assume that all requirements of this section, this chapter, and the
zoning requirements of Chapter 39 and this Code are satisfied by
the applicant. The City Manager shall make a determination within
30 calendar days after the City Clerk's receipt of the completed
application. If approved, then the City Clerk shall issue the sexually
oriented business license.
(b) Standards for issuance of license. The City Manager shall make a
licensing decision within 30 calendar days as referenced above in
Subparagraph (2) of Subsection (a) of this section, notwithstanding
other ordinance requirements, and the City Manager shall not
predicate a license denial on a deficiency in the application that is due
to the City's failure to perform under this section. The City Manager
shall issue a sexually oriented business license to an applicant unless
the City Manager finds any of the following:
Sec. 40-4 CHARTER Sec. 40-4
C:1103
(1) Failure of the applicant, the premises, or the sexually oriented
business to comply with this section, this chapter, the zoning
requirements of Chapter 39, all applicable fire, mechanical,
electrical, and building codes, or any other provision of this Code.
(2) Prior criminal convictions, other than minor traffic offenses, of the
applicant, any individual in the management of any corporation,
partnership, or other business entity operating the sexually
oriented business, a manager, a supervisor or an employee of the
sexually oriented business, when such criminal conviction involves
moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual
nature and is a felony conviction which arose within five years of
the date of the application or a misdemeanor conviction which
arose within two years of the date of the application.
(3) Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the
license.
(4) Violations of this chapter by the applicant, an individual in the
management of the corporation, partnership, or other business
entity operating the sexually oriented business, a manager, a
supervisor, or an employee of the sexually oriented business.
(5) The applicant, an individual in the management of the corporation,
partnership or other business entity operating the sexually
oriented business, a manager, a supervisor, or an employee of the
sexually oriented business is not at least 18 years of age.
(6) The applicant, an individual in the management of the corporation,
partnership or other business entity operating the sexually
oriented business, a manager, a supervisor or an employee of the
sexually oriented business (i) was denied a sexually oriented
business license within 12 months immediately preceding the date
of the application; (ii) had a sexually oriented business license
revoked within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the
application; or (iii) has a sexually oriented business license under
suspension at the time of application.
(c) Written findings of fact in support of denial. In the event that a sexually
oriented business license is denied, the City Manager shall make
written findings of fact in support of the denial based on the standards
described above and shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing.
The City Manager's written notice of denial shall be delivered in person
or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the applicant's address as set forth in the application. The
application shall be deemed denied on the day that the notice of denial
is delivered in person or three days after it is placed in the U.S. mail as
provided in this Subsection (c).
(d) Appeal. The applicant may appeal such denial to the City Council by
filing a written request for an appeal with the City Manager within 10
calendar days following receipt of notification of the denial. In the event
Sec. 40-4 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-4
C:1104
Sec. 40-5. Content and display of license. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
Sec. 40-6. Change or expansion of location. [Ord. No. 1343,
8-7-2002]
A license for a sexually oriented business shall not be transferable to a
new location or to a new person/licensee. Each sexually oriented business
located within the City shall be separately licensed regardless of whether
such businesses are owned or operated by the same person or entity.
of an appeal, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the denial
within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the written request for an
appeal. The City Council shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or
modify the decision of the City Manager, and the City Council shall
render a written decision on the appeal within 10 calendar days of
hearing the appeal. The City Council shall, in its determination, make
findings of fact supporting its decision, and the reasons shall be based
on the standards described in Subsection (b) of this section. The
determination of the City Council shall be final, any person aggrieved
by the decision of the City Council may promptly appeal such decision
to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the Michigan
Constitution and applicable state law. If such a person aggrieved by
the decision of the City Council seeks judicial review, then a temporary
license shall be issued pending the outcome of the appeal. If judicial
review is pursued, then the City shall submit the administrative
transcript to the court within 45 days of being served with pleadings
commencing the appeal process. A temporary license may be revoked
if the applicant/appellant fails to comply with the procedural
requirements for prosecuting the appeal.
(e) License deemed to be issued. If the City Manager does not issue or deny
a sexually oriented business license within 30 days after the properly
completed application is submitted to him or her for review and
determination, then the sexually oriented business license applied for
shall be deemed to have been issued.
(a) Every sexually oriented business shall be provided with a license which
prominently states on its face the expiration date of the license, the
name of the licensee, the name of the sexually oriented business, and
the address of the sexually oriented business. The licensee shall only
conduct business at the address and in the name shown on the license.
If the licensee has other sexually oriented businesses, then the licensee
must obtain a separate license for each business and operate at
separate locations.
(b) A license for a sexually oriented business shall be displayed on the
premises of the sexually oriented business in a conspicuous place so
that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises, and, upon
request, the licensee shall make the license available to the Police
Department or to the Building Inspector during normal business hours.
Sec. 40-4 CHARTER Sec. 40-7
C:1105
Sec. 40-7. Fees. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
A license fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be
submitted to the City Clerk along with an application for a license and
verification that special exception approval pursuant to Division 8 of
Chapter 39 of this Code has been obtained.
Sec. 40-8. Term and renewal of license. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
Sec. 40-9. Revocation or suspension of license. [Ord. No. 1343,
8-7-2002]
(a) Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate on April
30, unless it is revoked sooner, and a license must be renewed before
operation is allowed for May 1 through April 30 of the following year.
(b) A licensee desiring to renew a license shall make application to the City
Clerk. The application for renewal must be filed with the City Clerk not
later than 60 days before the license expires. The City Clerk shall date
the completed application upon receipt with the date that it is received.
Within three calendar days after receipt of a renewal application, the
City Clerk shall forward a copy to the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire
Chief and Building Inspector. The application for renewal shall be upon
a form provided by the City Clerk and shall be signed and sworn to by
the applicant. The application for renewal shall contain such
information, data and documentation as is required for an application
for a new license. An application for renewal shall be processed in
accordance with the procedure outlined in Section 40-4(a)(1), (2), (b),
(c), (d) and (e) regarding the procedure for processing a license
application.
(c) A license renewal fee in the amount established by resolution of the City
Council shall accompany the renewal application when it is filed with
the City Clerk. In addition to the renewal fee, a late renewal fee in the
amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be assessed
against an applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the
license expires.
(a) The City Council can revoke or suspend a license for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information, data or
documentation was given on any application or that material facts
were omitted from any application.
(2) The licensee, an individual in the management of the corporation,
partnership, or other business entity operating the sexually
oriented business, a manager, a supervisor or an employee of the
sexually oriented business has violated any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council
pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of a
Sec. 40-7 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-9
C:1106
first offense by a licensee where the conduct was solely that of
an individual in the management of the corporation, partnership,
or other business entity operating the sexually oriented business,
a manager, a supervisor or an employee, the penalty shall not
exceed a suspension of 30 days if the City Council finds that the
licensee had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation
and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual
or constructive knowledge.
(3) The licensee becomes ineligible to obtain a license, or the licensee
is convicted of, or pleads nolo contendere to, any felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other
crime of a sexual nature.
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(5) Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is sold, served,
used, possessed, or consumed on the premises of the sexually
oriented business, unless such business has a liquor license and is
operating in accordance with that license.
(6) The licensee fails to comply with the zoning requirements of
Chapter 39 which regulate sexually oriented businesses.
(b) The City Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give
the licensee at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against him
or her, and the opportunity for a public hearing before the City Council,
as hereinafter provided.
(1) Before the City Council revokes or suspends a license issued under
this chapter, the City Council shall cause written notice to be
delivered in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested, addressed as set forth in the application
to the licensee or applicant affected, informing such person of the
right to a hearing upon request.
(2) If the licensee does not request a hearing within 14 days of the date
the notice was sent, then the license may be forthwith revoked or
suspended. If the licensee requests a hearing before the City
Council regarding said proposed revocation or suspension, then
said hearing shall be held within 21 days after the date of the
written request.
(3) Any license issued by the City may be immediately suspended by
the City Manager or duly appointed City official if it is determined
that the licensee has violated or someone at or upon the licensed
location has violated the City ordinance or state law and that
continued operation under the license is contrary to the public
health, safety, and welfare. A licensee shall have the right to a
hearing before the City Council on any license suspension by the
City Manager or duly appointed City official, and notice thereof
shall be given in accordance with Subparagraphs (1) and (2) above.
Sec. 40-9 CHARTER Sec. 40-9
C:1107
Sec. 40-10. General requirements. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
All sexually oriented businesses shall comply with each of the following
requirements:
(4) Both the City and the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to present evidence on the issue at a hearing. The City
Council shall, in its determination, make findings of fact supporting
its decision, and the reasons shall be based on the standards
described in Subsection (a) of this section. The City Council shall
render a written decision on the proposed revocation or suspension
within 10 calendar days of the hearing, action taken by the City
Council shall be final, and any fees hereunder shall not be refunded
to the applicant or licensee.
(c) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically
and immediately revoke the license.
(d) Any licensee whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or
premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as a sexually
oriented business for six months from the date of revocation of the
license.
(e) Any licensee whose license is revoked or suspended pursuant to this
section may appeal the revocation or suspension to a court of
competent jurisdiction in accordance with the Michigan Constitution
and applicable state law. If such a licensee seeks judicial review, then a
temporary license shall be issued pending the outcome of the appeal. If
judicial review is pursued, then the City shall submit the administrative
transcript to the court within 45 days of being served with pleadings
commencing the appeal process.
(a) With the provisions of this chapter; all other applicable City ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations; and all other applicable federal,
state and local laws.
(b) Obtaining and maintaining a valid license to operate a sexually oriented
business issued in accordance with this chapter.
(c) A person under the age of 18 shall not enter or be on the premises of a
sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is
open.
(d) A person under the age of 18 shall not be employed, contracted or
engaged to provide any services within, for or on behalf of a sexually
oriented business.
(e) An owner, partner, performer, contractor or employee of a sexually
oriented business shall not sell or provide goods, merchandise or
services to persons under the age of 18 on the premises.
Sec. 40-9 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-10
C:1108
(f) A sexually oriented business or any other person at any sexually
oriented business shall not appear, be present, or perform while nude. A
sexually oriented business or any other person at any sexually oriented
business shall not perform or conduct any "specified sexual activities"
with or for any sexually oriented business patron or any other sexually
oriented business employee or any other person. A sexually oriented
business patron or any other person at any sexually oriented business
shall not perform or conduct any "specified sexual activities" with or for
any sexually oriented business employee or any other sexually oriented
business patron or any other person.
(g) A sexually oriented business shall be open to inspection by the City's
license officer, ordinance enforcement officer, the Building Inspector,
any public safety officer, any police officer, any firefighter, any sheriff
deputy and any Michigan State Police trooper that has reasonable
cause to believe that the licensee or the sexually oriented business is
not in compliance with the law, and such inspection shall be allowed at
any time the establishment is occupied or open for business and
anywhere in the establishment where patrons are allowed. Upon
request, the licensee shall make available to the inspector
documentation regarding the stock-in-trade (inventory) of the sexually
oriented business and documentation regarding the gross revenues of
the sexually oriented business, which documentation shall show how
much of the gross revenues are generated by the sale or rental of
merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities."
(h) The prohibitions of Section 40-10(c) shall be posted on signs placed in
at least two conspicuous (i.e., so they will be easily viewed by persons
occupying the premises) places on the business premises. Such signs
shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size and shall be printed in
bold face type at least 24 points in size.
(i) The exterior of the business premises shall not have any words,
lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of a sexually explicit manner, sexually explicit material,
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."
(j) The merchandise or activities within the business premises shall not be
visible or audible from a point that is outside of the business premises.
(k) Daily hours of operation shall be limited to the period of time from 7:00
a.m. until 2:30 a.m. the following day on any day of the week except
Sunday, when daily hours of operation shall be limited to the period of
time from 12:00 noon until 2:30 a.m. the following day.
(l) One or more manager's stations shall be in each sexually oriented
business, and the interior of each sexually oriented business shall be
configured in such a manner that there is a direct and substantially
unobstructed view from at least one manager's station to every part of
Sec. 40-10 CHARTER Sec. 40-10
C:1109
Sec. 40-11. Additional requirements for sexually oriented
businesses offering live entertainment. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
All sexually oriented businesses offering live entertainment shall comply
with each of the following requirements:
each area, except rest rooms, of the establishment to which any
sexually oriented business patron is permitted access for any purpose.
(m) A sexually oriented business shall comply with both the following:
(1) At least two employees, excluding entertainers, must be on the
premises of the business at all times the business is open; and
(2) The business is equipped with operational security cameras which
shall be used at all times the business is open.
(n) A booth, room or cubicle, located in any sexually oriented business
(excepting an adult motel), which is used by patrons for the viewing of
merchandise or any other entertainment must comply with all of the
following requirements:
(1) It must be unobstructed by any door, lock or other entrance and
exit control device;
(2) One side must be totally open to a public, lighted isle so that there
is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining isle of any
occupant in the booth, room or cubicle;
(3) It must be illuminated such that a person of normal visual acuity
looking into the booth, room or cubicle from the entrance adjoining
the public lighted isle can clearly determine the number of people
within;
(4) There shall be no holes or openings in any side or rear wall not
related to utility, ventilation or temperature control services or
otherwise required by any governmental code or authority;
(5) Only one individual shall occupy the booth, room or cubicle at any
one time; and
(6) An individual occupying an adult booth, room or cubicle shall not
engage in any "specified sexual activities," nor shall he or she
damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle.
(o) A sexually oriented business shall not contain any video, pinball, slot,
bagatelle, pigeon hole, pool or any other games, machines, tables or
implements.
(a) A dressing room for performers with direct access between said
dressing area and the performance area or stage shall be provided,
such that a performer may enter the performance area or stage without
entering the area from which patrons will view the performance.
Sec. 40-10 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-11
C:1110
Sec. 40-12. Prohibited conduct. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
(b) All performances shall occur on a stage elevated at least 18 inches
above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the
nearest employee or patron.
(c) The dressing area for performers shall be separate and not freely
accessible from areas of the business accessible to patrons, and the
dressing area shall contain hot and cold running water and toilet
facilities.
(d) There shall be no physical contact between any performer and any
other performer or between any performer and any owner, independent
contractor, employee, patron or other person during or for at least 15
minutes following such performance, and there shall be no physical
contact between any person on the stage or performance area and any
owner, independent contractor, employee, patron or other person
during or for at least 15 minutes following any performance. "Physical
contact" includes, but is not limited to any contact in which any part of
the body or clothing of one person touches any part of the body or
clothing of the other person, or if a person causes anything under his or
her direct control to touch any part of the body or clothing of another
person.
(e) An escort agency shall maintain permanent records on the premises
showing the name, address and telephone number of every person for
whom an escort is provided, the fee paid, the name of the escort or
escorts so provided, and the location where the escort and the person
requesting the escort initially meet. These records shall be made
available, upon demand and without prior notice, to any City official
inspecting the premises pursuant to this ordinance.
(f) No tip or gratuity from any sexually oriented business patron may be
offered or accepted for any performance by a sexually oriented business
employee at any time prior to the completion of any such performance.
No sexually oriented business patron shall offer, and no sexually
oriented business employee having performed live at a sexually
oriented business shall accept any form of a tip or gratuity offered
directly to the employee by the sexually oriented business patron.
Following completion of a performance, all tips and gratuities to a
sexually oriented business employee performing live shall be placed
into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and gratuities by the
sexually oriented business.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by this Code, no person within a sexually
oriented business shall display to the view of any other person
"specified anatomical areas," or dance, entertain, display or otherwise
engage in any exhibition or performance in such a manner as to expose
to the view of any person any device, costume or covering which gives
the appearance of or simulates any "specified anatomical areas."
Sec. 40-11 CHARTER Sec. 40-12
C:1111
Sec. 40-13. Violations. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
Sec. 40-14. Additional remedies. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall also be a nuisance per
se, and in addition to the remedies and penalties otherwise provided in
this chapter, the City shall be entitled to seek and obtain temporary and
permanent equitable relief, enjoin violations of this chapter, and seek all
other remedies as provided by law.
Sec. 40-15. Severability. [Ord. No. 1343, 8-7-2002]
The various parts, sections and clauses of this ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter CCT
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
(b) No person shall engage in any "specified sexual activities" on the
premises of a sexually oriented business or any other commercial
establishment.
(a) A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable in accordance with this Code.
(b) Permitting, allowing, encouraging or promoting any violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with this Code.
(c) Aiding, assisting or abetting the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with this
Code.
(d) Any violation of this chapter or the zoning requirements of Chapter 39
may result in the suspension and/or revocation of a license to operate a
sexually oriented business.
Sec. 40-12 HOLLAND CODE Sec. 40-15
C:1112