
Holly, MI Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF HOLLY, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation through Ord. 456, passed 2-12-2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 444



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF HOLLY REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING ORDINANCES OF
THE VILLAGE OF HOLLY.



   WHEREAS, the Home Rule Village Act (Act 278 of 1909) authorizes the
Village to revise, amend, restate, recodify and compile any existing
ordinances into a new code of ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the Village Council has authorized a general compilation,
revision and recodification of the ordinances of the Village.



THE VILLAGE COUNCIL HEREBY ORDAINS:



Section 1.  Codification of Ordinances.



   The ordinances of the Village of Holly as revised, amended, restated,
recodified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Village of Holly." Copies of the
Code of Ordinances can be viewed or obtained in the offices of the Village
Clerk located at the Karl Richter Community Center, 300 East Street, Holly,
Michigan 48442.



Section 2.  Effective Date.



   This ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after
publication.



Section 3. Repealer.



   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such
repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.



Enactment of the foregoing ordinance was moved by President Bladzik and
seconded by President Pro-Tern Musgrave.



Voting for: Heiple, Kleven, Cruickshank, Musgrave, Rankin, Allsop, Bladzik



Voting against: None



Absent: None



The ordinance was declared enacted by the Village President.



August 9, 2016                  /s/               
                             
Date                        Ryan Bladzik, Village
President



CERTIFICATION



 



                        /s/                 
                                   



                        Cathrene A. Behrens,
Clerk/Treasurer



   The foregoing is a true copy of Ordinance No. 444 which was enacted by
the village council of the Village of Holly at a regular meeting of the
Village Council held the 9th day of August, 2016.



CHARTER



Section




Chapter 1: Boundaries and Subdivisions of the Village




   1.1   Boundaries



Chapter 2: General Municipal Powers



   2.1   Powers of the village



   2.2   Exercise of powers



   2.3   Division of powers of government




Chapter 3: Governmental Organization




   3.1   Village legislative body



   3.2   Presidential term of office



   3.3   Councilmember term of office



   3.4   Compensation of members of the council



   3.5   Selection of President pro tem



   3.6   Duties of president



   3.7   Village manager



   3.8   Functions of the village manager



   3.9   Other administrative officers



   3.10   Appointment of administrative officers and employees of the
village



   3.11   Appointment of other officers, heads of departments and
employees



   3.12   Duties of administrative officers



   3.13   Multiple member bodies




Chapter 4: Elections and Appointments




   4.1   Eligibility for office in village



   4.2   Nepotism



   4.3   Vacancies in office



   4.4   Resignations



   4.5   Filling vacancies



   4.6   Term of office cannot be shortened or extended



   4.7   Increase or decrease of compensation



   4.8   Oath and bond of office



   4.9   Surety bonds




Chapter 5: Village Elections




   5.1   Election procedure



   5.2   Qualifications of electors



   5.3   Special elections



   5.4   Election precincts



   5.5   Election commission



   5.6   Notice of elections



   5.7   Voting hours



   5.8   Nomination petitions



   5.9   Approval of petitions



   5.10   Public inspection of petitions



   5.11   Form of ballots



   5.12   Canvass of votes and certification



   5.13   Recount



   5.14   Recall



   5.15   Tie vote




Chapter 6: Functions of the Council




   6.1   Public health and safety



   6.2   Police department



   6.3   Fire department



   6.4   Meetings of the Council



   6.5   Intergovernmental contracts



   6.6   Licenses



   6.7   Streets and alleys



   6.8   Public highways, grounds: procedure to vacate



   6.9   Rights as to property



   6.10   Investigations



   6.11   Restriction on the Council



   6.12   Contracts of public servants with the village



   6.13   Committees




Chapter 7: Village Legislation




   7.1   Ordinance enactment



   7.2   Penalties



   7.3   Ordinance; effective date



   7.4   Technical codes



   7.5   Compilation



   7.6   Initiative and referendum



   7.7   Petitions



   7.8   Council procedure



   7.9   Submission to electors



   7.10   Ordinance suspended




Chapter 8: General Finance




   8.1   Fiscal year



   8.2   [Submission of itemized budget estimate]



   8.3   [Budget document]



   8.4   Budget hearing



   8.5   Adoption of budget, tax limit



   8.6   Transfer of appropriations



   8.7   Budget control



   8.8   Depository



   8.9   Independent audit




Chapter 9: Taxation




   9.1   Power to tax and secure revenue



   9.2   Subjects of taxation



   9.3   Special assessment procedure



   9.4   Assessor and board of review




Chapter 10: Municipal Borrowing Power




   10.1   General power to borrow



   10.2   Unissued bonds




Chapter 11: Public Improvements, Contract, Utilities




   11.1   Village may perform public work



   11.2   Purchasing and contractual procedure



   11.3   Nuisances and hazards



   11.4   Cost of acquired property added



   11.5   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters



   11.6   Condemnation




Chapter 12: Franchises and Licenses




   12.1   General right of regulation



   12.2   Licenses and franchises remain in effect




Chapter 13: Miscellaneous




   13.1   Notice to village of claim for injuries



   13.2   Publication



   13.3   No estoppel by representative



   13.4   Village records



   13.5   Prior village ordinances and regulations



   13.6   Tense



   13.7   Headings



   13.8   Effect of illegality of any part of charter



   13.9   Amendments



Editor’s Note:



   Adopted:  March 8, 1982



   Amended:  March 18, 1984;March 11, 1986; November 6, 1990; November 3,
1992; March 8, 1994; March 12, 1996; August 3, 2010; November 4, 2014



PREAMBLE



We the people of the Village of Holly in order to enjoy to the fullest extent
the advantages and benefits of local self-government, as authorized by the
constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, do hereby establish this Home
Rule Charter.



CHAPTER 1:  BOUNDARIES AND SUBDIVISIONS OF THE VILLAGE



§ 1.1  BOUNDARIES.



   The village shall embrace the territory constituting the Village of
Holly on the effective date of this Charter, together with such annexations
thereto and less any detachments therefrom that may be made from time to
time. Upon annexation or detachment of territory, the boundaries shall be
deemed thereby to be changed without amendment of this section. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain and keep available in his/her office for
public inspection an official description of the current boundaries of the
village.



CHAPTER 2: GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS



§ 2.1  POWERS OF THE VILLAGE.



   (A)   All powers, privileges, and immunities not inconsistent with
the provisions of this charter, possessed by the Village of Holly by virtue
of its incorporation as such and enumerated in Act No. 3, P.A. 1895, the
former Charter of the village which is hereby superseded, are hereby
expressly retained by the village and shall constitute a part of the police
power of the village even though not expressly enumerated herein.



   (B)   Further, unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter,
the Village of Holly and its officers shall be vested with any and all
powers, privileges and immunities, expressed and implied, which villages and
their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide
for in their charters under the constitution and laws of the State of
Michigan, and of the United States of America, including all the powers,
privileges, and immunities which villages are permitted to or may provide in
their charters by the Michigan Home Rule Act for Villages, being Act No. 278
of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, as fully and completely as though
those powers privileges, and immunities were specifically enumerated in and
provided for in this charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of
particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this charter be held to be
exclusive, it being the intent of the Charter Commission in framing this
charter, and of the people of the Village in adopting it, to include all such
powers, privileges, and immunities within the scope of the powers,
privileges, and immunities granted to the Village of Holly by the provisions
of this charter.



   (C)   The Village and its officers shall have the power to exercise
all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and
in the administration of the municipal government whether such powers be
expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the
Village, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its
inhabitants, and through its regular constituted authority, to pass and
enforce all laws, ordinances and resolution relating to its municipal
concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and the
provisions of this charter.



§ 2.2  EXERCISE OF POWERS.



   (A)   Where no procedure is set forth in this charter for the
exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the Village and its
officers, the Council may resort to any procedure set forth in any statute of
the State of Michigan which was passed for the governance of villages or
townships, or in any other statute of the State of Michigan.



   (B)   If alternate procedures are to be found in different statutes,
then the Council shall select the procedure which it deems to be most
expeditious and advantageous to the village and its inhabitants.



   (C)   Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the
Village is set forth either in this charter or in any statute of the State of
Michigan, the Council may prescribe by ordinance a reasonable procedure for
the exercise thereof.



§ 2.3  DIVISION OF POWERS OF THE GOVERNMENT.



   All of the powers of municipal government possessed by the Village are
hereby divided into two (2) general divisions, i.e., legislative or policy
forming and administrative. No person or body belonging to or being part of
one (1) such division shall exercise powers imposed by this charter upon or
properly belonging to another division. It shall be the duty of every officer
of the village to preserve as distinct and separate the two (2) divisions of
the Village government.



CHAPTER 3:  GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION



§ 3.1  VILLAGE LEGISLATIVE BODY.



   All legislative or policy forming powers of the Village shall be vested
in, exercised, and determined by a Council of seven (7) members, one (1) of
whom shall serve as President. In all cases where the word “council” is
used in this charter, the same shall mean and shall be synonymous with the
terms “Commission,” “common council,” “board of aldermen,”
“governing body,” “legislative body,” “trustee,” or any other
synonymous terms, as the same may be used in any state or Federal law in
referring to legislative or governing bodies or [of] villages.



§ 3.2  PRESIDENTIAL TERM OF OFFICE.



   At regular Village elections in alternative years a President shall be
elected by and from the Village at large and shall hold office for two (2)
years.



§ 3.3  COUNCILMEMBER TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   At each regular village election there shall be elected by and
from the village at large three (3) Council members, each to serve for a term
of four (4) years.



   (B)   The terms of office of each Councilmember shall commence on
and date from the second Tuesday next following the date of the regular
village election at which they are elected.



§ 3.4  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL.



   The President and each council member shall receive as compensation for
his/her service to the Village the sum of Nine Hundred Dollars ($900.00) per
year. Such salaries shall be payable annually as determined by the Council
and shall constitute the only salary or compensation which may be paid for
services performed by the President or any Council Member for the discharge
of any official duty for or on behalf of the Village during their term of
office. Upon prior authorization of the Council, reasonable expense may be
allowed when actually incurred on behalf of the Village.



[Election 3/11/86]



§ 3.5  SELECTION OF PRESIDENT PRO TEM.



   The Council shall at its first regular meeting following each regular
village election, elect one (1) of its members to serve as President Pro Tem.
The President Pro Tern shall perform the duties of the President when, on
account of absence from the village, disability, or otherwise, the President
is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his/her office, and in case of
vacancy in the office of President, until such vacancy is filled by the
Council. In the absence of both the President and President Pro Tem, the
council shall appoint one of their [its] members to preside.  The President
Pro Tem shall preside over the meetings of the Council at the call of the
President.



   In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of President or
President Pro Tern, the council shall appoint one of its members to fill such
vacancy.



§ 3.6  DUTIES OF PRESIDENT.



   (A)   Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes,
the President shall be recognized as the executive head of the village. 
He/She shall be the presiding officer of the Council. He/She shall have an
equal voice and vote in the proceedings of the council but shall have no veto
power.



   (B)   As the executive head of the village, it is expected that the
Village President shall make recommendations and suggestions as to
governmental and legislative polices of the Village.



   (C)   The Village President shall have the power to declare a state
of emergency in the event of a serious natural or unnatural disaster or civil
disorder, within the Village.



   (D)   The Village President shall authenticate by his/her signature
such instruments as the Council, this Charter, or the laws of the State of
Michigan or of the United States shall require.



   (E)   The Village President shall be an ex-officio member of all
Village Commissions and Boards without the right to vote.



   (F)   The Village President shall exercise only such powers as this
Charter or the Council shall specifically confer upon him/her, except as may
be required or conferred by statute.



§ 3.7  VILLAGE MANAGER.



   (A)   All administrative powers, duties and functions of the village
shall be vested in the Village Manager, except as otherwise provided in this
charter.  He/She shall be selected by the Council on the basis of training
and ability in work which would qualify him/her for the position of Village
Manager, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council.  He/She shall
be removed only by resignation or by a five (5) member vote of the elected
council.



   (B)   The Village Manager need not be a resident of the village at
the time of his/her appointment, but shall, unless excused by the Council,
become a resident of the Village within one hundred and twenty (120) days
after his/her appointment and so remain throughout the tenure of office.



   (C)   The Village Manager may, with the approval of the Council,
designate an administrative officer or employee of the Village to perform the
duties of the Village Manager during his/her temporary absence or incapacity.
The Council shall designate a qualified person to perform the duties of
Village Manager during a vacancy in the office.



   (D)   No person acting as Village Manager in a temporary capacity,
whether during the absence or disability of the Village Manager or during a
vacancy in that office, shall make any change in the administrative officers
of the Village without the consent of the council.



   (E)   No Councilmember or Village President shall be eligible for
appointment as Village Manager or acting village manager, nor shall any such
person perform the duties of the Village Manager during a vacancy in that
office, until two (2) years have elapsed following the expiration of the term
for which he/she served.



[Election 3/13/84]



§ 3.8  FUNCTIONS OF THE VILLAGE MANAGER.



   (A)   The Village Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer
of the Village government.  He/She shall carry out the policies formulated
by the Council.



   (B)   The Village Manager shall be responsible to the Council for
the proper administration of all affairs of the water, sewer, public works,
police departments, and such other departments as created by statute or
ordinance, and to that end he/she shall have the power and shall be required
to:



      (1)   Act on behalf of and carry out the instructions and
policies of and be the authorized representative of the Village Council;



      (2)   Recommend to the Council the appointment and/or
dismissal of the department heads of each department under his/her
jurisdiction;



      (3)   Attend all meetings of the Village Council, unless
excused, with the right to take part in discussions but without the right to
vote;



      (4)   Be a member ex-officio of all committees of the Council
without the right to vote;



      (5)   Recommend to the Council the adoption of such measures
as he/she may deem necessary or expedient for improvement or betterment of
the administration of the affairs of the Village;



      (6)   Prepare an annual budget, submit it to the Council,
recommend its adoption and be responsible for the administration thereof;
provided, however, the raising of money shall in all cases be with the
approval of the Council;



      (7)   Be responsible for the purchase of all Village property
excepting real estate and capital expenditures, provided that the Village
Council shall by ordinance or resolution establish limitations and procedures
as to the Manager's authority to undertake said purchases;



      (8)   Be responsible for the sale of all Village property
excepting real estate, and unless  provided otherwise by statute, said sales
shall in all cases be made with the approval of the council;



      (9)   Exercise and perform all administrative functions that
are not imposed by charter, statute, or ordinance upon some other official;



      (10)   Present to the Council periodic reports and special
reports when requested by the Council covering the activities of the Village
administration for which he/she is responsible;



      (11)   Recommend to the Council the compensation to be paid
each department head of the Village under his/her jurisdiction;



      (12)   The Village Manager shall be the bargaining
representative of the Council with regard to all negotiations pertaining to
collective bargaining agreements and shall make a recommendation as to
tentative agreements to the Council;



      (13)   In addition to the duties prescribed by this charter,
the Village Manager shall perform such other duties as may be required of
him/her by ordinance, motion, or by resolution of the Council.



§ 3.9  OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.



   (A)   In addition to the Village Manager, the administrative
officers of the Village shall be the Clerk Treasurer, the Village Attorney,
and other officers included in the administrative plan approved by the
Council.



   (B)   The Clerk Treasurer shall perform those duties,
responsibilities and functions enumerated by ordinance or statute for village
Clerks and Treasurers.



   (C)   In addition to the duties prescribed by State law, and by
Village ordinance, the Village Attorney shall serve as the attorney for the
council and shall attend all council meetings, unless excused by the council,
and shall be responsible for the prosecution of all ordinance violations of
the Village.



   (D)   The Council may by resolution, upon its own recommendation or
upon the recommendation of the Village Manager, combine or separate any
administrative offices in any manner which is not inconsistent with the
provisions of State Law. No combination or separation of administrative
offices one with another or one from another shall abolish the office of
Village Manager or diminish any of the duties or responsibilities of that
office as set forth in this charter.



§ 3.10  APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE VILLAGE.



   (A)   All administrative officers of the Village shall be appointed
by the Council and the office holders shall serve at the pleasure of the
Village Council, who shall set their salaries in accordance with the budget
appropriations and upon recommendations of the Village Manager.



   (B)   The Village Manager, Clerk-Treasurer and Village Attorney
shall hold office by virtue of election by the Council, which shall also set
their salaries. They shall hold office at the pleasure of the council.



   (C)   The Village Manager, Clerk-Treasurer, and Village Attorney
shall be removed from office only by resignation or a five (5)-member vote of
the elected council.



[Election 3/13/84]



§ 3.11  APPOINTMENT OF OTHER OFFICERS, HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The Village Council, with the advice of the Village Manager,
shall appoint such other officers and department heads as may be required by
ordinance or resolution of the Council.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, Officers and
Department Heads so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the council and
shall be removed only by resignation or a five (5)-member vote of the elected
Councilmembers.



[Election 3/13/84]



§ 3.12  DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.



   All administrative officers of the Village shall perform such duties as
are provided for such officers by state law, this charter, the Village
ordinances, and the administrative directives of the Village Manager. Unless
the Council shall otherwise provide by ordinance, specifying another officer
of the Village, the Clerk-Treasurer shall be the chief accountant and auditor
of the village and he/she, or such other officer as shall be so designated by
the Council, shall, subject to the direction of the Village Manager, maintain
a system of accounts which conform to such uniform system as may be required
by state law. In the exercise of such duties, each Village officer shall
exercise and possess all the powers, privileges, and immunities granted to
village and township officers exercising the same duties for village and
townships generally under the general laws of the state.



§ 3.13  MULTIPLE MEMBER BODIES.



   (A)   Multiple member bodies, including boards and commissions, may
be established by the Village ordinance or resolution. Such bodies may
exercise those powers and duties granted by the Village provided that they do
not conflict with provisions of this charter.



   (B)   All multiple member bodies, including boards and commissions,
of the Village of Holly shall be subject to the following provisions, unless
otherwise stated in this charter:



      (1)   Initial appointments of persons shall be made to provide
for staggered expiration of terms.



      (2)   Appointments shall be made by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Village Council. Removal from office shall be
for cause upon recommendation of the Village President and approval of the
Village Council.



      (3)   Vacancies which occur prior to the expiration of the
term shall be filled for the remainder of the term in the same manner as an
expired term.



      (4)   Each body shall have the power to organize for the
conduct of its business including the selection of officers. All rules
adopted and used by such body shall comply with the provisions of this
charter. The rules shall provide for notice of meetings and shall define the
manner in which no-attendance becomes neglect of duty and grounds for removal
from office.



      (5)   Each body shall report at least once a year to the
Village Council concerning its activities. A copy of the report shall be
filed with the Village Clerk and be available for public inspection.



[Election 11/3/92]



CHAPTER 4:  ELECTIONS AND APPOINTMENTS



§ 4.1  ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE IN VILLAGE.



   (A)   No person shall be eligible for election or appointment to any
elective or appointive village office if such person is in default to the
Village. The election or appointment of any such person in default shall be
void.



   (B)   As used in this section, “in default to the Village” means
delinquent in the payment of property taxes or delinquent in a debt owed to
the village if one of the following applies:



      (1)   The property taxes remain delinquent after the last day
of February in the year following the year in which they are levied, unless
the taxes are the subject of an appeal.



      (2)   Another debt owed to the village remains unpaid 90 days
after the due date, unless the debt is the subject of an administrative
appeal or a contested court case.



   (C)   No person shall be eligible to hold any popularly elective
office of the Village unless he or she shall be eighteen years of age or
older, a registered voter in, and shall have been a resident of, the Village
for at least six (6) months immediately prior to the date of his or her
election.



[Election 11/4/2014]



   (D)   No person who is an employee of the Village shall be eligible
to hold the office of President or Council Member of the Village.



[Election 8/03/2010]



§ 4.2  NEPOTISM.



   Relatives by blood or marriage of any Councilmember or the Village
Manager, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, shall be
disqualified from holding any appointive office, or from being employed by
the village during the term of office of such Councilmember or Village
Manager, except and unless said relatives are bona fide appointive officers
or employees of the village at the time of the election of such officer or
appointment of such Village Manager. If the status of relationship between
any employee of the village and any officer of the village changes to a
relationship prohibited hereby after one (1) year following the employment of
such person or election or appointment of such officer, the provisions of
this section shall not apply.



§ 4.3  VACANCIES IN OFFICES.



   Every village office shall become vacant upon the happening of any of
the following events before the expiration of the term of such office.



   (A)   For any reason specified by state law as grounds for creating
a vacancy;



   (B)   Continuous absence of the officer from the village for more
than sixty (60) days without permission of the Council;



   (C)   Absence of the President or a Member of the Council from four
(4) consecutive regular meetings of the Council, or twenty-five (25%) percent
of such regular meetings in any fiscal year of the Village, unless such
absences shall in each case be excused by the Council and the reason
therefore entered in the proceedings of the Council;



   (D)   Conviction of any act constituting misconduct in office under
the provisions of this charter or state law.  “Misconduct in office”
shall mean the willful neglect to perform a duty imposed by law upon a public
officer.



§ 4.4  RESIGNATIONS.



   Resignations of all elected and appointed officers shall be made in
writing and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer and shall be presented to the
Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the
Clerk-Treasurer. A resignation submitted by an officer shall be deemed to be
considered as an unconditional resignation and shall become effective upon
acceptance by the Council.



§ 4.5  FILLING VACANCIES.



   (A)   If a vacancy shall occur in the office of President or
Councilmember, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days after such.vacancy
occurs, elect a person who possesses the qualifications required of holders
of the office in which the vacancy exists. If the vacancy shall be in the
office of Councilmember or President, any person so elected shall hold office
until the Tuesday, next following the next village election, at which
election the vacancy shall be filled for the balance of the term of the
person whose office is so filled.



   (B)   In the event of a vacancy in the office of Village Manager,
the Council shall fill such vacancy within one hundred twenty (120) days
after such vacancy occurs.



   (C)   If a vacancy occurs in any other office elected or appointed
by the Council, the Council shall fill such vacancy within a reasonable time.



§ 4.6  TERM OF OFFICE CANNOT BE SHORTENED OR EXTENDED.



   Except by procedures provided in this charter, the terms of the
officials of the Village elected for a definite term shall not be shortened.
The terms of officers of the Village may not be extended beyond the period
for which any such officer was elected except that an elected officer of the
village shall, after his/her term has expired, continue to hold office until
his/her successor is elected and has qualified.



§ 4.7  INCREASE OR DECREASE OF COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to
any Village officer, elected or appointive, or to any employee, after the
service has been rendered. Nor shall the salary of any village officer,
elected or appointive, be increased or decreased after his/her election or
appointment during any fixed term of office for which he/she was elected or
appointed.



   (B)   This section shall not prohibit increases or decreases in the
compensation of elected or appointive positions held for indefinite periods
such as the Village Manager, Clerk Treasurer, Village Attorney, or any other
office held for an indefinite period as created or designated by the Village
Council.



§ 4.8  OATH AND BOND OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the
duties of his/her office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section
2 of Articles XVI of the Constitution of the State and shall file the same
with the Clerk-Treasurer, together with any bond which he/she may be required
by this Charter or by the Council to give. The oath and bond of the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be filed with and kept by the Village Manager.



   (B)   In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this
section within ten (10) days from the date of the notice to him/her of the
election or appointment, such officers shall be deemed to have declined the
office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council
shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as
above set forth.



§ 4.9  SURETY BONDS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all officers of
the Village whose duties involve the custody of public property or the
handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both,
and all other officers and employees so required by the Council, shall,
before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the
Village an official bond in such form and amount as the council shall direct
and approve.



   (B)   Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his/her office,
and will on demand deliver over to his/her successor in office, or other
proper officer or AN agent of the Village, all books, papers, monies, effects
and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his/her office, which may
be in his/her custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be
further conditioned as the Council prescribes.



   (C)   The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to
receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall
be further conditioned that he/she will, on demand, pay over or account for
to the Village or any proper officer or agent thereof, all monies received by
him/her as such officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may
be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds
covering all, or a group of, Village employees and officers.



   (D)   All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the
premiums thereon shall be paid by the Village. All bonds of all officers or
employees shall be filed with the Clerk Treasurer except that any bond
pertaining solely to the clerk-treasurer, shall be filed with the Village
Manager. No bond shall be issued for a term exceeding two (2) years.



CHAPTER 5:  VILLAGE ELECTIONS



§ 5.1  ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as
near as may be, all procedures relating to registration for and the conduct
of nonpartisan Village elections, except as otherwise provided by this
charter.



§ 5.2  QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS.



   Each person who has the constitutional qualifications at the next
ensuing regular or special village election shall be entitled to register as
an elector of the Village of Holly in the voting district in which he/she
resides.



§ 5.3  SPECIAL ELECTIONS.



   Special village elections shall be held when called by resolution of
the council at least sixty (60) days in advance of such election or when
required by this Charter or statute. Any resolution calling a special
election shall set forth the purpose of such election. The Council shall not
call more special elections within any year than the number permitted by
statute.



§ 5.4  ELECTION PRECINCTS.



   The Council shall, by ordinance, establish convenient election
precincts which shall comply with the provisions of state law.



§ 5.5  ELECTION COMMISSION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by law, an election commission is
hereby created consisting of the Village Clerk-Treasurer and two (2) village
electors to be appointed by the Council with the advice of the
Clerk-Treasurer whose terms shall last three years. The term of office of the
electors selected shall be staggered so that their terms shall not end at the
same time. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Village shall be the chairperson of the
Commission.



   (B)   The commission shall have charge of all activities and duties
required of election commissions in villages by state law and this charter,
relating to the conduct of elections in the Village. The compensation of
election personnel shall be determined in advance by the council. In any case
where election procedure is in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe
the procedure to be followed.



§ 5.6  NOTICE OF ELECTIONS.



   Notice of the time and place of holding any village election, and of
the officers to be nominated or elected and the questions to be voted upon,
shall be given by the Clerk-Treasurer by publication at least twice in a
legal newspaper of general circulation in the village and, if deemed
advisable by the Council, by posting in two (2) or more conspicuous places in
the village not less than ten (10) days prior to such election.



§ 5.7  VOTING HOURS.



   The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time
prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections.



§ 5.8  NOMINATION PETITIONS.



   (A)   Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for nomination for
any elective office under this charter shall file a petition therefore with
the Clerk Treasurer signed by not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than
fifty (50) registered electors of the village not later than 5:00 p.m. on the
seventh (7th) Monday prior to the date of the regular or special village
election.



[Election 3/12/96]



   (B)   Official blank petitions in substantially the same form as
required by state law for state and county officers, except for references to
party, shall be prepared and furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. Before the
Clerk-Treasurer distributes any nomination petitions to any person, he/she
may enter thereon in ink the name of the person desiring to become a
candidate for office in the village, or the person in whose behalf the
petition is to be circulated, and the name of the office for which he/she is
a candidate.



   (C)   Nomination petitions for the purpose of filling a vacancy
shall so state in connection with the name of the office for which the
petition is to be circulated. The Clerk-Treasurer shall publish notice of the
last day and time for filing nomination petitions at least (1) one week
before, and not more than three (3) weeks before, that date.



   (D)   No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions
for any one office than there will be persons elected to said office. Where
any name appears on more petitions than there are candidates to be elected to
said office, such name shall not be counted upon any petition for that office.



§ 5.9  APPROVAL OF PETITIONS.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall accept for filing nomination
petitions containing the required number of signatures for candidates having
those qualifications required by elective Village officers by this charter.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any candidate from
having his/her own nominating petitions printed, but they must comply
substantially with the form required by law.



   (B)   When petitions are filed by persons other than the person
whose name appears thereon as a candidate, they may be accepted for filing
only when accompanied by the written consent of the person in whose behalf
the petition or petitions were circulated.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall, within five (5) days after the
final day and hour for receiving nomination petitions, determine the
sufficiency of the signatures on each petition filed, and if he/she finds any
petition does not contain the required number of legal signatures of
registered electors, he shall immediately notify the candidate in writing, by
registered mail with return receipt requested, of the insufficiency of
his/her petition.



   (D)   Each petition which is found by the Clerk-Treasurer to contain
the required number of signatures of registered electors shall be marked
“In Order,” with the date thereof, and he/she shall so notify the
candidate whose name appears thereon, in writing.



§ 5.10  PUBLIC INSPECTION OF PETITIONS.



   All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer beginning five (5) days after the final filing
date for such petitions.



§ 5.11  FORM OF BALLOTS.



   The form of the ballot used in any village election shall conform as
nearly as may be to that prescribed by the general law of the state for
nonpartisan elections. The name of candidates for nomination or of qualified
nominees, as the case may be, for each office shall be listed in a single
column and shall be rotated on the ballots. In all other respects the
printing and numbering of ballots shall conform to the general laws of the
state relating to elections.



§ 5.12  CANVASS OF VOTES AND CERTIFICATION.



   (A)   Village elections shall be canvassed by the Board of County
Canvassers as provided by Act No. 116, P.A., 1954 as amended.



   (B)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall file in his/her office and
preserve the original statement and determination of the Board of Canvassers
of the results of the elections and shall forthwith execute and cause to be
delivered to the persons thereby declared to be elected to Village Offices, a
certification of election certified by him/her.



§ 5.13  RECOUNT.



   A recount of the votes cast at any Village election for any office, or
upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws
of the state.



§ 5.14  RECALL.



   Any elective official may be removed from office by the electors of the
village in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy
created by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner
prescribed by law.



§ 5.15  TIE VOTE.



   If, at any village election, there shall be no choice between
candidates by reason of two (2) or more persons having received an equal
number of votes, and a failure to elect to any office is caused thereby, the
election of the office shall be determined by lot as provided by the law.



CHAPTER 6:  FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL



§ 6.1  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   Through the established departments and agencies of the village
government, together with any such departments or agencies as may be created
under authority of this charter, the Council shall provide for the public
peace, health, and for the safety of persons and property of the village.



§ 6.2  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Council shall maintain adequate police protection to
enforce all laws and ordinances which are in force in the Village to preserve
the peace and the good order of the Village.



   (B)   The Village Council, with the advice of the Village Manager,
shall select a Chief of Police who shall be head of the Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall serve at the pleasure of the council.



§ 6.3  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Council shall have power to enact such ordinances and to
establish and enforce such regulations as it shall deem necessary to guard
against the occurrence of fires in the Village and to protect the property
and persons of the inhabitants of the Village against damage and accident
resulting therefrom. For this purpose the Council may establish, organize and
maintain, within the administrative division of the village, a fire
department, which shall be under the direction of the village council.
Provided, however, that, until otherwise provided by ordinance passed by a
five (5) member vote of the Council, the fire department of the village shall
be and remain as now organized.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by a five (5) member vote of the
council, the Village Council shall appoint, with the advice of the Village
Manager and fire association members, a Fire Chief who shall be the head of
the Fire Department. He/She shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.



[Election of 3/13/1984]



§ 6.4  MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.



   (A)    The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and
place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least twelve (12) regular
meetings during the fiscal year.  [Election 11/04/2014; Election 11/6/2018]



   (B)   Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the
Clerk-Treasurer on the written request of the President or of any two (2)
members of the council on at least eighteen (18) hours' written notice to
each member of the Council, designating the time, place, and purpose of any
meeting and served personally or left at his/her usual place of residence by
the Clerk-Treasurer or someone designated by him/her.



   (C)   No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the
council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meetings.



   (D)   All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open
to the public and conducted pursuant to the statute and ordinance and the
rules of order of the Council shall provide that citizens shall have a
reasonable opportunity to be heard.



   (E)   Four (4) members of the Council shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business at all meetings of the council, but, in the absence
of a quorum, the President or any two (2) members may adjourn any regular or
special meeting to a later date.



   (F)   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of
business and shall keep a journal of all of its proceedings in the English
language which shall be signed by the President and the Clerk-Treasurer. The
vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all
resolutions shall be taken by “Yes” and “No” votes and entered upon
the record, except where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to
so state. Each member of the council who shall be recorded as present shall
vote on all questions decided by the Council unless excused by the unanimous
consent of the other members present unless prohibited by statute or
ordinance. Unless otherwise provided by statute any person shall have access
to the minutes and records of all regular and special meetings of the Council
at all reasonable times.



   (G)   The Council may, by vote of not less than two (2) of its
members, compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the
Village at its regular and special meetings and enforce orderly conduct
therein; and any member of the Council or other officer of the Village who
refuses to attend such meetings or conduct himself/herself in an orderly
manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The Council
may select a Sergeant-At-Arms for the enforcement of the provisions of this
section.



§ 6.5  INTERGOVERNMENTAL CONTRACTS.



   The Village may join with any governmental unit or agency, or with any
number of combinations thereof, by contract or otherwise as may be permitted
by law to perform jointly, or by one or more, for or on behalf of the other
or others, any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or
which is possessed or imposed upon each such governmental unit or
agency.   



§ 6.6  LICENSES.



   The Council shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and conditions upon
which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked; and may require and
exact payment of such reasonable sums for any licenses as it may deem proper.
The persons receiving the licenses shall, before the issuing thereof, execute
a bond to the village, when required by any ordinance, in sum and with such
securities as prescribed by such ordinance, conditioned for the faithful
observance of the charter of the Village, and the ordinance under which the
license is granted.



§ 6.7  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Except insofar as limited by state law and the provisions of
this charter, the Council shall have power to establish, vacate, use,
control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public
places (whether such public places be located within or without the limits of
the village) and the space above and beneath them.



   (B)   Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper
policing and supervision thereof; to the licensing and regulation, or the
prohibition of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things
which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of sidewalks
or streets, upon or over the sidewalks or streets of the Village; and the
licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings in the
sidewalks or streets, and of all vaults, structures, and excavations under
the same.



§ 6.8  PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, GROUNDS: PROCEDURE TO VACATE.



   (A)   When the council shall deem it advisable to vacate,
discontinue, or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or public ground or
any part thereof, they shall by resolution declare and in the same resolution
shall appoint a time not less than four (4) weeks thereafter when they will
make and hear objections thereto; notice of such meeting with a copy of said
resolution shall be given in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance
or resolution.



   (B)   Objections to such proposed action of the Council may be filed
with the Clerk-Treasurer in writing, and if any such shall be filed, the
street, alley or public



ground, or any part thereof shall not be vacated or discontinued except by
the affirmative vote of five (5) Councilmembers.



§ 6.9  RIGHTS AS TO PROPERTY.



   The council shall have the power to acquire for the Village by
purchase, gift, land contract purchase, condemnation, lease, construction or
otherwise, either within or without the Village of Holly, property of every
type and nature which may be required for or incidental to the present or
future exercise of the purpose, powers, and duties of the Village government
established by this charter and may build thereon, and on any other property
owned or leased by the village, such buildings or structures as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes for which such land is owned or leased.



§ 6.10  INVESTIGATIONS.



   The Council shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any
department, office, or officer of the Village and to make investigations as
to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer
oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure
on the part of any officer of the village to obey such subpoena or to produce
books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this
section shall constitute misconduct in office. If such failure shall be on
the part of any employee of the Village, the same shall constitute a
misdemeanor.



§ 6.11  RESTRICTIONS ON THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   Except for the purpose of inquiry or in case of an emergency
during the temporary absence or disability of the Village Manager, the
Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely
through the Village Manager and neither the Council nor any Council Member
shall give orders to any subordinate of the Village Manager, either publicly
or privately.



   (B)   No Council Member shall direct or request:



      (1)   Except for the election of those administrative officers
required to be elected by the council, the appointment of any person to, or
the removal of any person from, any employment position or office for which
the Village Manager is responsible;



      (2)   Except at public meetings and in cases of letting of
contracts, the purchase of any specific materials, supplies or equipment.



      It is not the intent of this provision to prevent frank
discussion of the business of the Village between the Village Manager and the
Council or any Council Member at any time, but to prevent the personal
favoritism or prejudice of any Council Member from hampering the
administration of the village government as set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with
or give any official position to any person who is in default to the village.



   (D)   As used in this section, “in default to the Village” means
delinquent in the payment of property taxes or delinquent in a debt owed to
the village if 1 of the following applies:



      (1)   The taxes remain delinquent after the last day of
February in the year following the year in which they are levied, unless the
taxes are the subject of an appeal.



      (2)   Another debt owed to the village remains unpaid 90 days
after the due date, unless the debt is the subject of an administrative
appeal or a contested court case.



[Election 8/3/2010]



§ 6.12  CONTRACTS OF PUBLIC SERVANTS WITH THE VILLAGE.



   All contracts involving public servants and the Village shall be
governed by Act. No. 317, P.A. 1968, as amended.



§ 6.13  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Village Council by resolution shall have the power to
create committees comprised of three (3) Councilmembers for the purpose of
serving as a recommending and advisory body to the Council. The President
with the approval of the Council, shall appoint the members to serve on each
committee.



   (B)   The Committees created by the Village Council shall be under
the direct control and supervision of the Council.



   (C)   Committees may be established for Departments within the
Village governmental structure.



   (D)   Committees will have the power to make recommendations to the
Village Council at either regular or special meetings of the Council.



   (E)   Committees will only have the power to study, investigate and
report back on matters referred to them by Council.



   (F)   Committees will not have the power to interfere in the day-to
day [to-day] operation of the Village administration.



   (G)   A Department Head or other Village Officer may request, in
writing to the Council, a meeting with a particular committee. The written
request shall set forth the specific reason for said meeting.



   (H)   Committees must present their reports to the Village Council
at the next regular or special Council Meetings.



CHAPTER 7:  VILLAGE LEGISLATION



§ 7.1  ORDINANCE ENACTMENT.



   (A)   The Council is empowered to adopt, continue, amend or repeal
Village Ordinances.



   (B)   All legislation of the Village of Holly shall be by ordinance
or by resolution. The word “Resolution” as used in this charter shall be
the official action of the council in the form of a motion and such action
shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by
this Charter or by state or Federal law and to matters pertaining to the
internal affairs or concerns of the Village government.



   (C)   All other acts of the Council, and all acts caning [carrying]
a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance
shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each proposed ordinance
shall be introduced in written or printed form, and, except for emergency
ordinances, a synopsis published not less than fifteen (15) days prior to its
enactment in some legal newspaper of general circulation in the village.



   (D)   All ordinances, when enacted shall be immediately recorded by
the Clerk-Treasurer in a book called “The Ordinance Book;” and it shall
be the duty of the President and Clerk-Treasurer to authenticate such record
by their official signatures thereon. The style of all ordinances passed by
the Council shall be, “The Village of Holly Ordains.”



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all ordinances
involving a penalty or the condemnation, acquisition or sale of property
shall be passed by a vote of five (5) Council Members; and all other
ordinances may be passed by majority vote.



   (F)   The Council is empowered to pass an emergency ordinance so as
to be given immediate effect. Such ordinance shall contain a declaration of
such emergency and the reasons therefore and can be passed only upon the
affirmative vote of five (5) council members. Any such ordinance shall be
limited to be effective for a period of nor [not] more than sixty (60) days
from the adoption thereof and any such ordinance shall not be effective
beyond such sixty (60) day period unless such emergency ordinance has been
enacted as a regular ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter.



[Election 3/13/84]



§ 7.2  PENALTIES.



   The Council shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of those
who violate its provisions. No punishment for the violation of any village
ordinance or for the commission by any officer of the village of any act
declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office shall exceed the
maximum fines and penalties allowed by state law, except that any officer of
the village found guilty of any act declared by this Charter to constitute
misconduct in office shall, in addition to any fine or imprisonment, or both,
forfeit his/her office.



§ 7.3  ORDINANCE:  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be published at least once
in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the village within fifteen
(15) days after its adoption by the Council. The publication requirement
shall be met if a synopsis of the ordinance is published and the publication
includes a notice that a complete true copy of the ordinance is available to
the public at the office of the Village Clerk. All ordinances of the village
shall become effective immediately upon the publication thereof, unless a
date upon which an ordinance shall become effective, which is subsequent to
the date of the publication thereof, is specifically provided in the
ordinance itself. The publication of any ordinance in full after its final
passage as a part of the published proceedings of the Council shall
constitute publication of such ordinance as required herein.



[Election 3/8/94]



§ 7.4 TECHNICAL CODES.



   The Council may adopt any provision of state law or any plumbing code,
electrical code, or building code which has been promulgated by the State of
Michigan or by any department, board, or other agency thereof, or by any
organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose
of developing any such code in full, provided, that said code is clearly
identified in said ordinance and that the purpose of said code shall be
published with the adopting ordinance and that printed copies thereof are
kept in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, available for inspection, or
distribution at cost, to the public at all times; Provided further, that the
publication shall contain a notice to the effect that a complete copy of said
code is available for public use and inspection at the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer. Any amendment to or revision of such adopted code or
detailed technical ordinance may be published in the same manner.



§ 7.5  COMPILATION.



   (A) Copies of all ordinances enacted and amendments to the Village
charter adopted after the effective date of this charter shall be available
at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   Within two (2) years after the adoption of this charter and at
least once in every five (5) years the Council shall direct and complete the
compilation or codification and the publication of the charter and of all
ordinances of the Village then in force, in loose leaf or pamphlet form, and
may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. No further
publication of any such compilation or codification shall be required for the
validity thereof. In case the compilation or codification of the ordinances
of the Village shall have been maintained current and up-to-date during any
five-year period, no recompilation or recodification of the ordinances of the
Village shall be required during or at the end of such period.



   (C)   The copies of ordinances and of any compilation, code, or
codes referred to in this charter may be certified by the Clerk-Treasurer,
and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally
established tribunals as to the matters contained therein.



§ 7.6  INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.



   (A)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an ordinance may be
initiated by petition as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an ordinance enacted by
the Council may be subject to a referendum by petition as hereinafter
provided.



§ 7.7  PETITIONS.



   (A)   An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not
less than fifteen (15%) per cent of the registered electors of the Village
who have signed said petition within six (6) months before the date of filing
the petition with the Clerk Treasurer. Before being circulated for
signatures, all such petitions shall be approved as to form by the
Clerk-Treasurer. No such petition need be on one paper but may be aggregate
of two (2) or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign
his/her name in ink or indelible pencil, and shall place thereon, after
his/her name, the date and his/her place of residence by street and number,
or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be
attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the numbers of
the signers thereto and that each signature is that of the person whose name
it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant.



   (B)   Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer who
shall, within ten (10) days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the
sufficiency thereof. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures
of registered electors of the Village, or to be improper as to form or
compliance with the provisions of this section, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
notify forthwith the person filing such petition, and ten (10) days from such
notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers.
When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk-Treasurer shall present the
petition to the council at its next regular meeting.



§ 7.8  COUNCIL PROCEDURE.



   Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the
Clerk-Treasurer, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days after publication
in accordance with section 7.1., either:



   (A)   if it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as
submitted in the petition or determine to submit the proposal to the electors
of the Village.



   (B)   if it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which
the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of
the Village.



§ 7.9  SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS.



   Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it
shall be submitted at the next election held in the village for any other
purpose or, in the discretion of the council, at a special election. The
result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon,
except in cases where otherwise required by the constitution or laws of the
State of Michigan.



§ 7.10  ORDINANCE SUSPENDED.



   The certification by the Clerk-Treasurer of the sufficiency of a
referentary petition within thirty (30) days after the passage of the
ordinance to which such petition refers shall not suspend the operation of
the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final
determination by the electors as the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the
electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by
the Council for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at
which it was adopted. Should two (2) or more ordinances, adopted at the same
election, have conflicting provisions the one receiving the highest vote
shall prevail as to those provisions.



CHAPTER 8:  GENERAL FINANCE



§ 8.1  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on the first day of July and
end on the last day of June of the following year. Such year shall constitute
the budget year of the village government.



§ 8.2  [SUBMISSION OF ITEMIZED BUDGET ESTIMATE.]



   On or before the first Monday in March, each village officer shall
submit to the Village Manager an itemized estimate of the expenditures for
the next fiscal year, for the department or activities under his control. The
Village Manager shall prepare a complete itemized budget proposal for the
next fiscal year and shall submit it to the council at its first meeting in
May.



[Election 11/04/2014]



§ 8.3  [BUDGET DOCUMENT.]




   § 8.13    The budget document shall present a complete financial
plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following
information:




   (A)   Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each
department and office of the village showing the estimated expenditures for
corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with
reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with
appropriations for the current year;



   (B)   Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the
village, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt
authorized and unissued, and the condition of the sinking funds, if any;



   (C)   Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the village
from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of
the amounts received by the village from each of the same or similar sources
for the last preceding and current fiscal year;



   (D)   A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case
may be, for the end of the current fiscal year;



   (E)   An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current
and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which,
together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the
proposed expenditures and commitments of the village government during the
ensuing year;



   (F)   Such other supporting schedules or information as may be
required by Act No. 2, P.A. 1968, as amended.



§ 8.4  BUDGET HEARING.



   (A)   The Village Council shall provide for a public hearing to be
held on the budget proposal with notice of such hearing to be given by
publication in a legal newspaper of general circulation within such unit at
least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.



   (B)   Such notice shall include the time and place of such hearing
and shall state the place where a copy of the proposed budget is available
for public inspection.



   (C)   In addition, the notice shall state the rate of taxation
necessary to defray the expenditures and meet the liabilities of the general
fund for the ensuing fiscal year.



   (D)   The failure to give the aforesaid notice shall not invalidate
the adoption of any budget of the Village.



§ 8.5  ADOPTION OF BUDGET, TAX LIMIT.



   Not later than the first regular meeting in June, the Council shall, by
resolution, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and shall, in such
resolution, make an appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes
during the ensuing fiscal year of the Village and provide for a levy of the
amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for
municipal purposes, which levy shall not exceed two (2) per cent (twenty 20
mills) of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to
taxation in the Village. The levy so provided shall be known and referred to
as the charter tax rate of the Village of Holly and shall be subject to all
provisions of state law and the Michigan Constitution pertaining thereto.
(Election 11/6/90)



§ 8.6  TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS.



   After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the
treasury of the village nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money
be incurred, except pursuant to the budget appropriations. The Council may
transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from
one department, fund, or agency to another. The balance in any appropriation
which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall be
re-appropriated during the next fiscal year.



§ 8.7  BUDGET CONTROL.



   At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and
more often if required by the Council, the Village Manager shall submit to
the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income
and expenses to date; and if it shall appear that the income is more or less
than anticipated, the Council may reduce or increase appropriations, except
amounts required for debt and interest charges to such a degree as may be
necessary to keep expenditures within the cash income.



§ 8.8  DEPOSITORY.



   The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for Village
funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all Village monies. The
Council shall provide for such security deposits as is authorized or
permitted by the general laws of the state, except that personal surety bonds
shall not be deemed proper security.



§ 8.9  INDEPENDENT AUDIT.



   An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the Village
government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the
Council. Such audit shall be made by public accountants experienced in
municipal accounting. The results of such audit shall be made public in such
manner as the Council may determine.



CHAPTER 9:  TAXATION



§ 9.1  POWER TO TAX AND SECURE REVENUE.



   In order to carry out the purposes, powers, and duties of the Village
government established by this charter, the Village may assess, levy, and
collect taxes, rents, tolls, and any other taxes as may be authorized by
state law.



§ 9.2  SUBJECTS OF TAXATION.



   The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the
same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. Except
as otherwise provided by this charter, Village taxes shall be levied,
collected, and returned in the manner provided by state law.



§ 9.3  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.



   The council shall prescribe, by general ordinance, a complete special
assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and
specifications, estimates of costs, notice and hearings, the making and
confirmation of the assessment rolls, and the correction of errors therein,
the financing of improvements made by special assessment procedures, the
collection of special assessments, and any other matters concerning the
making of such improvements.



§ 9.4  ASSESSOR AND BOARD OF REVIEW.



   The council may establish, by appropriate ordinance, the position of
assessor, and establish a board of review pursuant to state law.



CHAPTER 10.  MUNICIPAL BORROWING POWER



§ 10.1  GENERAL POWER TO BORROW.



   (A)   Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this
charter, the Council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the
borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in
the Village and the issuance of bonds of the Village or other evidence of
indebtedness therefore, and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources
of the village for the payment of the obligation created thereby; provided,
that the net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not
at any time exceed (10) per centum of the assessed value of all real and
personal property in the Village.



   (B)   The village shall also have power to issue special assessment,
mortgage, revenue, or other types of bonds, beyond the debt limits fixed by
law for the issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness which are a
general obligation of the Village, in the manner and for the purpose
permitted by the charter, the Constitution, and the general laws of the State
of Michigan, including Act No. 278, P.A. 1909, under which the Village is
incorporated. Bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special
assessments may be an obligation of the special assessment district or may be
both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general
obligation of the Village.



   (C)   All collections on special assessment rolls shall be set apart
in a special fund and shall be used only for the purpose or purposes for
which they were levied and for the payment of the principal and interest of
any bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments.
If there be any deficiency in the special assessment fund to meet the payment
of any such principal and interest, monies shall be advanced from the general
funds of the village to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in such
general fund when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor.
No bond of the village shall bear interest at a rate exceeding the maximum
allowed by law.



§ 10.2  UNISSUED BONDS.



   No unissued bonds of the village shall be issued or sold to secure
funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically
authorized, and if any such bonds are not issued or sold within three (3)
years after authorization, such authorization shall, as to such bond, be null
and void.



CHAPTER 11:  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, CONTRACTS, UTILITIES



§ 11.1  VILLAGE MAY PERFORM PUBLIC WORK.



   The Council shall have power to do any public work or make any public
improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the
necessary supplies and materials with separate accounting as to each
improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after
competitive bidding Provided, however, that the Council shall have the power
to reject any and all bids. The council shall also have the power to do any
public work or make any public improvement under any legally constituted plan
under which the labor is furnished by any other governmental unit,
department, or agency of the United States or the State of Michigan, or which
is wholly or in part financed by them or either of them.



§ 11.2  PURCHASING AND CONTRACTUAL PROCEDURE.



   Before making any purchase or contract for supplies, materials,
equipment, or contractual services, opportunity shall be given for
competition, under such rules and regulations, and with such exceptions as
the council shall by ordinance prescribe.



§ 11.3  NUISANCES AND HAZARDS.



   When any lot, building, or structure within the Village, because of
accumulation of refuse or debris the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or
dilapidation or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the
opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the
health or safety of the inhabitants of the Village or of those of them
residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the
Council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon
which such hazard or nuisance exists or to the owner of the building or
structure itself, specifying the nature of the nuisance, to promptly have it
eliminated within a time to be specified by the Council which shall be
commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If, at the expiration of the
time limit in said notice, said owner has not complied with the requirements
thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or
structure itself is not known, the Council may order such hazard or nuisance
abated by the proper department or agency which is qualified to do the work
required and the cost of such abatement, assessed against the lot, premises,
or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was
located. Procedure to be followed to make this section fully effective shall
be established by ordinance.



§ 11.4  COST OF ACQUIRED PROPERTY ADDED.



   Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation, or otherwise, for
the purpose of any public improvement, the cost thereof, and of the
proceedings required to acquire such property, may be added to the cost of
such improvement.



§ 11.5  SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   The Council may prescribe that sidewalks, except crosswalks, shall be
built by the owners of lands within the Village which abut upon such
sidewalks in the manner and within the time prescribed by ordinance;
provided, that, in case of failure of any such owner to comply with the
provisions of such ordinance, the Village may build or cause to be built such
sidewalk and assess the cost thereof against such owner and against the land
improved thereby, in the manner prescribed by the Council by ordinance.



§ 11.6  CONDEMNATION.



   (A)   Private property may be taken and appropriated for public use
by the Village of Holly, either within or without its limits, for the
purposes of opening, widening, altering and extending streets, alleys and
avenues; for the construction of bridges, for public buildings and for other
public structures; for public grounds, parks, market places and spaces; for
the improvement of water courses; for the providing of water and utilities;
for the acquisition and improvement of property for the public parking of
motor vehicles; for sewers, drains and ditches; for public hospitals, pest
houses, quarantine grounds and public cemeteries; for jails and fire halls
and other lawful and necessary public uses.



   (B)   If it shall become necessary to take and appropriate private
property for the public uses for the purposes specified in the preceding
section, the right to occupy and hold the same and the ownership therein and
thereto, may be acquired by the village in the manner and with like effect,
as provided by any of the general laws, statutes or Constitution of this
State relating to the taking of private property for public use by cities and
villages.



CHAPTER 12:  FRANCHISES AND LICENSES



§ 12.1  GENERAL RIGHT OF REGULATION.



   The Village Council shall have the power to grant or revoke franchises
and licenses and shall by ordinance provide for the procedures and
requirements in regards to same.



§ 12.2  LICENSES AND FRANCHISES REMAIN IN EFFECT.



   All licenses and franchises granted by the Village of Holly and in
force within the Village when this charter becomes law, shall remain in full
force and effect until the period of time for which they were respectively
granted, has expired under conditions contained in the license or franchise
granted, or until any such licenses or franchises have been taken over by the
Village by purchase, condemnation, grant, or otherwise.



CHAPTER 13:  MISCELLANEOUS



§ 13.1  NOTICE TO VILLAGE OF CLAIM FOR INJURIES.



   The village shall not be liable in damages sustained by any person,
either to his person or property, by reason of or the negligence of the
Village, its officers, or employees, nor by reason of any defective highway,
street, bridge, sidewalk, crosswalk or culvert, or by reason of any
obstruction, ice, snow or other encumbrances upon such street, sidewalk,
crosswalk or public highway, situated in the village, unless such person
shall serve or cause to be served, within 120 days after such injury shall
have occurred, a notice in writing upon the Clerk-Treasurer, which notice
shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the nature
of the defect, the manner in which it occurred, and the extent of such injury
as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses
known at the time by claimant, and a statement that the person receiving such
injury intends to hold the village liable for such damages as may have been
sustained by him/her. No person shall bring any action against the Village
for any damages to person or property arising out of any obstruction, ice,
snow, or other encumbrance upon such street, sidewalk, crosswalk or public
highway, situated in the Village, unless he/she shall present to the
Clerk-Treasurer his/her claim in writing and under oath, setting forth
particularly the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages
claimed by reason thereof, which claim shall be presented to the Council by
the Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 13.2  PUBLICATION.



   The council shall determine the method of publication of all notices,
ordinances, and proceedings for which a mode of publication is not prescribed
by this charter or by law. The Council may determine that such publication
may be made in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the village, or
that such publication may be made by posting in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and in five (5) other public places in the village. In case
publication is made by posting, a notice of such posting, setting forth by a
descriptive phrase, the purpose or nature of the notice, ordinance, or
proceeding posted, and located of the places where posted, shall be published
at least once in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the village
within seven (7) days after such posting was done.



§ 13.3  NO ESTOPPEL BY REPRESENTATIVE.



   No official of the village shall have power to make any representation
or recital of fact in any franchise, contract, document or agreement,
contrary to any public record of the Village. Any such representation shall
be void and of no effect as against the village.



§ 13.4  VILLAGE RECORDS.



   Unless exempted by state or federal law or regulation, all records of
the village shall be public.



§ 13.5  PRIOR VILLAGE ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS.



   All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the Village of
Holly which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, in
force and effect at the same time of the adoption of this charter, shall
continue in full force as ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of
the Village until repealed or amended by action of the proper authorities.



§ 13.6  TENSE.



   Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context,
all words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be
limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and
include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which
provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or
prohibition.



§ 13.7  HEADINGS.



   The chapter and section headings used in this charter are for
convenience only and shall not be considered to be part of this Charter.



§ 13.8  EFFECT OF ILLEGALITY OF ANY PART OF CHARTER.



   Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this charter be
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or
unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the
validity of this charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such
provision or section; it being hereby declared to be the intent of the
Charter Commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such
unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any part
of this charter except that specifically affected by such holding. Further,
it is hereby declared that it was the intent of the Charter Commission and of
the electors of the Village of Holly, in preparing and adopting this charter
that said instrument should conform in all respects with the provisions and
requirements of state law. In the event that any provision of this charter
shall conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the
State of Michigan, the provisions of such general law of the state shall
govern.



§ 13.9  AMENDMENTS.



   This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by state
law.



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Village of Holly shall
be designated as the Holly Village Code, and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code,
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CODE,THIS CODE,THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES, VILLAGE CODE, orHOLLY
VILLAGE CODE. This municipal code as modified by amendment, revision, and
adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.



      COUNTY. Oakland County, Michigan.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, legal entity, or receiver.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or
agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Michigan.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      VILLAGE. The Holly, Michigan.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   ANDorOR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such
spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state or federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
or NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



      (2)   If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
ordinance repealing or modifying it takes effect.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, a new chapter or section, containing the
desired amendment, shall be substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new title, chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In
addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed
ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the
ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.



Example:  (M.C.L.A. § 15.231)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



         § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



            This municipality shall make available to any person
for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by
state law.



         Statutory reference:



            For provisions concerning the inspection of public
records, seePublic Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any
particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this code or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in
pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and
costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; unless there is a fine or penalty specifically
set forth in the ordinance which provides for a greater penalty, and in that
event, such greater penalty shall control. Each act of violation and every
day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate
offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is
expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this code
whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance.



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Civil Infractions and Municipal Civil Infractions Bureau, see
§§ 32.20 through 32.23



Statutory reference:



   Maximum penalty established, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(k)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND OFFICERS



      32.   LAW ENFORCEMENT



      33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Election precincts



   30.02   Polling place



§ 30.01  ELECTION PRECINCTS.



   The village shall be into two election precincts as described below:



   (A)   Precinct Number 1 consists of registered voters residing in an
area bounded by the village’s eastern boundary and part of the northern and
southern boundaries of the village and by a line beginning at the northern
village boundary and extending southerly along the centerline of North Holly
Road until it intersects with Grange Hall Road, at which point the line
extends easterly along the centerline of Grange Hall Road to the CSX Railroad
tracks, at which point the line extends southerly along the centerline of the
CSX railroad tracks to the southern boundary of the village; and



   (B)   Precinct Number 2 consists of registered voters residing in an
area bounded by the village’s western boundary and part of the northern and
southern boundaries of the village and by a line beginning at the northern
village boundary and extending southerly along the centerline of North Holly
Road until it intersects with Grange Hall Road, at which point the line
extends easterly along the centerline of Grange Hall Road to the CSX Railroad
tracks, at which point the line extends southerly along the centerline of the
CSX railroad tracks to the southern boundary of the village.



(1984 Code, § 1-08-010)  (Ord. 260, passed 10-24-1995)



§ 30.02  POLLING PLACE.



   The polling place for Precinct Number 1 of the village is designated as
the north side of the gymnasium at 6161 E. Holly Road, Holly, Michigan, and
the polling place for Precinct Number 2 is designated as the south side of
the gymnasium at 6161 E. Holly, Road, Holly, Michigan.



(1984 Code, § 1-08-020)  (Ord. 260, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 383, passed
2-18-2007)



CHAPTER 31:  VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND OFFICERS



Section




Village Manager




   31.01   State Construction Code Act; agency designation



   31.02   Sales of unclaimed property; Manager’s role




Fire Department




   31.15   Establishment of Fire Department



   31.16   Appointment of Fire Chief



   31.17   Direction of Village Council; role of Village Manager



   31.18   Responsibility of Fire Department



   31.19   Organization of Fire Department



   31.20   Staffing of Fire Department




Parks Commission




   31.35   Title



   31.36   Established



   31.37   Members



   31.38   Duties




Downtown Development Authority




   31.50   Established



   31.51   Boundaries



   31.52   Definitions



   31.53   Governing body



   31.54   Property ownership



   31.55   Appointment of Board members



   31.56   Term



   31.57   Compensation



   31.58   Officers; oath



   31.59   Meetings



   31.60   Procedures



   31.61   Removal of members



   31.62   Records



   31.63   Source of financing



   31.64   Powers



   31.65   Requirement of state law




VILLAGE MANAGER




§ 31.01  STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT; AGENCY DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions Public Act 230 of 1972, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.1509, as amended, the Village Manager or his or her designate
is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the
responsibilities of the village under Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A.
§ 125.1509.



   (B)   The village hereby assumes responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.



(1984 Code, § 1-01-01-010)  (Ord. 45, passed 7-9-1974; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 31.02  SALES OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; MANAGER’S ROLE.



   (A)   Removal from public places. The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and empowered to remove from the highways, streets, alleys, and
other public places of the village, any bicycles or other personal property
which has been abandoned or lost.



(1984 Code, § 1-01-02-010)



   (B)   Storage. Said personal property, together with any contraband
or stolen property which has some commercial value, shall be retained by the
village for at least six months to see if the lawful owner thereof claims any
of the said property.



(1984 Code, § 1-01-02-020)



   (C)   Inventory and sale. If any of the aforesaid property has
remained unclaimed for a period of at least six months, a detailed inventory
of the property shall be prepared by the Village Manager or his or her
designate, which inventory shall be presented to the Village Council with the
request that a public sale or auction be held of the items of personal
property.



(1984 Code, § 1-01-02-030)



(Ord. 61, passed 8-9-1977; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 31.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   There is hereby established within the administrative division of the
village the Village Fire Department.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-03-010) (Ord. 367, passed 7-1-2004)



§ 31.16  APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF.



   The Village Council, with the advice of the Village Manager, shall
appoint a Fire Chief who shall be the head of the Fire Department. The Fire
Chief shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-03-020) (Ord. 367, passed 7-1-2004)



§ 31.17  DIRECTION OF VILLAGE COUNCIL; ROLE OF VILLAGE MANAGER.



   As required by § 6.3 of the Village Charter, the Fire Department shall
be under the direction of the Village Council, but, as required by § 6.12 of
the Charter, the Council shall deal with the Fire Department solely through
the Village Manager.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-03-030) (Ord. 367, passed 7-1-2004)



§ 31.18  RESPONSIBILITY OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   Commencing July 1, 2004, the Fire Department shall be responsible for
the prevention and suppression of fires, the provision of emergency medical
services, and such other services within the village as may be determined by
the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-03-040) (Ord. 367, passed 7-1-2004)



§ 31.19  ORGANIZATION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Fire Department shall be organized and consist of those command and
duty positions as proposed by the Village Manager and approved by the Village
Council.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-03-050) (Ord. 367, passed 7-1-2004)



§ 31.20  STAFFING OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Village Manager, with the advice of the Fire Chief and within
amounts budgeted by the Village Council for such purpose, shall appoint all
personnel necessary to staff the Fire Department.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-03-060)  (Ord. 367, passed 7-1-2004)




PARKS COMMISSION




§ 31.35  TITLE.



   This subchapter may be known and cited as the “Park Commission
Ordinance of the Village of Holly”.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-02-020)  (Ord 55, passed 1-24-1977; Ord. 434, passed
8-2-2015)



§ 31.36  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Village Parks Commission.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-02-030)  (Ord 55, passed 1-24-1977; Ord. 434, passed
8-2-2015)



§ 31.37  MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Park Commission shall consist of six members appointed by
the Village President with the consent of the Village Council. One member of
the Village Council shall serve on the Parks Commission in an ex officio
capacity. Members of the Parks Commission shall be qualified electors of the
village.



   (B)   The terms of all members shall expire on December 31 of the
third year of each member’s term. The terms of each member shall be three
years, except that, to create continuity, two members’ terms shall expire
on December 31, two members’ terms shall expire on December 31, and two
members’ terms shall expire on December.



   (C)   The term of a member of the Village Council appointed as an ex
officio member of the Parks Commission shall correspond to his or her term as
an elected official, or until a successor has been appointed by the Village
President.



   (D)   A vacancy shall occur upon a member’s death, resignation,
removal, or upon the expiration of that member’s term. Vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment, in the manner
set forth in division (A) above, no later than 60 days after the vacancy
occurs.



   (E)   The Village Council may remove a member of the Parks
Commission for misconduct, misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in
office, upon recommendation by the Village President or by concurrence of two
Village Council members upon written notice of the charges and after a public
hearing. Removal of a member shall require five affirmative votes of the
Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-02-040)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-25-1977; Ord. 95, passed
4-8-1980; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 223, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 434,
passed 8-2-2015)



§ 31.38  DUTIES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The Parks Commission shall meet at least ten times per
year at a regular time and place as established by resolution. The business
of the Parks Commission shall be conducted at a public meeting held in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 15.261 to 15.275, and a record of proceedings shall be kept of each
meeting.



      (2)   The Parks Commission shall elect a Chairperson and
Secretary from its members and fill other offices as it considers advisable,
and may establish rules and procedures of operation subject to approval of
the Village Council and not inconsistent with Village Charter, ordinance, or
Village Council Rules of Procedure.



      (3)   The Parks Commission may appoint advisory subcommittees
whose members are not members of the Parks Commission.



   (B)   Parks and cemetery.



      (1)   The Parks Commission shall develop plans and
recommendations for presentation to the Village Council to promote the usage
and quality of village parks, public recreation areas, and the village
cemetery.



      (2)    No later than March 15 of each year, the Parks
Commission shall forward to the Village Manager and Village Council an annual
report on the status of village parks and cemetery, as well as budget
proposals for each for the upcoming fiscal year.



      (3)   The Parks Commission shall provide recommendations to
the Village Council on rules, regulations, and other policy matters relating
to the use, operation, and care of village parks and village cemetery.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-02-050)  (Ord. 434, passed 8-2-2015)




DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY




§ 31.50  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Downtown Development Authority, pursuant
to Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651—125.1681, with the
authority and powers necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-010)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.51  BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Declaration. It is hereby declared that the Downtown
Development Authority District is hereby described as: the general properties
adjacent to or with addresses on the following village streets: Grange Hall
Road from North Holly Road West to the village limits; Grange Hall Road from
North Holly Road east to the southeast corner of the property, identified by
the parcel number IH-01-27-126-005 on the north side of Grange Hall Road and
to the northeast corner of the property identified by the parcel number
IH-01-27-176-003 on the south side of Grange Hall Road, including those
properties located within the County Condominium Plan Number 1000, Bush Lake
Village Condominiums; North Holly Road from Grange Hall Road to the village
limits on the west side of the road and from Grange Hall Road to and
including the property, identified by the parcel number IH-01-22-351-006 on
the east side of the road; South Broad Street to the village limits; North
Broad Street; North Saginaw Street; South Saginaw Street; West Maple Street;
East Maple Street from Saginaw to the railroad tracks.



   (B)   Adjacent properties. In addition the properties adjacent to or
with addresses on: Battle Alley; the 100 blocks of First Street and Michigan
Avenue; and the property commonly known as Crapo Park (identified by the
parcel numbers IH-01-34-306-001 and IH-01-34-306-002) on Martha Street and
beginning at the northeast corner of parcel number IH-01-34-310-001; thence
northwesterly across the GTW RR right-of-way to the southwest corner of
parcel number IH-01-34-306-001; thence southeasterly along the north
right-of-way line of GTW RR to the southeast corner of parcel number
IH-01-34-306-002; thence northerly across the C&O RR right-of-way to the most
southwesterly corner of parcel number IH-01-34-306-012; thence southeasterly
along the north right-of-way line of the C&O RR to the point of intersection
with the north right- of-way line of the GTW RR; thence continuing
southeasterly along the north right-of-way line of the GTW RR to the point of
intersection of the north right-of-way line of Sherman Street; thence
westerly along said right-of-way line to the southeast corner of parcel
number IH-01-34-311-010; thence northwesterly along the south right-of-way
line of the GTW RR to POB.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-020)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984; Ord. 336, passed
1-18-2001; Ord. 380, passed 7-30-2006; Ord. 387, passed 9-2-2007)



§ 31.52  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORITY. A Downtown Development Authority created pursuant to this
chapter.



   BOARD. The governing body of an authority.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. An area in the downtown of a municipality zoned and
used principally for business.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor or City Manager of a city, the
President of a village, or the supervisor of a township.



   DEVELOPMENT AREA. The area to which a development plan is applicable.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The information and those requirements for a
development set forth in § 17 of the State Act, Public Act 197 of 1975,
being M.C.L.A. § 125.1667.



   DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM. The implementation of the development plan.



   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. An area in a business district which is specifically
designated by ordinance of the governing body of the municipality pursuant to
this chapter.



   GOVERNING BODY OF A MUNICIPALITY. The elected body of a municipality
having legislative powers.



   MUNICIPALITY. A city, village, or township.



   OPERATIONS. Office maintenance, including salaries and expenses of
employees, office supplies, consultation fees, design costs, and other
expenses incurred in the daily management of the Authority and planning of
its activities.



   PUBLIC FACILITY. A street, plaza, pedestrian mall, and any improvements
thereto, including street furniture and beautification, park, parking
facility, recreational facility, right-of-way, structure, waterway, bridge,
lake, pond, canal, utility line or pipe, building, and access routes to any
of the foregoing, designed, and dedicated to use by the public generally, or
used by a public agency.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-030)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.53  GOVERNING BODY.



   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of the Board
consisting of the Village President and eight members.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-040)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984; Ord. 257, passed
8-13-1996)



§ 31.54  PROPERTY OWNERSHIP.



   Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an
interest in property located in the Downtown District, and not less than one
of the members shall be a resident of the Downtown District if the Downtown
District has 100 or more persons residing within it.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-050)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984; Ord. 257, passed
8-13-1996)



§ 31.55  APPOINTMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS.



   The Village President shall appoint the Board members with the approval
and consent of the Council.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-060)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.56  TERM.



   (A)   Of the member first appointed, an equal number of the members,
as near as practical, shall be appointed for one year, two years, three
years, and four years. A member shall hold office until the member’s
successor is appointed.



   (B)   Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four years.
An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the Village President for
the unexpired term only.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-070)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.57  COMPENSATION.



   All members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-080)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.58  OFFICERS; OATH.



   The Chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the Board, and before
assuming the duties of office, all members shall qualify by taking and
subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-090)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.59  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The business which the Board may perform shall be conducted at
a public meeting of the Board held in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275.



   (B)   Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting
shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-100)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.60  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board shall adopt rules consistent with Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275, governing its procedure and the
holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the governing body.



   (B)   Special meetings may be held when called in the manner
provided in the rules of the Board.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-110)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.61  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Pursuant to notice and after having been given an opportunity
to be heard, a member of the Board may be removed for cause by the governing
body.



   (B)   Removal of a member is subject to review by the appropriate
Circuit Court.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-120)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.62  RECORDS.



   (A)   All expense items of the Authority shall be publicized
monthly, and the financial record shall always be open to the public.



   (B)   In addition to the items and records prescribed herein, a
writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the Board
in the performance of an official function, shall be made available to the
public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231
to 15.246.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-130)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.63  SOURCE OF FINANCING.



   The activities of the Authority shall be financed from one or more of
the sources enumerated in the state statute.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-140)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.64  POWERS.



   The powers of the Downtown Development Authority shall be those powers
enumerated and stated in the state enabling statute and those necessary in
order to carry out the purposes for which they were created.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-150)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



§ 31.65  REQUIREMENT OF STATE LAW.



   In all respects, the Authority shall comply with the requirements and
procedures enumerated in the state enabling statute and shall consult with
and seek the approval of the Village Council as provided for by law.



(1984 Code, § 6-05-160)  (Ord. 137, passed 5-8-1984)



CHAPTER 32:  LAW ENFORCEMENT



Section




Police Community Service Officers




   32.01   Definitions



   32.02   Establishment of Program



   32.03   Qualification of Program



   32.04   Authority of the Chief of Police; rules and regulations



   32.05   Duty to comply with rules and regulations



   32.06   Uniforms, equipment, and identification



   32.07   Authority and limitations



   32.08   Worker’s compensation



   32.09   Prohibition of preferential hiring practices for police
community service officers




Municipal Civil Infractions




   32.20   Definitions



   32.21   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement; dismissal



   32.22   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service



   32.23   Municipal civil infraction citations; contents




Parking Violations




   32.35   Definitions



   32.36   Parking violations




Issuance of Appearance Tickets, Citations, and Violation Notices




   32.50   Appearance tickets



   32.51   Municipal civil infraction violation notices and municipal
civil infraction citations



   32.52   Parking violation notices and citations



 



   32.99   Penalty




POLICE COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS




§ 32.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HAZARDOUS. When used to describe an activity, means any activity which
is likely, based on experience, to expose the person performing that activity
to any threat of physical harm greater than that to which the average person
is exposed in every day non-police activities.



   POLICE COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS. Persons appointed by the Chief of
Police pursuant to this subchapter to assist regular officers of the Village
Police Department in non-hazardous law enforcement and crime prevention
duties.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Holly.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-010)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.



   There is hereby established a Police Community Service Officer Program
for the village. Police community service officers shall be volunteers, shall
receive no compensation for their services, and shall perform those duties
and responsibilities and exercise that authority assigned to them by the
rules and regulations governing such Program.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-020)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.03  QUALIFICATION OF PROGRAM.



   To be eligible for appointment as a police community service officer, a
person must have attained the age of 18 years. Applicants shall have no
criminal record; must be physically able to perform assigned duties; must
demonstrate the ability to understand and carry out oral and written
instructions; must demonstrate the ability to act quickly and calmly in
difficult situations; and must possess a valid state motor vehicle
operator’s license and a satisfactory driving record.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-030)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.04  AUTHORITY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have complete authority and control
of the police community service officers. The Chief may appoint those persons
deemed qualified for such a position through such procedures established by
the Village Police Department. Such procedures shall include, but are not
limited to, application, background investigation, physical examination, and
preliminary training requirements.



   (B)   The Chief of Police may, at any time, terminate the services
of a police community service officer at his or her sole discretion with or
without cause.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall promulgate rules and regulations for
the operation of the Police Community Service Officers Program, including,
without limitation, such matters as the establishment of specific duties,
performance standards, training requirements, maintenance of discipline, and
the like.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-040)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.05  DUTY TO COMPLY WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Except as specifically authorized by the Chief of Police, police
community service officers shall comply with all policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, and directives applicable to employees of the village and the
Village Police Department.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-050)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.06  UNIFORMS, EQUIPMENT, AND IDENTIFICATION.



   The Chief of Police shall prescribe the uniform and equipment
requirements for police community service officers. All uniforms and
equipment which a police community service officer shall be required to use,
shall be provided by the village at its cost. Each police community service
officer will be issued a signed identification card that shall be earned at
all times while on-duty unless otherwise ordered.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-060)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.07  AUTHORITY AND LIMITATIONS.



   Police community service officers shall, when on duty as assigned by
the Chief of Police, have the authority to direct traffic or assist in
non-hazardous criminal investigations and programs of the Department. Police
community services officers shall not, however, have the power to make an
arrest and shall not carry or use, or be permitted to carry or use any
firearm.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-070)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.08  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Although each member of the Police Community Service Officer
Program is a volunteer and receives no compensation for such service,
nevertheless, while performing duly authorized activities in connection with
this Program, such person shall be deemed to be an employee of the village
for purposes of receiving worker’s compensation benefits from the village
in accordance with the provisions of the State Worker’s Compensation Law,
Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§ 418.101 et seq.



   (B)   If a police community service officer sustains an illness or
injury covered by the Worker’s Compensation Law not caused by his or her
intoxication or willful misconduct and not intentionally self-inflicted,
which arises out of and in the course of the performance of his or her duties
while acting under the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee during a regular assigned tour of duty, then for the purpose of
computing the benefits to which such members or his or her dependent would be
entitled on the date of injury, the member shall be considered to be
receiving the state average weekly wage from the village, as last determined
under § 355 of the Worker’s Compensation Act, Public Act 317 of 1969,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 418.355 et seq.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-090)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 32.09  PROHIBITION OF PREFERENTIAL HIRING PRACTICES FOR POLICE COMMUNITY
SERVICE OFFICERS.



   A police community service officer may, upon publication of a position
opening, apply for and supply all applicable documentation to be considered
for employment in such position with the village, provided, such person
possesses the minimum applicant qualifications for such position. No
preferential points, treatment, or decision is, however, to be accorded to a
police community service officer for purposes of appointment to such position.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-100)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)




MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS




§ 32.20  DEFINITIONS.



   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701—600.8735,
as amended.



   AUTHORIZED VILLAGE OFFICIAL. A police officer or other personnel of the
village authorized by this code of ordinances or any ordinance to issue
municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation
notices.



   BUREAU. The Village of Holly Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as
established by this subchapter.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by
this code of ordinances or any ordinance of the village, but which is not a
crime under this code of ordinances or other ordinance, and for which civil
sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses, and
costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Public Act 236 of 1961, Ch. 87, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701—600.8735, as amended. A MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION
is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this code of ordinances
that is a criminal offense.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized village official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice prepared
by an authorized village official, directing a person to appear at the
District Court and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the
violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the village, as
authorized under §§ 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act, Public Act 236 of 1961,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8396 and 600.8707(6).



(1984 Code, § 1-02-02-010)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)



§ 32.21  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION; COMMENCEMENT; DISMISSAL.



   (A)   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the
issuance by an authorized village official of:



      (1)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the
alleged violator to appeal in court; or



      (2)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing
the alleged violator to appear at the District Court.



   (B)   Only the Village Attorney may dismiss a municipal civil
infraction action once commenced.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-02-020)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)



§ 32.22  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.



   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized village officials as follows:



   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable tune after the citation is issued;



   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the
District Court;



   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in
a form approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by
the village and issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of the
Act, Revised Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §
600.8705;



   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an
authorized village official shall be treated as made under oath if the
violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official
signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement
immediately above the date and signature of the official: “I declare under
the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my
information, knowledge, and belief”;



   (E)   An authorized village official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation;



   (F)   An authorized village official may issue a citation to a
person if:



      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or



      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for
an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or Village Attorney approves in
writing the issuance of the citation.



   (G)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an
authorized village official as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided by division (G)(2) below, an
authorized village official shall personally serve a copy of the citation
upon the alleged violator; or



      (2)   (a)   If the municipal civil infraction action
involves the use or occupancy of land, a building, or other structure, a copy
of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged
violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building,
or structure by posting the copy of the land or attaching the copy to the
building or structure.



         (b)   In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent
by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the
owners last known address.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-02-030)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)



§ 32.23  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; CONTENTS.



   (A)   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.



   (B)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that
he or she may do one of the following:



      (1)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance;



      (2)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
with explanation by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person,
or by representation;



      (3)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by doing either of the following:



         (a)   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before
a judge or District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is
requested by the village; or



         (b)   Appealing in court for a formal hearing before a
judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



   (C)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of
the following:



      (1)   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility
with explanation in person or by representation, the alleged violator must
apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation
within the time specified for appearance and obtain a schedule date and time
for an appearance;



      (2)   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility,
the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and
obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing
date is specified on the citation;



      (3)   A hearing shall be an informal hearing, unless a formal
hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the village;



      (4)   At an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear
in person before a judge or District Court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney; and



      (5)   At a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.



   (D)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-02-040)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)




PARKING VIOLATIONS




§ 32.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKING VIOLATION NOTICE. A notice, other than a citation, directing a
person to appear at the District Court and to pay the fine and costs, if any,
prescribed by ordinance for the parking or standing of a motor vehicle in
violation of the ordinance.



§ 32.36  PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Parking violation notices. Parking violation notices shall be
issued and served by village police officers or other village personnel
authorized by ordinance to issue and serve such parking violation notices. A
copy of the parking violation notice need not be served personally upon the
defendant, but may be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle by
attaching the copy to the vehicle. In addition to any other information
required by this code of ordinances, any other village ordinance, or state
law, the parking violation notice shall indicate the time by which the
defendant must appear at the District Court, the methods by which an
appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the District
Court, the hours during which the District Court is open, the amount of the
fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to
appear, and pay the required fine within the required time.



   (B)   Appearance; payment of fines and costs. The registered owner
of the vehicle or other alleged violator receiving a parking violation notice
shall appear at the District Court and pay the specified fine and costs at or
by the time specified for appearance in the parking violation notice. An
appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.



   (C)   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine
not paid. If a parking violation notice is issued and served, a citation
filed with District Court and a copy of the citation may be served by
first-class mail upon the registered owner of the vehicle at the registered
owner’s last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need
to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided
by the State Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.727c and 257.743, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the
allegations stated in the parking violation notice and shall fairly inform
the defendant how to respond to the citation.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-03-020)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)




ISSUANCE OF APPEARANCE TICKETS, CITATIONS, AND VIOLATION NOTICES




§ 32.50  APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   In addition to village police officers, the following village officials
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of the designated
offenses of this code of ordinances:



   (A)   The Code Compliance Officer and the Village Manager is hereby
authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets for any violation of:
Sections 91.20 through 91.32, “Sidewalks”; §§ 92.035 through 92.040,
“Dangerous Nuisances and Structures”; §§ 92.055 through 92.062,
“Weeds”; §§ 92.075 through 92.107, “Litter”; Ch. 111, “Licenses
and Permits”; Ch. 150, “Buildings”; Ch. 151, “Rental Property
Maintenance”; Ch. 152, “Planning”; Ch. 153, “Subdivision Control”;
Ch. 154, “Signs”; Ch. 155, “Historic Districts”; Ch. 156,
“Floods”; and Ch. 157, “Zoning”; and



   (B)   The School Liaison Officer is hereby authorized to issue and
serve appearance tickets for any violation of Ch. 70, “Traffic Rules”;
Ch. 71, “Bicycles and Mopeds”; §§ 72.01 through 72.04, “Special
Parking Provisions”; §§ 72.15 through 72.19, “Handicapped Parking”;
Ch. 93, “Smoking in Public Places”; § 130.02, “alcoholic beverages”;
§ 131.03, “marijuana”; § 131.05, “firearms”; § 131.06, “larceny
and theft”; §§ 131.20 through 131.52, “Miscellaneous Offenses”; Ch.
132, “Obstructing Pedestrian or Vehicular Traffic”; and Ch. 133, “False
Alarms”, where such violation occurs on any school property or within 100
feet of any school property within the village.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-04-010)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)



§ 32.51  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICES AND MUNICIPAL CIVIL
INFRACTION CITATIONS.



   The following village personnel are authorized local officials with the
authority to issue a municipal civil infraction violation notice or a
municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of any provision of this
code of ordinances which is a municipal civil infraction:



   (A)   A police officer;



   (B)   The Code Compliance Officer and the Village Manager for any
violation of §§ 92.035 through 92.040, “Dangerous Nuisances and
Structures”; §§ 91.20 through 91.32, “Sidewalks”; §§ 92.055 through
92.062, “Weeds”; §§ 92.075 through 92.107, “Litter”; Ch. 111,
“Licenses and Permits”; Ch. 150, “Buildings”; Ch. 151, “Rental
Property Maintenance”; Ch. 152, “Planning”; Ch. 153, “Subdivision
Control”; Ch. 154, “Signs”; Ch. 155, “Historic Districts”; Ch. 156,
“Floods”; and Ch. 157, “Zoning”; and



   (C)   The School Liaison Officer for any violation of Ch. 70,
“Traffic Rules”; Ch. 71, “Bicycles and Mopeds”; §§ 72.01 through
72.04, “Special Parking Provisions”; §§ 72.15 through 72.19,
“Handicapped Parking”; Ch. 93, “Smoking in Public Places”; § 130.02,
“alcoholic beverages”; § 131.03, “marijuana”; § 131.05,
“firearms”; § 131.06, “larceny and theft”; §§ 131.20 through
131.52, “Miscellaneous Offenses”; Ch. 132, “Obstructing Pedestrian or
Vehicular Traffic”; and Ch. 133, “False Alarms”, where such violation
occurs on any school property or within 100 feet of any school property
within the village.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-04-020)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)



§ 32.52  PARKING VIOLATION NOTICES AND CITATIONS.



   In addition to village police officers, the following personnel of the
village are authorized to issue parking violation notices and citations.



   (A)   The School Liaison Officer for any parking violation within
100 feet of any school property; and



   (B)   Code Compliance Officer.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-04-030)  (Ord. 262, passed 2-27-1996)



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   It shall be an offense punishable by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days or by a fine not to exceed $500 or both, for any person not a
Village Police Department police community service officer to:



      (1)   Wear, carry, or display a Village Police Department
police community service officer card, uniform, equipment, or insignia; or



      (2)   In any manner represent himself or herself to be
connected with the Police Community Service Officer Program.



(1984 Code, § 1-02-01-080)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-11-1992)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section




General Provisions




   33.001   Recovery of fees for fire emergency services




Special Assessments




   33.015   Short title



   33.016   Definitions



   33.017   Authority to assess



   33.018   Initiation by petition



   33.019   Initiation by project



   33.020   Restrictions on expenditures



   33.021   Resolution to proceed



   33.022   Notice



   33.023   Public hearing



   33.024   Final roll



   33.025   Objections



   33.026   Lien against premises



   33.027   Duties of Clerk-Treasurer



   33.028   Payment in full



   33.029   Collection



   33.030   Interest and fees



   33.031   Total costs



   33.032   Additional assessments



   33.033   Excess of assessment



   33.034   Division of lots



   33.035   Defective assessments



   33.036   Assessment by court



   33.037   Nuisances



   33.038   Single lot or parcel



   33.039   Single lots; spreading assessment



   33.040   Additional procedure




Purchasing Regulations and Procedures




   33.055   Definitions



   33.056   Manager’s general supervision powers; purchase and
distribution of supplies, materials, and equipment



   33.057   Requisition and estimates



   33.058   Encumbrance of funds



   33.059   Competitive bidding required; exceptions



   33.060   American and community purchase requirements



   33.061   Purchasing procedures



   33.062   Emergency purchases



   33.063   Inspection and testing



   33.064   Cooperative purchasing



   33.065   Surplus supplies




Sale of Real Property Procedures for Village-Owned Property




   33.080   Definitions



   33.081   Real property disposal



   33.082   Disposal procedures



   33.083   Notice of public sales



   33.084   Minimum bids




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 33.001  RECOVERY OF FEES FOR FIRE EMERGENCY SERVICES.



   (A)   Purpose. The village finds that the continuing increases in
the cost of providing adequate emergency fire protection and other public
safety services to the village has created an urgent need for additional
funds to provide these services. Based on this need and pursuant to the
authority provided by law, this subchapter is adopted for the purpose of
establishing and collecting fees for emergency fire services provided to
persons and properties for the sole purpose of being applied to cover the
costs of such services.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-04-010)



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY FIRE SERVICE. The dispatch, provision, or utilization
of firefighting and rescue services by the Village Fire Department to or for
a person and/or property.



      EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY FIRE SERVICE. The direct and reasonable
costs incurred by the village, or any person or corporation operating at the
request or direction of the Village Fire Department, in performing or
providing an emergency fire service, including the salaries and wages of the
Village Fire Department personnel in responding to, investigating,
supervising, or reporting on or to, an incident that required, or was
reported as requiring, emergency fire services.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-04-020)



   (C)   Liability for expense of an emergency response.



      (1)   Possession or control. The owner, occupant, operator,
and other persons having an interest in the ownership, possession, or control
of any premises for which an emergency fire service is necessary and
provided, are liable for the expenses of the emergency fire service which may
be satisfied by timely payment of the fees established as provided in this
subchapter.



      (2)   Charge against person. The expenses of an emergency fire
service shall be a charge against the persons liable and constitutes a debt
of those persons, collectible by the village in the same manner as in the
case of an obligation on account or account stated as a contract, express or
implied.



      (3)   Fee schedule. The village shall, by resolution, adopt,
and from time to time may amend, a schedule of fees to be collected in and as
satisfaction of a person’s liability for expenses of emergency fire
service. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the
Village Clerk-Treasurer or the Village Fire Department.



      (4)   Billing.



         (a)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer or his or her
designee, upon receiving an itemization of emergency fire services from the
Village Fire Department, shall submit a bill based on the fee schedule,
together with notice of the actual expenses of the emergency fire services,
if known, by first-class mail or personal service to the person liable for
the expenses as enumerated under this subchapter.



         (b)   The bill(s) shall require full payment of fees
within 30 days of mailing or personal delivery and shall include a notice
that failure to do so may subject the persons to liability for the actual
expenses of the emergency fire service.



      (5)   Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs.



         (a)   A failure to make full and timely payment of fees
shall be considered a violation of this subchapter and default, and subjects
the defaulting person to liability for the actual expenses of the emergency
fire service.



         (b)   The village may commence a civil action to recover
those expenses and/or fees which are not paid as provided herein and all
costs allowed by law.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-04-030)  (Ord. 369, passed 10-21-2004)




SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS




§ 33.015  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Special
Assessment Ordinance” of the Village of Holly, Michigan.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-010.1)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COST. When referring to the cost of any local public improvement, shall
include the costs of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls,
notices, advertising, financing, construction, legal fees, interest on
special assessment bonds not to exceed one year, and all other costs incident
to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the
financing thereof.



   LOCAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any public improvement which is of such a
nature as to benefit especially any real property or properties within a
district in the vicinity of such improvement and shall include new
construction, repairs, resurfacing, and similar improvements.



   TREASURER-CLERK or CLERK. The Village Clerk-Treasurer.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-010.2)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 33.017  AUTHORITY TO ASSESS.



   The whole cost or any part thereof of any local public improvement may
be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefitted by the
improvement in the manner hereinafter provided.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-020)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.018  INITIATION BY PETITION.



   Local public improvements may be initiated by petition signed by
property owners whose aggregate property in the proposed district was
assessed for not less than 51% of the total assessed value of the
privately-owned real property located therein, all shown by the last
preceding general tax records of the village. Such petition shall contain a
brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories thereof
and if it shall appear that the petition is signed by at least 51%, as
aforesaid, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify same to the Council. The
petition shall be addressed to the Council and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer
and shall in no event be considered directory, but is advisory only.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-030)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.019  INITIATION BY PROJECT.



   (A)   Proceedings for making public improvements and defraying the
entire cost or any part thereof by special assessment may be initiated by
resolution of the Council. Whenever the Council shall determine to make any
public improvement and defray the entire cost and expense thereof or any part
thereof by special assessment, the Council shall cause the engineer for the
village to make an investigation of the proposed public improvement and
report his or her findings to the Council.



   (B)   Said report shall include an analysis of the following:



      (1)   The estimated cost of the proposed public improvement;
and



      (2)   Plans and specifications for the public improvement.



   (C)   There shall also be included recommendations as to the
following:



      (1)   The portion of the cost to be borne by the special
assessment district and the portion, if any, to be borne by the village at
large;



      (2)   The extent of the improvement and boundaries of the
district;



      (3)   The number of installments in which assessments may be
paid; and



      (4)   Any other facts or recommendations which will aid the
Council in determining whether the improvement shall be made and how the same
shall be financed.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-040)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.020  RESTRICTIONS ON EXPENDITURES.



   No expenditure, except for the necessary procedures of the Council and
for the preparing of necessary profiles, plans, specifications, and estimates
of cost, shall be made for any public improvements, the cost of which is to
be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted
thereby, until the Council has passed a resolution determining to proceed
with such public improvement.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-050)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.021  RESOLUTION TO PROCEED.



   Upon receipt of the report of the engineer, if the Council shall
determine to proceed with said improvement, it shall, by resolution, order
the report prepared by the engineer filed with the Clerk-Treasurer. In
addition, by said resolution, the Council shall tentatively determine to
proceed with the public improvement, tentatively determine the necessity
thereof and set forth the nature thereof, tentatively designate the limits of
the special assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be
assessed, tentatively determine the part or proportion of the cost of the
public improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefitted thereby and
the part or proportion, if any, to be paid by the village at large for
benefit to the village at large, shall direct the Assessor to make a special
assessment roll of the part or proportion of the cost to be borne by the
lands specially benefitted according to the benefits received and to report
the same to the Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-060)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.022  NOTICE.



   (A)   When the said special assessment roll shall have been reported
to the Council, it shall order the same filed in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer for public examination along with the report of the engineer
required to be made pursuant to § 33.019, and shall fix a date, time, and
place when the Council shall meet to finally determine the necessity of the
improvement, composition of the district, and to review the roll and to hear
complaints.



   (B)   The engineer’s report and the assessment roll shall be open
to public inspection for a period of seven days before the hearing required
by this section. The Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of the hearing by the
Council to determine necessity for the improvement, composition of the
district and review of said special assessment roll and to hear complaints by
publication at least once in a newspaper printed and circulated in the
village at least ten days prior to the time of said meetings, and shall
further cause notice of said meeting to be mailed by first-class mail to each
property owner in the special assessment district as shown by the current
assessment rolls of the village at least ten days prior to the time of said
hearing, said notice to be mailed to the addresses shown on the current
assessment rolls of the village. Such notice shall state that the plans,
estimates of cost, and that special assessment rolls are on file with the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-070)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.023  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   The Council shall meet and hear objections to said public
improvement to the special assessment district, and the special assessment
roll therefor at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned meeting
thereof and shall consider any objections thereto. The Council may revise,
correct, or amend the plans, estimates of cost, special assessment district,
and special assessment roll. If any changes shall be made which result in
additions to the special assessment district or increases in the special
assessment roll, then a second hearing shall be held with respect to said
changes and notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as
required for the first hearing.



   (B)   After the hearing, or second hearing if required, the Council
may, by resolution, determine to proceed with the public improvement,
determine the necessity thereof and set forth the nature thereof, designate
the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the
lands to be assessed, finally determine the part or proportion of the cost of
the public improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefitted thereby
and the part or portion, if any, to be paid by the village at large for
benefit to the village at large. The Council may also confirm the special
assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may
refer it back to the Assessor for revision, or may annul it or any
proceedings in connection therewith. The Clerk-Treasurer shall endorse the
date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-080)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.024  FINAL ROLL.



   Such roll shall be, upon ratification and confirmation, final and
conclusive.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-090)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.025  OBJECTIONS.



   If, at or prior to the hearing by the Council, the owners of more than
one-half of the property to be assessed shall object in writing to the
improvement, the assessment shall not be made without an affirmative vote of
five members of the Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-100)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.026  LIEN AGAINST PREMISES.



   (A)   All special assessments contained in any special assessment
roll, including any part thereof to be paid in installments, shall, from the
date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots
or parcels of land assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the
respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the
village from the persons to whom they are assessed. Such lien shall be of the
same character and effect as the lien created by the statute for real
property taxes and shall include accrued interest and fees.



   (B)   No judgment or decree nor act of the Council vacating a
special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the village upon the
premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably
charged against the same or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be
lawfully assessed thereon.



   (C)   All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of
the special assessment roll or in annual installments not to exceed 20 in
number, as the Council may determine at the time of confirmation, and, if in
annual installments, the Council may determine the first installment to be
due upon confirmation or upon any other date the Council may prescribe, and
the subsequent installments annually thereafter. Deferred installments shall
bear interest at such rate as the Council may prescribe which shall not
exceed 7% per annum.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-110)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.027  DUTIES OF CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   Whenever any special assessment roll shall be confirmed and be
payable, the Council shall direct the roll to the Clerk- for collection.



   (B)   The Clerk- shall mail statements of the several assessments to
the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, as
indicated by the records of the Assessor, stating the amount of the
assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; however, failure to mail
any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner
to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-120)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 33.028  PAYMENT IN FULL.



   The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid in full at any
time after the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll until such
time as the Council shall prescribe without interest or penalty.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-130)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.029  COLLECTION.



   Each special assessment shall be collected by the Clerk-Treasurer with
the same rights and remedies as provided by law for the collection of taxes,
except as otherwise herein provided. All collection fees shall belong to the
village and be collectible in the same manner as the collection fee for
village taxes.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-140)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.030  INTEREST AND FEES.



   After the expiration of the period provided in § 33.028 of this
subchapter for payment without interest or fees, any installment may be
discharged by paying the face amount thereof together with fees and interest
thereon from the date of confirmation to the date of payment; provided,
however, that if the public improvement has been financed by the sale of
non-callable bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, which are not
repayable, then the interest shall be computed from the date of confirmation
to the date upon which such installment would have fallen due had it not been
prepaid.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-150)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.031  TOTAL COSTS.



   Upon completion of the improvement, the financing thereof and the
payment of the cost thereof, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify to the Council
the total cost of said improvement together with the amount of the original
roll for said improvement.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-160)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.032  ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS.



   Should the assessments on any special assessment roll, including the
amount assessed to the village at large, prove insufficient for which they
were made, then the Council may make additional pro rata assessments to
supply the deficiency against the village and the several lots and parcels of
land in the same ratio as the original assessments, but the total amount
assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the
benefits received from the improvement.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-170)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.033  EXCESS OF ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   Should the special assessment or the proceeds of sale of any
special assessment bonds prove larger than necessary to meet the costs of the
improvement or to meet the principal and interest requirements of any special
assessment bonds and expenses incidental thereto, the excess shall be placed
in the Village Treasury.



   (B)   If more than 5%, the excess shall be returned pro rata
according to assessments, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. No
refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any evidence of
indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-180)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.034  DIVISION OF LOTS.



   (A)   Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment
thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the Assessor shall
apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided,
and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment
roll.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall, within ten days after such
apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their
last known address by first-class mail. Said apportionment shall be final and
conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the
Clerk-Treasurer within 20 days of the mailing of the aforesaid notice.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-190)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.035  DEFECTIVE ASSESSMENTS.



   Whenever the Council deems any special assessment invalid or defective,
or whenever a court adjudges an assessment to be illegal in whole or in part,
the Council may cause a new assessment to be levied for the same purpose,
whether or not the improvement or any part thereof has been completed, or any
part of the special assessment collected. All proceedings on such
reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same
manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the
original special assessment is collected and not refunded, it shall be
applied upon the reassessment, and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be
deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed is collected, the
balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-200)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.036  ASSESSMENT BY COURT.



   If in any action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities
or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the person
assessed or upon the lot or premises sought to be charged, the court may,
nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the
village which is a proper charge against the person assessed or the lot or
premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable
against such person or upon such lot or premises.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-210)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.037  NUISANCES.



   When any lot, building, or structure, because of accumulation of refuse
or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds or age or dilapidation, or
because of any other condition or happening, becomes a public hazard or
nuisance which is detrimental to the health or safety of the inhabitants of
the village or of those residing or habitually going near such lot, building,
or structure, the Council may order such hazard or nuisance abated and the
cost of such abatement assessed against the lot, premises, or description of
real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was located as a single lot
assessment.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-220)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.038  SINGLE LOT OR PARCEL.



   (A)   When any expense shall be incurred by the village upon or in
respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or premises, which, by
the provisions of this subchapter the Council is authorized to charge and
collect as a single lot special assessment against the same, and which is not
of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon
several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district; an account
of the labor or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the
officer or person performing the labor or services, or causing the same to be
done, shall be reported to the Council in a manner it prescribes.



   (B)   The accounting reported to the Council shall include a
description of the lot or premises on or in respect to which the expense was
incurred, the name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, and the cost
of labor or services performed. The provisions of the preceding sections of
this subchapter with reference to pro rata special assessments generally, and
the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvement, shall not
apply to single lot assessments contemplated in this section.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-230)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.039  SINGLE LOTS; SPREADING ASSESSMENT.



   The Council, after review of the single lots assessment account, shall
determine what amount or part of every such reported expense shall be
charged, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a single lot
special assessment. As often as the Council may deem it expedient, it shall
require all of the several amounts so reported and determined and the several
lots or premises chargeable therewith respectively to be reported by the
Clerk-Treasurer to the Assessor who shall spread such amounts against the
real property chargeable therewith on the next tax roll for the collection of
general village taxes.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-240)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)



§ 33.040  ADDITIONAL PROCEDURE.



   In any case where the provisions of this subchapter may prove to be
insufficient to carry into full effect the making of any improvement or the
special assessment therefor, the Council shall provide any additional steps
or procedure required to effect the improvement by special assessment in the
resolution declaring the determination of the Council to make such
improvement in the first instance.



(1984 Code, § 1-05-250)  (Ord. 41, passed 3-21-1974)




PURCHASING REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES




§ 33.055  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the
singular number include the plural number, and use of either male or female
gender includes the other gender. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.



   AGENCY. Any department, office, multiple member body, or other
organization of village government and includes any elective officer,
appointee, or person acting or purporting to act in the exercise of official
duties.



   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES. Includes all telephone, gas, water, electric
light, and power service; towel and cleaning service; insurance; leases for
all grounds, buildings, office, or other space required by the agencies; and
the rental, repair, or maintenance of equipment, machinery, and other
village-owned personal property. The term shall not include professional and
other CONTRACTUAL SERVICES which have been proven to be unique and not
subject to competition.



   COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Holly.



   EQUIPMENT. All capital improvement items, projects, and services,
including such items as vehicle, equipment, street construction, and the like.



   SUPPLIES. Includes disposable supplies and materials.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Holly, Michigan.



   VILLAGE MANAGER or MANAGER. The Village Manager.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-010)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.056  MANAGER’S GENERAL SUPERVISION POWERS; PURCHASE AND DISTRIBUTION
OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The Village Manager or his or her designee shall have general
supervision of the purchase and distribution of all supplies, materials, and
equipment and shall perform all duties required by law and shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by this section.



   (B)   The Manager shall have the power and it shall be his or her
duty:



      (1)   Purchase or contract. To purchase or contract for all
supplies and contractual services needed by any agency in accordance with
purchasing procedures as prescribed by this subchapter and such rules and
regulations as the Village Manager shall adopt for the internal management
and such other rules and regulations as prescribed by the Council;



      (2)   Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it
shall be unlawful for any agency to order the purchases of any supplies or
make any contract within the purview of this subchapter other than through
the Village Council or the Village Manager and any purchase ordered or
contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved and the
village shall not be bound thereby; and



      (3)   Disqualification of bidders.



         (a)   The Village Manager shall have the authority, with
the approval of the Council, to declare vendors who default on their
quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any
business from the village for a stated period of time. Any vendor who feels
himself or herself aggrieved by such decision may, within ten days of
notification of such determination, make objections thereto, in writing, to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer.



         (b)   The Council shall, after public hearing, make a
final determination as to the disqualification of said vendor, which
determination shall be final.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-020)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.057  REQUISITION AND ESTIMATES.



   (A)   Generally. All agencies, either by or with the authorization
of the head of the department under which the agency operates, shall file
with the Manager detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in
supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times, and for such
future periods as may be required for budgeting and accounting purposes.



   (B)   Unforeseen requirements. An agency shall not be prevented from
filing, in the same manner, with the Manager at any time a requisition or
estimate of any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not
foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-030)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.058  ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS.



   Except in cases of emergency, the Manager shall not issue any order for
delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the Manager certifies,
after pre-audit, that there is to the credit of the agency concerned a
sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid
obligations, to defray the amount of such order.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-040)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 366, passed
7-1-2004)



§ 33.059  COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   All purchases of equipment, supplies, contractual services, or
sales of personal property which are unsuitable for continued use, except as
specifically provided in divisions (B) or (C) below, or elsewhere in this
subchapter, shall be based wherever possible on competitive bids or
estimates. The Council may schedule a public auction for the purposes of
disposing of unsuitable personal property.



   (B)   It is generally recognized that purchasing equipment or
supplies by competitive bids or estimates is not possible where the equipment
or supplies being purchased are used, or where they are being sold through a
factory closeout sale, bankruptcy sale, or other distressed sale.



   (C)   Upon the recommendation of the Village Manager and for reasons
stated on the public record, the Village Council may waive the requirements
of the competitive bids or estimates requirements of this subchapter when
there is no advantage to the village to do so or where there is a specific
defined benefit to the village not to do so.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-050)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.060  AMERICAN AND COMMUNITY PURCHASE REQUIREMENTS.



   All equipment, supplies, products, services, and capital improvement
items must originate from an American firm unless an American firm does not
exist or if it is not financially feasible to do so. Additionally, the
Village Manager will make every attempt, within reasonable financial limits,
to purchase all equipment, supplies, products, services, and capital
improvement items from firms, businesses, and individuals located within the
village (see § 33.061(B)(3)(e)3. for additional information).



(1984 Code, § 1-07-060)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.061  PURCHASING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All supplies, equipment, and contractual services, except as
otherwise provided herein, shall be processed in accordance with the
following schedule.



 


Purchase Schedule Estimated Cost

 

Requirements




Up to $199

 

No estimates or bids




$200 to $1,999

 

Telephone estimates




$2,000 to $4,999

 

Three written estimates




$5,000 or more

 

Competitive bids




 



   (B)   (1)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish the
purchasing limits that the Village Manager must abide by for all regular
purchases. In the event that purchases made without Village Council approval
from any one supplier exceed $10,000 in any fiscal year, the Council shall be
informed of such in writing by the Village Manager.



      (2)   A purchase order shall be used for every purchase over
$1,000. Written contracts shall be used for all contractual services. The
Council or Manager may also require a written contract for any other purchase.



      (3)   The Council or Manager may ask for competitive bids on
any purchase of $ 1,999 or less in an attempt to purchase the product at the
least expense.



         (a)   Notice inviting bids.



            1.   Newspaper. Notices inviting bids shall be
published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the village and
at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals.
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of
the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid specifications
may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.



            2.   Bidder’s list. The Village Manager shall
also solicit sealed bids from all responsible perspective suppliers who have
requested their names be added to a “bidder’s list”, which the Village
Manager shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or
such other notice to acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any
case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidder’s list shall be limited
to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the
trade group to which the invitations are sent. Bids may also be solicited by
telephone, direct mail, or by posting a notice on the public bulletin board
at the village office.



         (b)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the
Manager, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid deposits upon
award of the contract. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit
required by the Manager upon failure on his or her part to enter a contract
within ten days after the award.



         (c)   Bid opening procedure.



            1.   Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope.



            2.   Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at
the time and place stated in the public notices.



            3.   Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received
shall be available for public inspection.



         (d)   Rejection of bids. The Council shall have the
authority to reject any bid, or any part thereof or any irregularity, when
the public interest will be served thereby. The Manager shall not knowingly
accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes,
licenses, or other monies due to the village. Contracts with bidders who are
found to have been in default at the time of award of such contract shall be
voidable.



         (e)   Award of contract.



               1.   Authority of the Village Manager. The
Village Manager shall have the authority to award contracts within the
purview of this subchapter, subject to the approval of the Village Council.



               2.   Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts
shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, in determining lowest
responsible bidder, in addition to the price, the Village Manager shall
consider:



               a.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required;



               b.    Whether the bidder can perform the
contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified,
without delay or interference;



               c.   The character, integrity, reputation,
judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder in business;



               d.   The quality of performance of previous
contracts or service;



               e.   The previous and existing compliance by
the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service;



               f.   The sufficiency of the financial
resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the
services;



               g.   The quality, availability, and
adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services, to the particular use
required;



               h.   The ability of the bidder to provide
future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and



               i.   The number and scope of conditions
attached to the bid.



            3.   Award to other than the low bidder.



               a.   From the bidders so determined to be
responsible, the Council shall award the contract to the lowest such bidder;
provided, that in determining the lowest bid, the Council shall consider the
bona fide business location of the bidder.



               b.   If the lowest responsible bidder is not
located within the village limits, and the lowest bid of the responsible
bidders located within the village limits does not exceed that of said lowest
non-local bidder by more than 5%, then the Council may determine said lowest
local bidder to be the lowest responsible bidder, and make the award to such
local bidder accordingly.



            4.   Irresponsible bidder; statement required.
When bidders are determined not to be responsible bidders and their bids
would have been lower than the bid actually awarded, a full and complete
statement of the reason for such determination shall be prepared by the
Village Manager and filed with the other papers relating to the transactions.



            5.   Performance bonds. The Village Manager shall,
in his or her discretion, have the authority to require either a performance
bond, cash deposit, or surety, before entering a contract, in such amount as
he or she shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of
the village.



         (f)   Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or
purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-070)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 229, passed
12-8-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.062  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   (A)   By Village Manager. In case of an emergency, the Manager shall
be empowered to secure any equipment, supplies, or contractual service by
open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price,
any supplies or contractual service in an amount not to exceed $10,000. A
special Council meeting shall be called before any emergency purchase exceeds
$10,000.



   (B)   Recorded explanation. A full report of the circumstances of an
emergency purchase shall be filed immediately by the Village Manager with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer, shall be reported to the Village Council, and shall
be open to public inspection.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-080)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.063  INSPECTION AND TESTING.



   The Village Manager may inspect, or supervise the inspection of, all
deliveries of equipment supplies or contractual services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract.



   (A)   Inspection by agency. The Village Manager shall have the
authority to authorize agencies having the staff and facilities for adequate
inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such agencies under rules and
regulations which the Manager shall prescribe.



   (B)   Tests.



      (1)   The Village Manager shall have the authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of
deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance
with the specifications.



      (2)   In the performance of such tests, the Manager shall have
the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the
village government or of any outside laboratory.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-090)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.064  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   The Village Manager shall have the authority to join with other units
of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the
village world be served thereby.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-110)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)



§ 33.065  SURPLUS SUPPLIES.



   (A)   All agencies shall submit to the Village Manager at such times
and in such form as he or she shall prescribe an inventory of all supplies
which are no longer used or which have become obsolete.



   (B)   The Village Manager shall have the authority to transfer
surplus supplies to other agencies.



(1984 Code, § 1-07-120)  (Ord. 191, passed 9-12-1989)




SALE OF REAL PROPERTY PROCEDURES FOR VILLAGE-OWNED PROPERTY




§ 33.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISPOSAL or DISPOSE. The sale, lease, exchange, or donation of real
property.



   LEASE. A tenancy in real property granting the right of possession for
a specified term for consideration. LEASE does not include a permit, license,
or franchise to use any village-owned or controlled real property or public
way.



   REAL PROPERTY. Any interest in real property owned by the village
within the geographic limits of the village.



(1984 Code, § 1-09-010) (Ord. 428, passed 11-20-2013)



§ 33.081  REAL PROPERTY DISPOSAL.



   Before disposing of any real property under this subchapter, the
village shall find either that the property is not needed for public use or
that the public interest may be furthered by disposal of such real property.
In determining whether to dispose of real property, the village, in its
discretion, may consider whether to establish certain requirements as
conditions of the transaction, such as requiring that the property be
developed to a certain standard by a specified date, that the property not be
placed in tax-exempt status for a specified length of time, and other
conditions the village may deem appropriate. Nothing in this subchapter shall
require additional procedures or limit the authority of the Village Manager
to issue any permits or licenses authorized by this code of ordinances.



(1984 Code, § 1-09-020) (Ord. 428, passed 11-20-2013)



§ 33.082  DISPOSAL PROCEDURES.



   The Village Council, in its discretion, may decide to dispose of real
property in any one of the following ways.



   (A)   Bids or auction. The village shall publish notice of its
intent to accept bids from prospective purchasers. The Village Manager or his
or her designee shall tabulate all bids received and shall present them to
the Village Council for consideration. In evaluating each bid, the Village
Council is not required to accept the highest bid, but may also consider
proposed contingencies of any offer, the bidder’s financial resources to
complete the sale, and any other factors the Village Council deems
appropriate. The Village Council reserves the right to reject any and all
bids.



   (B)   Real estate broker. The village may retain a real estate
broker to advertise property for sale. The broker must be selected in
accordance with village policies for hiving of consultants and applicable
state and local laws pertaining to conflicts of interest. The broker shall
advertise the property for sale, accept offers for the property, and
negotiate with potential buyers in order to increase the final sales price,
reduce proposal contingencies, and to ensure the bidder’s sufficient
financial resources to complete the sale. The broker shall then present all
bona fide offers to Village Council for consideration. The Village Council
reserves the right to reject any and all offers to purchase.



(1984 Code, § 1-09-030) (Ord. 428, passed 11-20-2013)



§ 33.083  NOTICE OF PUBLIC SALES.



   Whenever the village must give notice of its intent to sell, it shall
do so by publishing notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the
village. Notice must be published at least twice, the first of which shall be
at least ten days before the date on which bids or proposals are due.



(1984 Code, § 1-09-040) (Ord. 428, passed 11-20-2013)



§ 33.084  MINIMUM BIDS.



   The minimum price at which property may be offered for sale shall be no
less than 60% of the state equalized value (SEV) of the parcel according to
county equalization records from the year immediately preceding the
contemplated sale, unless the Village Council authorizes otherwise.



(1984 Code, § 1-09-050)  (Ord. 428, passed 11-20-2013)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS GENERALLY



      51.   RATES FOR WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICES



      52.   SEWER SYSTEMS



      53.   WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS



      54.   REFUSE COLLECTION



CHAPTER 50:  WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS GENERALLY



Section



   50.01   Intent



   50.02   Extension of the water and sewer system beyond village
boundaries



Cross-reference:



   Rates for Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Services, see Ch. 51



   Sewer Systems, see Ch. 52



   Water Supply Regulations, see Ch. 53



§ 50.01  INTENT.



   The Village Council believes that its first priority is to serve and
protect the residents of the village and the current users of its services.
To that end, the Village Council on January 24, 1989, adopted a policy
prohibiting the provision of any village service, activity, advantage, or
benefit outside the boundaries of the village unless the Village Council
determines that to do so benefits the village. Accordingly, it is the intent
of this title to ensure that policies are implemented and to require a super
majority vote of the Village Council to extend services of the village’s
water or sewer system to persons outside the village boundaries.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-01-010)  (Ord. 235, passed 6-22-1993)



§ 50.02  EXTENSION OF THE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM BEYOND VILLAGE BOUNDARIES.



   The water system and/or the sewer system of the village shall be
extended to serve customers outside the boundaries of the village upon the
affirmative vote of five members of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-01-020)  (Ord. 235, passed 6-22-1993)



CHAPTER 51:  RATES FOR WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICES



Section



   51.01   Purposes for establishing charges



   51.02   Applicability of charges



   51.03   No free service



   51.04   Basis for charge



   51.05   Water connection fees



   51.06   Sewer connection fees



   51.07   Method of computing units for calculating costs



   51.08   Examples of connection fees assessments



   51.09   Water supply and sewage disposal rates



   51.10   Industrial cost recovery charge for sewage disposal



   51.11   Extra strength surcharge for sewage disposal



   51.12   Determination of volume usage



   51.13   Billings



   51.14   Collection



Cross-reference:



   Sewer Systems, see Ch. 52



   Water and Sewer Systems Generally, see Ch. 50



   Water Supply Regulations, see Ch. 53



§ 51.01  PURPOSES FOR ESTABLISHING CHARGES.



   Charges for furnishing water supply and sewage disposal services are
established to provide for the following:



   (A)   The payment of the expenses of operation and maintenance of
the water supply and transmission system and/or the sewage collection and
disposal system as may be necessary to preserve those systems in good repair
and working order, including the expenses of administration in connection
therewith;



   (B)   The payment of the interest on and the principle of bonds
payable from the revenues of the water supply and sewage disposal systems
when the bonds become due and payable, the creation and maintenance of any
reserve for same, and/or the refunding of bonds payable, or any combination
of the foregoing; or



   (C)   The creation of any reserve for future capital expenses,
including expansion and reconstruction of the water supply and transmission
system and/or sewage collection and disposal system.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-010)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 51.02  APPLICABILITY OF CHARGES.



   (A)   Charges for furnishing water supply service and/or sewage
disposal service shall be made against those premises connected to either of
such systems or those premises discharging sewage, either directly or
indirectly, into the sewage disposal system or any part thereof.



   (B)   The owner(s) of any premises furnished water supply service
and/or sewage disposal service is the party responsible for the charges of
the service used except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (C)   On all properties located within the boundaries of the village
and, to the extent authorized by law, on all properties outside the
boundaries of the village which receive water and/or sanitary sewer services
from the village, the village shall have a lien upon the premises to which
water supply service and/or sewage disposal service is supplied as security
for the collection of water and/or sewage system rates, assessments, charges,
or rentals due or to become due, including without limitation volume usage
charges. Said lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution
of the water or provision of the sewage disposal service to the premises as
provided for in Public Act 178 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. § 123.162, as
amended, and Public Act 94 of 1933, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 141.121, as
amended.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-020)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002; Ord. 392, passed 6-15-2008)



§ 51.03  NO FREE SERVICE.



   The village shall not provide free water supply service and/or sewage
disposal service to any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, or
to any public agency or instrumentality.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-030)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 51.04  BASIS FOR CHARGE.



   (A)   Charges for water supply service and/or sewage disposal
service shall be based on and measured by a meter installed and controlled by
the village; where furnished to any premises not having a meter, the water
consumption shall be estimated by the Village Manager. No free water service
or sewage disposal service shall be furnished to any person. The size for
such meter shall be determined by the village. All premises receiving water
supply service and/or sewage disposal service after June 19, 1997, shall have
installed, at said owner’s expense, a meter registering water usage
installed by the village at an appropriate location whether connected to the
village’s water supply system or not. On, or after that date, the village
may discontinue service for failure to have such a device in place.



   (B)   Rates for furnishing water supply and/or sewage disposal
services shall be based on a volume usage charge.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-040)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 373, passed
3-24-2005; Ord. 392, passed 6-15-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.05  WATER CONNECTION FEES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, and except as
provided in any agreement referenced in §§ 51.01 and 51.02, the fee for
connecting a single residential unit with a five-eighths-inch meter to the
village’s water supply system shall be $3,000 per unit for the first unit
or fraction thereof, and an additional $600 for each additional unit or
fraction thereof based on the unit factor as identified in § 51.07. This
charge covers the purchase and installation of the tap, corporation cock,
curb stop, and meter. There shall be an additional charge based on actual
costs of equipment, materials, and labor used if the connection requires the
village to excavate streets paved with asphalt, concrete, or other hardened
surfaces. Fees for connection shall be paid to the village at the time
application for connections is made, unless the connection would be for a new
structure, at which time connection fees shall be paid when a building permit
is applied and paid for.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (C), below, and except as
provided in any agreement referenced in §§ 51.01 and 51.02, the fee for
connecting any other structure with a meter size larger than five-eighth-inch
to the village’s water supply system shall be $3,000, plus the actual
costs, including labor, materials, equipment, insurance, and related items.
This charge covers the purchase and installation of the tap, corporation
cock, curb stop, and meter. There shall be an additional charge based on
actual costs of equipment, materials, and labor used if the connection
requires the village to excavate streets paved with asphalt, concrete, or
other hardened surfaces. Fees for connections shall be paid to the village at
the time application for connection is made unless the connection would be
for a new structure, at which time connection fees shall be paid when a
building permit is applied and paid for.



   (C)   There shall be no fee charged for connecting a water line
solely dedicated to serving a fire suppression sprinkler system.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-050)  (Ord. 330, passed 1-1-2000; Ord. 333, passed
9-7-2000; Ord. 343, passed 9-15-2001; Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002; Ord. 355,
passed 12-8-2002)



§ 51.06  SEWER CONNECTION FEES.



   (A)   The fee for connecting to a sanitary sewer line is $4,000 per
unit for the first unit or fraction thereof, and an $800 for each additional
unit or fraction thereof based on the unit factor as identified in § 51.10.



   (B)   (1)   Every connection shall be charged on the basis of at
least one unit.



      (2)   Each detached single-family residential unit, whether
located on a single lot or on land contained within a site condominium
project, a mobile home park, a planned unit development district, or a
manufactured housing district, whether developed singly or as part of a
larger development of single-family detached units, shall be considered a
single unit and shall be required to pay the full connection fee set forth in
division (A) above, without any reduction for subsequent or additional units.



      (3)   The connection charges shall be paid for at the time a
connection permit is applied for, except when a new structure is being built,
which then connection fees will be paid for at the time the building permit
is applied and paid for.



      (4)   The connection charges shall be exclusive of, and in
addition to, any fee or payment made or required for engineering or
inspection charges.



      (5)   The construction and installation of any such connection
shall be subject to the same rules and regulations that are provided in this
chapter.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-060)  (Ord. 283, passed 12-16-1997; Ord. 333, passed
9-7-2000; Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002)



§ 51.07  METHOD OF COMPUTING UNITS FOR CALCULATING COSTS.



 


Usage

 

Unit Fact





Auto dealers, per 1,000 square feet
 

.40



Barbershops, per chair
 

.08



Bars, per seat
 

.06



Beauty shops, per booth
 

.30



Boarding houses, per person
 

.20



Boarding schools, per person
 

.35



Bowling alleys (no bars or lunch facilities), per alley
 

.20



Car wash (automatic facility single production line)
 

10



Car wash (per automatic bay)   
 

3.50



Car wash (per self-serve bay)   
 

1.75



Churches, per seat
 

.01



Cleaners (pick-up only), per employee
 

.06



Cleaners (pressing facilities), per press
 

1.25



Clinics (minimum assignment 1.00 per unit per profession), per doctor
 

.65



Convalescent homes, per bed
 

.30



Convents, per person
 

.25



County clubs, per members
 

.10



Drug stores (with fountain service), per seat
 

.10



Factories (exclusive of excessive industrial use), per 1,00 square feet
 

.50



Fraternal organizations (members or rental), per hall
 

2.50



Grocery stores and supermarkets, per 1,000 square feet
 

1.10



Hospitals, per bed
 

1.40



Hotels (private bath, 2 persons per room), per bed
 

.25



Laundry (self-service), per washer
 

.50



Motels, per bed
 

.25



Multiple-family residence, per unit
 

1



Office building, per 1,000 square feet
 

.60



Public institutions (other than hospitals), per employee
 

.40



Restaurants (dinner and/or drinks), per seat
 

.16



Rooming houses (no meals), per person
 

.167



Schools (cafeteria without showers and/or pool), per classroom
 

1.5



Schools (showers and/or pool), per classroom
 

2



Schools (showers, gym, cafeteria), per classroom
 

2.5



Service stations, per pump
 

.30



Snack bars, drive-in, per seat, and/or stall
 

.10



Store (other than specifically listed), per employee
 

3.50



Swimming pool, per 1,000 square feet
 

.05



Theaters (drive-in), per car space
 

.05



Theaters (inside with air conditioning) x weekly hours of operation x seats
 

.001



Tourist courts (individual bath units), per cubicle
 

.27



Trailer parks (central bath houses), per trailer
 

.35



Trailer parks (individual baths), per unit
 

1.00



Trailer parks (individual baths, seasonal only) per unit
 

.50



Warehouses, per 1,000 square feet
 

.10





 



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-070)  (Ord. 330, passed 1-1-2000; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)



§ 51.08  EXAMPLES OF CONNECTION FEES ASSESSMENTS.



 


Types of Use

 

Water Fee

 

Sewer Fee

 

Total





Service by 5/8-Inch Water Meter


   Single-family home
 

$3,000

 

$4,000

 

$7,000



Serviced by Water Meter Greater Than 5/8-Inch



4-chair barber shop

 

$3,144

 

$4,192

 

$7,336




$,3000+(3 x 0.08 x $600)+$4,000+(3 x 0.08 x $800)= $7,336




8-unit apartment building

 

$7,200

 

$9,600

 

$16,800




$3,000+(7 x 1 x $600)+$4,000+(7 x l x $800)= $16,800




80-bed motel

 

$14,850

 

$19,9800

 

$34,650




$3,000+(79 x 0.25 x $600)+$4,000+(79 x 25 x $800)= $34,650




100-seat restaurant

 

$12,504

 

$16,672

 

$29,176




$3,000+(99 x 0.16 x $600)+$4,000+(99 x 0.16 x $800)= $29,176




Residential duplex, one tap

 

$36,00

 

$4,800

 

$8,400




$3,000+(1 x 1 x $600)+$4,000+(1 x 1 x $800)= $8,400





 



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-080)  (Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002)



§ 51.09  WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL RATES.



   (A)   The rates for water supply and sewage disposal shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Village Council. Such
rates shall be based on a volume usage charge.



   (B)   The volume usage charge covers the administration and
operation, maintenance and repairs, repayment, and/or refunding of
outstanding debt, any reserves required by the bonding instrument and future
capital needs of the respective systems. The village applies the charge to
every user of water supply service and/or sewage disposal service when the
meter registers water flow.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-090)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002; Ord. 373, passed 3-24-2005; Ord. 392, passed 6-15-2008)



§ 51.10  INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGE FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   All processed wastewaters from industrial users are subject to
an industrial cost recovery charge after June 30, 1980. Processed wastewater
includes all liquid waste discharged into the village sanitary sewer system
from an industrial facility, less those wastewaters that originate from
employees’ uses of sanitary appliances.



   (B)   For all sewer services provided on or after July 1, 1993, the
industrial cost recovery charges shall be computed as follows:



 


BOD

 

$0.1368




Flow, per 1,000 gallons

 

$0.1984




Suspended soils, per pound

 

$0.0788




 



   (C)   (1)   There shall be an additional charge for laboratory
testing of wastewater samples.



      (2)   The laboratory charge shall be the cost thereof and
shall be determined for each user.



   (D)   As to all funds obtained as a result of the industrial cost
recovery system as set forth herein, the village shall invest or deposit the
retained amounts for reconstruction and expansion in:



      (1)   Obligations of the U.S. government;



      (2)   Obligations guaranteed as to principle and interest by
the U.S. government or any agency thereof; or



      (3)   Deposit said amounts in accounts fully collateralized by
obligations fully guaranteed as



to the principle and interest by the U.S. government or any agency thereof.



   (E)   (1)   The rates established herein for industrial cost
recovery may be revised as to amounts and rates permitted by law and
appropriate regulations by resolution shall establish when such rates shall
be billed and paid.



      (2)   No interest shall be charged on industrial cost recovery
billing except when such are delinquent.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-100)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.11  EXTRA STRENGTH SURCHARGE FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   (1)   If the character of the sewage effluent of any user
imposes an unreasonable additional burden upon the sewage disposal system of
the village, an additional charge shall be made over and above the rates
charged for sewage disposal service.



      (2)   Effluent in excess of the normal domestic sewage limit
imposed by this chapter shall be deemed prima facie evidence that an
unreasonable burden has been placed upon the system and shall be subject to
surcharge.



   (B)   (1)   (a)   If necessary to protect the system or any
part thereof, the village shall deny the right of any user to discharge such
sewage into the system. Surcharges required by this section shall be computed
as the prorated share of the annual cost of operation and maintenance
attributable to treating the substance multiplied by the ratio of weight of
surchargeable excess of the discharged substance to the total weight of such
substance that is treated in that year.



         (b)   This amount shall be collected, on the basis of
estimated surchargeable amounts, with each periodic billing and shall be
adjusted annually to reflect actual operation and maintenance costs.



      (2)   For all sewer services provided on or after July 1,
1993, surcharge rates shall be computed as follows.



 


BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand, per pound)

 

$0.1618




Suspended soils, per pound

 

$0.1266




 



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-120)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)



§ 51.12  DETERMINATION OF VOLUME USAGE.



   (A)   The quantity of water supplied as recorded by a meter
installed and maintained by the village



shall be conclusive on both the consumer of the water supply service and/or
sewage disposal service and the village, except when:



      (1)   The meter is found by the village to be registering
inaccurately;



      (2)   When the meter ceases to record any flow of water;



      (3)   When the Village Council, in its discretion, decides
that extraordinary circumstances exist whereby justice and fairness require
an adjustment on billings for sewer and water, said adjustment to be
determined by the Village Council; or



      (4)   As otherwise provided for in this chapter.



   (B)   Upon the written request of any user of water supply service,
the village will test the accuracy of the water meter used in the premises.
The user shall deposit with the village an amount determined by the Village
Council based on size of meter tested. If the test shows that the meter is
registering more than 4% against the consumer on a flow as determined by
American Water Works Association Standard C705-60 (Testing Cold Water
Meters), as revised, the deposit shall be refunded and adjustments to charges
for water supply service and/or sewage disposal service shall be made.
Otherwise, the amount deposited is forfeited and the charges for services
furnished shall remain unchanged.



   (C)   Industrial and commercial users shall be charged for sewage
disposal service for all water metered, but not being discharged to the
sewage disposal system, except as follows.



      (1)   When an industrial or commercial premises uses water
supply service and all or a portion of such water supplied to the premises is
not discharged to the sewage disposal system, the property owner may install
a device or devices to measure either the waste discharged or the quantity of
water not discharged to the sewage disposal system. The device or devices
shall be installed at the cost of the owner and with the approval of the
Village Manager or the Manager’s authorized representative. The Manager or
the duly authorized representative shall inspect and approve the installation
of the measuring device or devices.



      (2)   If it is not feasible to install measuring devices to
determine continuously the quantity of waste discharged or the water not
discharged into the sewage disposal system, the Village Manager or duly
authorized representative shall determine periodically the percentage of
metered water discharged in to the sewage disposal system.



   (D)   Residential users shall be charged for sewage disposal service
for all water metered but not being discharged to the sewage disposal system,
except when the property owner installs and maintains a device to measure the
quantity of water not discharged to the sewage disposal system. The device
shall be installed at the cost of the owner and with the approval of the
Village Manager or the Manager’s authorized representative. The Director or
the duly authorized representative shall inspect and approve the installation
of the measuring device.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-130)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 316, passed
10-27-1998; Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002)



§ 51.13  BILLINGS.



   (A)   The owner(s) of each property receiving water supply service
and/or sewage disposal service shall request the village to provide such
service on a form provided by the village for such purpose. A new application
for service shall be made to the village upon any change in ownership of the
property or when the owner desires to make the tenant responsible for the
payment of the service and follows the procedure identified in § 51.15. Once
the application for service is submitted and signed by the village, the owner
or tenant are bound by the terms and conditions under which water supply
service and/or sewage disposal service are furnished to the premises.



   (B)   (1)   Charges for water supply service and/or sewage
disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly. A bill shall become
due and payable on the final Tuesday of the month billed as specified on such
bill and, if not paid by the final Wednesday of the month billed, shall be
subject to a 10% penalty which shall be added thereto as an additional charge
for that month’s bill. If there are previous monthly bills yet unpaid, this
new billing, plus the 10% penalty for that month, will be added to the prior
bill and constitute the total arrearage. In the event that the charges for
such services furnished to any premises are not paid within ten days after
the due date thereof, then all services furnished to such premises may be
discontinued. No further notifications will be mailed, regarding shut off
status.



      (2)   (a)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue
utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after
notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The
village's form for application for utility service and all bills shall
contain, in addition to the title, address, room number, and telephone number
of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable
provisions to the effect:



            1.   That all bills are due and payable on or
before the date set forth on the bill; and



            2.   That if any bill is not paid by or before
that date, a shutoff notice will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if
the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the shutoff notice,
service will be discontinued for nonpayment; and



            3.   That any customer disputing the correctness
of his or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she
may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the village official in charge of utility billing.  This
official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of
the customer's complaint.



         (b)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not
be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the unpaid balance is $250 or more, and that
amount is due and unpaid for 30 days.



         (c)   When it becomes necessary for the village to
discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service
will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid,
along with a turn-on charge in an amount to be set by the Village Council
through resolution.



   (C)   Once water supply services or sewage disposal services to any
premises have been discontinued, those services may be restored under the
following conditions:



      (1)   Payment of all sums due and owing, including penalties
and interest;



      (2)   Correction of any noted conditions leading to the
discontinuance; and



      (3)   Payment of a shut off charge of $20 and a turn on charge
of $20 per service used.



   (D)   When there is a change in occupancy or tenancy, in those
instances where the tenant pays for the service used, the owner(s) or tenant,
or his, her, or their agent shall notify the village at least 24 hours in
advance of the change in order to provide the village with sufficient time to
obtain a final reading and billing. In no case shall the village change a
billing account until a new application for service is processed. Any dispute
over service used as a result of failing to change accounts becomes a charge
against the property, or to the last tenant if the landlord used the
procedure identified in § 51.14.



   (E)   When a new application for service is processed as identified
in this section, the village shall charge a fee of $15 per service furnished
to the outgoing customer and the same amount to the incoming customer in
order to cover the costs for obtaining a final reading and billing and
processing the new account. Upon written notification to the Village Office,
the outgoing customer will be given final billing based on estimated prior
monthly usage with the payment due at the time of the change. If not paid
within ten days from the billing date, a penalty of 10% and interest of 1.5%
per month would apply.



   (F)   Public works employees will, under no circumstances, be
permitted to receive payments for water/sewer services.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-140)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. passed
6-15-2008; Ord. 392, passed 6-15-2008; Ord. 394, passed 8-17-2008; Ord. 405,
passed 1-17-2010)



§ 51.14  COLLECTION.



   (A)   (1)   The village shall have a lien upon the premises to
which water supply service and/or sewage disposal service is supplied as
security for the collection of water and/or sewage system rates, assessments,
charges, or rentals due or to become due, including without limitation,
readiness-to-serve and volume usage charges. Said lien shall become effective
immediately upon the distribution of the water or provision of the sewage
disposal service to the premises as provided for in Public Act 178 of 1939,
being M.C.L.A. § 123.162, as amended and Public Act 94 of 1933, being
M.C.L.A. § 141.121, as amended.



      (2)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall certify annually all
unpaid charges for water supply service or sewage disposal service, or both
furnished to any premises which remain unpaid for a period of six months.
Prior to entering the total amount due on the next tax roll, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the owner of the premises by first-class mail at
the owner’s last known address of the village’s intent to place the
unpaid charges, plus late penalties and a processing and collection fee as a
lien against the owner’s premises if the unpaid charges are not paid in
full within 15 days of the mailing of said notice. If the unpaid charges
remain unpaid at expiration of 15 days, the Clerk-Treasurer shall enter those
charges so certified, plus any late fees and a 10% processing and collection
fee on the total amount due upon the next tax roll against the premises to
which the services were rendered.



      (3)   The charges shall be collected and the lien shall be
enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed
upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for the taxes.



   (B)   In cases where the village is properly notified in accordance
with Public Act 94 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 et seq., as amended,
and/or Public Act 178 of 1939, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 123.161 et
seq., as amended that a tenant is responsible for the charges of water supply
service and/or sewage disposal service, no such service shall be commenced or
continued to such premises until a sum sufficient to cover an average
quarterly bill for such premises as estimated by the village is deposited
with the village.



   (C)   In addition to discontinuing water supply service and/or
sewage disposal service, the village



may use any other legal means available to it to collect for nonpayment of
the service furnished. Before discontinuing either or both services to the
premises for nonpayment, the village shall notify the owner of the property
and the person in whose name services are charged, if not the same person.
Notification shall be done by first-class mail at the last known address(es)
or by posting the premises where such service is rendered, or by both
methods, of the village’s intent to discontinue service ten days after
mailing or posting the notice.



   (D)   No water supply service and/or sewage disposal service shall
be restored to a premises that had its service discontinued to enforce
payment until all charges, including any penalties, fees, and deposits have
been paid.



   (E)   When, in the judgment of the village, the collection of
charges for water supply service and/or sewage disposal service maybe
difficult or uncertain, or when otherwise provided for by law, the village
may require a deposit in an amount sufficient to cover an average quarterly
bill for the premises served as estimated by the village. In all cases no
deposit collected by the village shall bear any interest. A deposit may be
applied against the delinquent water supply service charge and/or sewage
disposal service charge. In doing so, the village’s right to discontinue
water supply service or sewage disposal service, or both in full satisfaction
of such delinquency shall not be affected. A deposit, or any remaining
portion, shall be returned only to the person giving it to the village.



   (F)   No person shall be permitted to establish a new account at
another service address if such person has an outstanding balance with the
village until all charges, including any penalties, fees, and deposits have
been paid.



   (G)   Any water supply customer is entitled to one voluntary shut
off and one voluntary turn on of water supply service in a 12-month period
from the date of last turn on of service without being charged any fee. Such
voluntary shut off does not relieve the customer from paying base charges.
More than one of each in the 12-month period shall be charged at the
involuntary shut off or turn on rate, as applicable.



   (H)   The Village Council may set by resolution all fees, penalties,
and charges pertaining to the village water supply and sewage disposal
systems not set by Charter or ordinance.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-02-160)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWER SYSTEMS



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   General provisions



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Abbreviations



   52.04   Industrial cost recovery



   52.05   Protection from damage



   52.06   Powers of the Director



   52.07   Enforcement




Sewer Regulations




   52.20   Use of public sewer required



   52.21   Private sewage disposal



   52.22   Connection of private systems



   52.23   Industrial use of system



   52.24   Building sewers and connections with utilities



   52.25   Regulation of public sewers



   52.26   Main extension




Pretreatment




   52.40   Categorical standards



   52.41   Pretreatment generally



   52.42   Discharge permits



   52.43   Reporting requirements



 



   52.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Rates for Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Services, see Ch. 51



   Water and Sewer Systems Generally, see Ch. 50



   Water Supply Regulations, see Ch. 53




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 52.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Introduction. This chapter sets forth requirements for direct
and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system
for the village, and enables the village to comply with all applicable state
and federal laws, as required by the Clean Water Act of 1977, being 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq., and the general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. pts.
22 and 403), as amended.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system inadequately
treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;



      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewaters and sludges from the system; and



      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
municipal wastewater system.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-010)  (Ord. 146, passed 1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (Pub. Law No.
92-500), also known as the Clean Water Act,(Pub. Law No. 95-217), as amended,
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director in an NPDES state with an approved
state pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator of the
EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.



   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall. A BUILDING DRAIN is a component of that instrumentality
defined as a service lead in Public Act 109 of 2001, being M.C.L.A. §
691.1416.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal. A BUILDING SEWER is a component of that
instrumentality defined as a service lead in Public Act 109 of 2001, being
M.C.L.A. § 691.1416.



   BYPASS. An intentional diversion of any waste stream from any portion
of an industrial user’s treatment facility.



   CATEGORIZED STANDARDS. The national categorical pretreatment
standards/or pretreatment standard.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer, or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. A substance amenable to treatment in the village
wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus “additional pollutants”
identified in the NPDES permit of the village wastewater treatment works.



   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   COUNCIL. The Village Council.



   DELIVERY FLOW RATE CHARACTERISTICS. Information establishing rate of
flow during daily or weekly intervals, or portions of the day in unit-time
designation such as gallons per day and fluctuations.



   DEPARTMENT. The Village Department of Public Works.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.



   DIRECTOR. The Village Manager or his or her designee.



   DISCHARGE. Spilling, leaking, seeping, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, dumping, or depositing.



   DOMESTIC WASTES. Wastes normally emanating from residential living
units and resulting from the day-to-day activities usually considered to be
carried on in a domicile. Wastes emanating from other users which are to be
considered DOMESTIC WASTE shall be of the same nature and strength and have
the same flow rate characteristics.



   GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food and from handling, storage, and sale of produce.



   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regarded to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.



   GROUNDWATER. The water beneath the surface of the ground, whether or
not it flows through known or definite channels.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.



   IMPOUNDMENT. Any lake, reservoir, pond, or other containment of surface
water occupying a bed or depression in the earth’s surface and having a
discernible shoreline.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. All pollutants not defined as compatible.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under §§ 307(b), 307(d) of the Act or
308(c), being 33 U.S.C. 1317(b) and (d) or 33 U.S.C. § 1318(c), including
holding-tank waste discharged into the system.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery by the village from the industrial
users of the sewer system of the federal grant amount allocable to the
treatment of wastes from such users, pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 35.928.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD. Equal to 30 years from the date of
completion of the facilities.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-governmental, nonresidential user of the
publicly-owned treatment works, which discharges more than the equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day of normal domestic sewage (excluding domestic wastes
or discharges from sanitary conveniences) and which is identified under
Division A, B, C, D, E, or I of the Standards Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget. Also included in this
definition is any non-governmental user of the publicly-owned treatment works
which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic
pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge
of any municipal system or to injure or to interfere with any sewage
treatment process or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates
a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the
waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER. A source of indirect discharge.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, free-flowing waste, including cooling
water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources, with or without
suspended solids.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE USER. See INDUSTRIAL USER.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, that:



      (1)   Prohibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and



      (2)   Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTWs NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of the violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)
(including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., and including
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of SWDA) the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., and the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuary Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1401 et seq.



   LETTER OF INTENT. Notification from a significant industrial user to a
municipality of that user’s intent to utilize a publicly-owned treatment
facility for a given length of time.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industry that:



      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day; and



      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste.



   MDNR (OR DNR). The State Department of Natural Resources.



   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation
which contains pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)
and (c),  which applies to industrial users. These terms include the
prohibitive discharge limits listed in this chapter.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of any proposed pretreatment standards which
would be applicable to such source, if such standards are thereafter
promulgated provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same facility. In determining
whether the production or process is substantially independent, factors such
as, to what extent the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and
the extent which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as existing source(s), will be considered.



      (2)   Construction at a site in which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (1)(b) and (1)(c) above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process(es) or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE will be deemed to have
commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun or caused to begin as a part of a continuous
on-site construction program:



            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work, including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
the new source facilities or equipment.



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation so as to designate the commencement of construction.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. See definition of SEWAGE (WASTEWATER).



   PASS-THROUGH. A discharge which exits the village’s wastewater
treatment plant into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with the discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the village’s
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, cooperative, association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity. It does not include a governmental entity unless
specifically provided.



   PH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions.



   POLLUTION. The placing of any noxious or deleterious may be potentially
harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or aquatic life, or
property, or unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property,
including outdoor recreation.



   POTW. Any structure or facility owned and/or operated by the village
which is utilized in the storage, treatment, recycling, and/or reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial waste of liquid nature. This includes sewers,
pipes, and other conveyances that convey wastewater to the wastewater
treatment plant.



   PRETREATMENT. A reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharge or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into the village’s POTW. Reduction or alteration may be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes. Appropriate PRETREATMENT
technologies include control equipment, such as equalization tanks or
facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might
interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the village’s POTW. In the
event that wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization
facility with unregulated wastewater or wastewater from another regulated
process, effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
PRETREATMENT limit calculated by the village.



   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A system for disposal of domestic
sewage by means of a septic tank or mechanical treatment, designed for use
apart from a public sewer.



   PRODUCER. Any person who owns, operates, possesses, or controls an
establishment or plant, whether or not a permittee.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer that is owned and maintained by the village and,
where said sewer is so owned, said term shall be synonymous with sewage
disposal system as that term is defined in Public Act 109 of 2001, being
M.C.L.A. § 691.1416.



   REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR. One of the EPA regional administrators.



   RESERVE CAPACITY. The unused portion of the village’s POTW capacity
that has formally been set aside for use by a specific industry and is so
identified by a formal binding agreement. Factors such as strength, volume,
and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included when
determining the RESERVE CAPACITY to ensure a proportional distribution of the
cost recovery obligation.



   SALT. Sodium chloride and calcium chloride or a combination thereof in
solid or liquid form.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial waste/wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions.



   SERVICE LEAD. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
Public Act 170 of 1964, being M.C.L.A. § 691.1416(i) and shall include the
building drain and the building sewer as defined in this section.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. The same meaning as that term is defined in
Public Act 109 of 2001, being M.C.L.A., being § 691.1416.



   SEWAGE (WASTEWATER). Any liquid- or water-carried waste from
residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial, commercial, and
governmental establishments, watercraft or floating facilities, or other
places, together with such groundwater infiltration, surface waters, and
stormwaters as may be present.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and devices or structures
required for pumping, lifting, or collecting such sewage.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES). Pipelines or
conduits, pumping stations, and force mains and all other construction,
devices, appurtenances, and facilities used for collecting or conducting
waterborne sewage, industrial waste, or other wastes to a point of disposal
or treatment and including the water pollution control plant, including all
extensions and improvements thereto which may hereafter be acquired or
constructed. A SEWERAGE SYSTEM, not including the building drain and the
building sewer, as those terms are defined in this section, to the extent
owned by the village, shall constitute a sewage disposal system as that term
is defined in Public Act 109 of 2001, being M.C.L.A, being § 691.1416.



   SHALL. The term SHALL mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   All industrial users subject to the categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch.
N; and



      (2)   Any other industrial user that either:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of processed wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blow down wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the village on the basis
that industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
village’s POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement. Upon finding that an industrial user, designated as such for
possessing the potential to adversely affect the POTW operation, has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operations, the village
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from an industrial user, may determine that the industrial user is not a
significant industrial user.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in rate of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five or more times the
average rate for a 24-hour period during normal operation.



   SLUG LOADINGS.



      (1)   Any relatively large release of pollutant that you might
ordinarily release in smaller quantities, or



      (2)   A release of a chemical you aren’t permitted to
discharge.



   STANDARD METHODS. The most recent edition of Standard Methods of
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Director.



   STORM SEWER. Otherwise referred to as STORM DRAIN. A sewer intended to
carry only stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash water, subsoil drainage,
and non-contact cooling water.



   STREAM. Any river, creek, slough, or natural watercourse in which water
usually flows in a defined bed or channel. It is not essential that the flow
be uniform or uninterrupted.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the village to supervise the
operation of the publicly-owned treatment works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly
authorized representative.



   SURCHARGE. The additional charge, which a user discharging wastewater
of strength in excess of the limits for normal domestic sewage set by the
village for transmission and treatment, which the user of the sewerage system
will be required to pay to meet the cost of treating the excessive strength
wastewater.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   TENANT. A person who leases property from an owner.



   TEST METHODS (STANDARD METHODS). As specified in the latest edition of
Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Waste, U.S. EPA; Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, APHA; and Annual Book of
Standards, Part 23, Water Atmospheric Analysis, ASTM; Guidelines Establishing
Text Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, (October 13, 1973, Federal
Register).



   UPSET.



      (1)   An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user.



      (2)   An UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent it
is caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or
carelessness or improper operation.



   USER. Any person, establishment, or owner who discharges any domestic
sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary sewer system of the village or
any system connected thereto.



   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the sewage works for the cost
of operation, maintenance, and replacement of such works.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Holly, Michigan, a municipal corporation.



   WASTEWATER. Any liquid- or water-carried waste from residences,
business buildings, institutions, industrial, commercial, and governmental
establishments, watercraft or floating facilities, or other places, together
with such groundwater infiltration, surface waters, and stormwaters as may be
present.



   WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES. See SEWERAGE SYSTEM.



   WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any
arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of waste occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-020)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 146, passed
1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993; Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002)



§ 52.03  ABBREVIATIONS.



   Abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:



 




BOD

 

Biochemical oxygen demand




C.F.R.

 

Code of Federal Regulations




COD

 

Chemical oxygen demand




EPA

 

Environmental Protection Agency or EPA




l

 

Liter




mg

 

Milligrams




mg/l

 

Milligrams per liter




NPDES

 

National pollutant discharge elimination system




POTW

 

Publicly-owned treatment works




SIC

 

Standard industrial classification




SWDA

 

Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.




U.S.C.

 

United States Code




TSS

 

Total suspended soils





 



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-020)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 146, passed
1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993; Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002)



§ 52.04  INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   Generally. Existing or future industrial users, as identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, under Division A, B,
D, E, or I, that contribute process wastes and cooling water to the sanitary
sewer system of the village shall be charged a fee in proportion to the
amount of the federal grant which is allocable to the treatment of wastes
from those users. The fee to be assessed will be determined by flow and
strength. As a minimum, an industry’s share shall be proportional to its
flow in relation to treatment works flow capacity. In computing derivation of
charges for cost recovery, the following strength and volume units are used
as the basis of design.



 


Treatment

 

mg/l




BOD

 

250




Phosphorous

 

15




Suspended solids

 

300



Note:

The industrial cost recovery amount shall be equal to the amount of U.S. EPA
participation in project costs. An industrial user’s share shall include
only that portion of the grant assistance allocable to its use or to capacity
firmly committed for its use



 



   (B)   Amortization. All industries annual payment shall be amortized
over a 30-year cost recovery period and shall not include an interest
component.



   (C)   Exemption to cost recovery. Industrial users shall be exempt
in the cost recovery system if they are governmental users or discharge
primarily segregated domestic wastes or other wastes in volumes less than
25,000 gallons per day or equivalent strengths thereof, the latter being
calculated using the pollutant concentrations defined by the “normal
domestic sewage” in § 52.02.



   (D)   Domestic waste. Domestic wastes attributable to the employees
of the industrial facility (the maximum amount shall be 15 gallons per
employee per work shift) shall be exempt from the cost recovery system. Where
the industrial facility feels its employee domestic waste exceeds the
15-gallon exemption, such substantiation shall be submitted to the Director,
who shall review and make a determination as to the amount of exemption. Such
exemption shall be reviewed by the village on an annual basis, with new
substantiation of the allowed exemption being submitted to the village upon
request of the Director. The industrial user shall furnish, on a periodic
basis as established by the Director, a certified report indicating the
number of man days worked for that period. One man day shall be equal to one
employee working one normal work shift. This certified report shall be used
as the basis for establishing the exemption of domestic waste attributable to
employees of said industry.



   (E)   Monitoring categories. In order to determine the degree to
which users must be monitored, “major” and “minor” user categories
will be established. Classification of industry into such categories will be
at the option of the village, but industry may petition for reclassification
based on sound engineering study and/or certified independent laboratory
analysis. Major users will be monitored on a regular basis. Minor users will
be monitored only to the extent that such monitoring is reasonable insofar as
it is administratively effective to do so.



   (F)   Length of cost recovery period. The initiation of the cost
recovery period will be no later than 30 days after final acceptance of the
plant expansion project by the U.S. EPA.



   (G)   Annual submittal to the EPA by village of cost recovery
information. The village will, at annual intervals beginning one year after
the start of the industrial cost recovery period, submit the following to the
regional administrator:



      (1)   Information listing ICR amounts charged and collected
from industries during the preceding annual accounting period;



      (2)   Amount of payments being submitted to the federal
government for the period;



      (3)   Investments made and amount of interest earned during
the preceding annual accounting period;



      (4)   Fiscal status, including accrued interest earned on 80%
of all ICR amounts retained by the grantee since initiation of the ICR period;



      (5)   Certification by grantee that information submitted is
complete and correct and that grantee has complied with all provisions of the
approved ICR system; and



      (6)   A check for the annual payment to the U.S. EPA.



   (H)   Approval of revisions of ICR system by EPA. Significant
revisions of the approved ICR system must be submitted to and approved by the
regional administrator prior to implementation.



   (I)   Permit adjustment for change in strength. An industrial
user’s payment will be adjusted to reflect significant changes in strength
or volume so that the user pays its allocable share.



   (J)   Record retention. To accomplish compliance with the Act, the
following records will be maintained:



      (1)   Documentation of the final grant amount;



      (2)   The originally approved industrial cost recovery system
and all materials and correspondence related thereto;



      (3)   Any and all subsequently approved revisions to the
industrial cost recovery system and all materials and correspondence related
thereto;



      (4)   The grantees notification of initiation of operation of
the industrial cost recovery system;



      (5)   All annual submissions from the grantee;



      (6)   All material relating to approval(s) of the use of
retained funds; and



      (7)   The record of the grantee’s annual payments to the EPA.



   (K)   (1)   In order to determine the strength and volume of
user’s wastes, the village may require monitoring, control manholes,
control manhole locations, and right of inspection. It shall be the
obligation of the user to conduct a test on measuring equipment at least once
every 12 months or when required by the village to determine the accuracy,
and the results thereof shall be furnished in writing to the Director. It
shall also be the user’s responsibility to notify the Department within a
reasonable time in advance so that the Department may, if it chooses, have a
witness present during such test.



      (2)   If, upon any such test, the percentage of accuracy is
found to be within the accuracy tolerance as established by the
manufacturer’s specifications, such measuring equipment shall be determined
to have correctly measured the quantity delivered to the sewer system. If,
however, the percentage of accuracy tolerance is found to be outside the
accuracy tolerance as established by the manufacturer’s specifications,
then such measuring equipment shall be immediately adjusted to register
correctly the quantity delivered to the sewer system.



      (3)   The billings to such user shall be adjusted for a period
extending back to the time when the inaccuracy began, if such time is
ascertainable, or for a period extending back one-half of the time elapsed
since the date of the last test or the date of the last adjustment, if the
time is unascertainable.



   (L)   If, in the opinion of the Director, it is impractical or
infeasible for the producer to install a meter or meters to measure the
industrial waste being discharged into the sanitary sewer, the Director may
require that the village perform an engineering study to determine the
percentage of water being discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Such
engineering study, when approved by the Director, shall constitute the basis
upon which the ICR established by this chapter shall be computed, and the
costs of such a study shall be borne by the user.



   (M)   Where it is not administratively feasible to meter the
quantity of sewage delivered to the village sewers, the volume will be
construed as being the same as the water delivered to the user by the village
water system unless otherwise provided.



   (N)   Determination of the average concentration or strength of the
waste delivered shall be the obligation of the user. Analysis shall be made
on representative samples collected by the user or his or her agent and at
such intervals as the village may designate, but not less than annually. Cost
of all testing shall be at the user’s expense. The village may conduct
multiple discharge analysis or require multiple discharge analysis from an
independent testing laboratory. Sampling will be conducted according to
accepted methods. Composite or grab sampling, depending on the user’s
process, may be used.



   (O)   (1)   The user’s annual cost will be determined by volume
and strength. Specific values for volume, BOD, SS, and phosphorous will be
derived by dividing the federal grant cost component attributable to each of
the basic design parameters so that a cost is derived per 100 cubic feet of
volume and per pound for suspended solids, BOD, and phosphorous.



      (2)   The village, by ordinance, shall establish unit charges
to be used in computing the industrial cost recovery share after obtaining
the recommendation of the village engineers.



      (3)   Revenues collected for industrial cost recovery under
this chapter shall be deposited in one of the following accounts:



         (a)   Industrial Cost Recovery Fund: federal;



         (b)   Industrial Cost Recovery Fund: local; and



         (c)   Receiving Fund: Water and Sewer Fund.



      (4)   Revenues shall be deposited to the aforementioned
accounts in the following manner:



         (a)   Fifty percent of all revenue collected shall be
deposited in the Federal Industrial Cost Recovery Fund;



         (b)   Eighty percent of the remaining revenues shall be
deposited in the Local Industrial Cost Recovery Fund; and



         (c)   All remaining revenues shall be deposited in the
Water and Sewer Receiving Fund.



      (5)   Revenues collected under this chapter shall be
restricted and may be transferred and disbursed only as provided hereinafter
in this chapter.



      (6)   Once a year, on an annual basis, the month of which will
be agreed upon between the Director and the EPA, all amounts deposited to the
federal industrial cost recovery fund, plus all interest earned thereon shall
be returned to the U.S. Treasury in a manner as may be prescribed by the U.S.
Treasurer or his or her designee.



      (7)   Amounts deposited in the local industrial cost recovery
fund, plus all interest earned thereon, may not be transferred or otherwise
expended from this fund for any purpose whatsoever, except by resolution of
the Village Council with written approval of the regional administrator of
the U.S. EPA and then only for the purpose of the expansion and/or
reconstruction of water pollution control facilities.



      (8)   (a)   Amounts deposited to the receiving fund may be
transferred or otherwise expended to meet any obligation of the sewer fund,
provided, however, these funds may not be used to reduce sewer user charges
or industrial cost recovery amounts for any person or firm.



         (b)   Pending use as provided elsewhere in any
applicable rule or regulation, all amounts deposited to local industrial cost
recovery fund for reconstruction and/or expansion shall be invested in:



            1.   Obligations of the U.S. government; or



            2.   Obligations of any agency thereof:



            3.   Shall deposit such amounts in accounts fully
collateralized by obligations of the U.S. government or by obligations full
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. government or any agency
thereof.



   (P)   Billing of ICR charges. Charges for ICR shall be billed and
collected on an annual basis. Bills shall be rendered at least 25 days prior
to the due date. The initial bill to be rendered shall be not later than one
year and 30 days after final acceptance of the property by the U.S. EPA. All
subsequent bills shall be rendered on an annual basis within the
aforementioned 30-day period.



   (Q)   Penalty for late payment. If ICR charges are not paid on or
before the due date, there shall be assessed a late charge of 5%. If ICR
charges are not paid within 30 days after the due date thereof, the water
services to such premises may be discontinued; and if such water is obtained
from a source or sources of supply other than the village’s water supply
system, the discharge thereof into the village’s sewage disposal system
shall be illegal and the owner of said property subject to fine or
imprisonment, as is herein provided for violation of any applicable rule or
regulation.



   (R)   Creation of lien for nonpayment of ICR charges. Charges for
ICR to any premises shall be a lien thereon, and during April of each year
the person or agency charged with the management of said system shall certify
that such charge which as of April 1 of that year has been delinquent six
months or more to the Village Assessor who shall enter the same upon the
village tax roll of that year against the premises to which such service has
been rendered, and such charges shall be collected and said lien shall be
enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon
such roll; provided that when a tenant is responsible for payment of any such
charge against and premises located within the boundary of the village and
the Village Council is so notified in writing, with a true copy of the lease
of the affected property (if there be one) attached, then so such charge
shall become a lien against such premises from and after the date of such
notice; however, in the event of the filing of such notice, no further
service shall be rendered by the system to such premises until a cash deposit
not to exceed three times the average annual charge to such premises shall
have been made as security for the payment of charges thereto.



   (S)   Requirement of deposit to ensure payment of ICR charges by
users located out of village limits. In the case of premises located outside
the corporate limits of the village, which premises are subject to the
village industrial cost recovery system, the owners of such premises shall at
all times be liable for such charges and shall make such deposit to ensure
payment of charges as the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall require.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-130)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)



§ 52.05  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   (A)   Powers of the police. No person shall maliciously willfully or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.



   (B)   Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the village by reason of such violation.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-160)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.06  POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   Right of entry. The Director shall be permitted to enter all
properties for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not
an easement has been granted. The Director shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the property as a source of discharge to the sewage system or
waterways.



   (B)   Hold harmless. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to herein, the Director shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall
be held harmless for injury or death to village employees, and the village
shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to its property by village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the person and growing out of the gauging,
sampling operations, and inspections, except as such maybe caused by
negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions as required
herein.



   (C)   Easements. The Director and other duly authorized employees of
the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the public sewage works staying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.



   (D)   Sampling and testing.



      (1)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter may be made in accordance with test methods, as defined in this
chapter, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of the constituents upon the sewage
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.



      (2)   The particular analysis involved will determine whether
a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate, or whether
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-170)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Harmful contributions.



      (1)   The village may suspend the wastewater treatment service
and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the village, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or
causes interference to the POTW or causes the village to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.



      (2)   Any person notified of the suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the village shall take such
steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals.



      (3)   The village shall reinstate the user contribution permit
and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the village within 15
days of the date of occurrence.



   (B)   Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following
conditions of this section, or applicable state and federal regulations, is
subject to having his or her permit revoked in accordance with the procedures
of this chapter:



      (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable accesses to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



   (C)   Notification of violations. Whenever the village finds that
any user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater contribution
permit, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained herein, the
village may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the
violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the village by the user.



   (D)   Show cause hearing.



      (1)   The village may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Village
Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice
shall be service on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be
held by the Village Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the
user to show cause before the Village Council why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation.



      (2)   The Village Council may itself conduct the hearing and
take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the (assigned Department) to:



         (a)   Issue in the name of the Village Council, notices
of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;



         (b)   Take the evidence; and



         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Village Council for action thereon.



      (3)   At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded electronically or stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public
or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.



      (4)   After the Village Council has reviewed the evidence, it
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances shall
have been installed on existing treatment faculties, and that such devices or
other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.



   (E)   Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes into the village’s wastewater disposal system
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal, or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the village, the Village Attorney may commence
an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the County Circuit
Court. For this division (E), the term CONTRARY TO THE PROVISION OF THIS
CHAPTER, includes, but is not limited to, refusal of entry to allow or carry
out inspections, or monitoring activities, any rules, regulations, or orders
issued by the POTW, any requirements set forth in the permit issued by the
village or any reporting requirements imposed by the POTW.



   (F)   Falsifying information. No person shall knowingly make any
false statements, representation, or certification in any application,
record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater contribution permit. No person shall
falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this chapter.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-140)  (Ord. 146, passed 1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)  Penalty, see § 52.99




SEWER REGULATIONS




§ 52.20  USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.



   (A)   Unlawful discharge. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, discharge, or permit to be discharged in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other waste or wastewater, unless licensed to do so by the village or as
controlled by other ordinances.



   (B)   Discharge to natural outlet. It shall be unlawful to discharge
to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said village, or in any area covered by an agreement provided
for in § 50.01, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter and the standards of the State Department of Natural Resources.



   (C)   Private wastewater disposal. Except as hereinafter provided,
it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater.



   (D)   Mandatory connection.



      (1)   All property with primary structures, as defined Ch.
157, or, in the case of properties outside the boundaries of the village
covered by an agreement referenced in § 50.01, all property with primary
structures as defined in the zoning ordinance of the governmental entity
having zoning jurisdiction over said property, shall connect to the
village’s sewage disposal system, provided, a public sanitary sewer main is
within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property from which sewage originates and
there is sufficient capacity in the sewage disposal system. All expenses to
plumb the structure for connection and to construct the building sewer line
for connection to the public sanitary sewer main shall be borne by the
property owner.



      (2)   Properties with primary structures not connected to a
public sanitary sewer main and meeting the criteria for connection shall
connect to one within 90 days of receipt of a notice from the Village Council
to do so. Property owners have 21 days from receipt of the notice to request
a waiver from the Village Council from the requirement to connect.



      (3)   Upon an application from the property owner, the Village
Council may waive the mandatory connection requirement on the basis of unique
circumstances when an alternative sewage disposal system provided for in this
chapter is used. The Council may limit the time period or attach any
reasonable conditions to the granted waiver. Council will enter into the
record the reasons for approving or denying the waiver with any applicable
time limitations and conditions.



   (E)   Unlawful use. No person shall discharge any waste or other
substance directly into a manhole, catch basin, or sewer inlet. All
discharges to the sewer shall be through a sewer connection. Nothing in this
provision shall restrict the use of a catch basin for stormwater in the storm
sewer system.



   (F)   Private treatment permit. Where treatment is provided prior to
discharge into any natural outlet, a permit for such discharge shall be
obtained from the Director and shall be renewed each year. The fees charged
for issuance and renewal of the permit shall be set by the Village Council.
The person receiving the permit shall show the character of the discharge by
type and quantity of all compatible and incompatible pollutants. Provisions
shall be made for observing treatment facilities and testing discharge for
the use of the Director.



   (G)   Stormwater discharge permit. A permit shall be required for
all stormwater and uncontaminated wastewater connections to any natural
outlet in the village or any area under the jurisdiction of the village.
Adequate provisions shall be made for observing and testing at each such
connection.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-030)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 221, passed
2-25-1992; Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993; Ord. 352, passed 11-10-2002) 
Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.21  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Allowed use of private sewage disposal. Where a public
sanitary or combined sewer is not available or when the Village Council has
waived connection to such system under the provisions of this chapter, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, other ordinances of the
village, or the Plumbing Code, Public Act 733 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §
338.3511, currently administered by the village, as appropriate.



   (B)   Private disposal permit. No person shall construct or install
a private sewage disposal system without first applying to the County Health
Department for and obtaining a permit to construct and operate the system.



   (C)   Inspections required. A permit to operate a private sewage
disposal system shall not become effective until such installation is
approved by the County Health Department, which shall be allowed to inspect
such system at any state of construction. The applicant for the permit shall
notify the Director and the County Health Department when the system is
completed and ready for final inspection, but before any underground portions
are covered.



   (D)   Health requirements. The type, capacity, location, and layout
of any private sewage disposal system shall comply with the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Health and the County Department of
Public Health.



   (E)   Illegal discharge. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge into any impoundment, stream, surface water, or other
watercourse.



   (F)   Required abandonment of private facilities. At such time as
the public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in this chapter, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in accordance with this chapter, and any septic
tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned, pumped dry, and filled with suitable material such as sand,
gravel, or concrete.



   (G)   Continual operation. The owner of a private sewage disposal
facility shall maintain and operate such facility in a sanitary manner at all
times.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-040)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)



§ 52.22  CONNECTION OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS.



   Before any sanitary sewer system constructed by private, as
distinguished from public funding (hereinafter referred to as the “private
sanitary sewer”), shall be permitted to connect to the system, the owner of
said system (hereinafter referred to as “developer”), shall do and
provide the village with the following:



   (A)   Provide the village with the developer’s plans and
specifications for construction, an estimate of the cost of construction, a
performance bond and deposit with the village the estimated cost of review of
the construction plan, to cover the cost of hiring a registered professional
engineer to review plans and specifications, which monies shall be placed by
the village in an escrow account in the name of said developer;



   (B)   Obtain approval of the village of the plans and specifications;



   (C)   Secure all necessary permits for construction;



   (D)   Upon commencement of construction of the private sanitary
sewer, deposit with the village in the escrow account referred to in division
(A) above, a sum of 4% of the cost of construction of the wastewater system
improvements to cover the anticipated cost of inspection of construction and
payment of connection charges; and



   (E)   Upon completion of connection of the private sanitary sewer to
the system, the performance bond, upon recommendation of the Villages
Engineer and approval of the Village Council, shall be released and any
monies remaining in the developer’s escrow account shall be returned to the
developer. Any additional expenses incurred by the village in assuring the
village that the private sanitary sewer is properly operating shall be
deducted therefrom or charged directly to the developer, at the option of the
village.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-050)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980)



§ 52.23  INDUSTRIAL USE OF SYSTEM.



   Any industry or structure discharging or desiring to discharge
industrial waste to the system shall provide the village with the following
information or material and do the following:



   (A)   A written statement setting forth the nature of the
enterprise, the source and amount of water used; the amount of water to be
discharged, with its present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical,
radioactive; or other pertinent characteristics of the wastes;



   (B)   A plan map of the building, works, or complex, with each
outfall to the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural
watercourse, or groundwater noted, described and the waste stream identified;



   (C)   A test sample, and shall file reports with the village and the
appropriate state agencies on appropriate characteristics of wastes on a
schedule, at locations and according to methods approved by the village;



   (D)   Place waste treatment facilities, process faculties, waste
streams, or other potential waste problems under the specific supervision and
control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as
properly qualified to supervise such facilities;



   (E)   A report on raw materials entering the process or support
systems, intermediate materials, final products, and waste by-products, as
these factors may pertain to waste control;



   (F)   Maintain records and file reports on the final disposal of
specific liquid, solid, sludge, oils, radioactive materials, solvents, or
other waste; and



   (G)   If any industrial process is to be altered as to include or
negate a process waste or potential waste, written notification shall be
given to the village, subject to approval of the waste product.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-060)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 227, passed
1-26-1993)



§ 52.24  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS WITH UTILITIES.



   (A)   Connection permit required. No person may construct a building
sewer and connect it to the village’s sewage disposal system without first
receiving permission from the village. Application shall be made to the
village on its forms at least seven days before the requested connection
date. No application shall be accepted unless accompanied by the required
fee. Failure to submit the application timely may result in delays, but may
not be the basis for rejection of the application.



   (B)   Responsibility.



      (1)   The property owner is responsible for maintaining and
preserving the good working conditions of the building sewer line up to and
including the connection to the public sanitary sewer main or other proper
sewage disposal point.



      (2)   If any building sewer line, or any portion thereof
passes over or through premises which at the time of installation are the
property of persons other than the owner of the premises to be served by the
building sewer line, evidence of an easement acceptable to the village must
be presented to the village before a connection permit may be issued for such
line. The easement shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds at the
expense of the owner being served.



   (C)   Sewer requirements.



      (1)   All sewer connections shall be made with approved sewer
pipe, not less than six inches in diameter, and at such locations in the
public sewers where branches, wyes, or tees were placed for that purpose, if
any. Where there are no branches, wyes, or tees, the sewer may, for the
purpose of making connections, be tapped under the direction and supervision
of the Director and the connection shall be made by a saddle device approved
by the Director.



      (2)   All work for the purpose of making sewer and water
connections shall be done in compliance with the rules and regulations
adopted by the village and the Plumbing Code, Public Act 733 of 2002, being
M.C.L.A. § 338.3511, enforced by the village. The materials of construction
and construction methods must meet the requirements of the village.



      (3)   Whenever any existing sewer connections have been made
with pipe smaller than six inches in internal diameter, then a stub
connection not less than six inches in internal diameter shall be constructed
from the main to the property line to serve such premises; however, the owner
of any lot or parcel of land having a sewer connection of less than six
inches internal diameter shall not be required to connect to the new stub
connection until such time as existing connection is inadequate or requires
repairing in public property.



      (4)   In no case shall the village issue a permit to repair an
existing connection less than six inches in diameter under a pavement or
gravel street where a six-inch stub line has been constructed, and if there
is no six-inch stub line constructed, then the connection of less than six
inches in diameter shall be replaced with a six-inch tile at the time when
replacements or repair become necessary.



   (D)   Failure to connect. In the event the owner of a parcel of land
fails to connect within the time permitted by the State Public Health Code,
Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq. the village
shall proceed to take such action as is authorized by the said Public Health
Code to require the connection.



   (E)   Deferment of connection fee. Property owners, by reason of
financial hardship, who are unable to pay the connection fee, may request to
have the fee deferred until a later time under the following conditions and
according to policies adopted by Council from time to time:



      (1)   Paying such fee would, by reason of age, indigency, or
any other factor affecting ability to pay, tend to cause the property owner
to become a public charge, or would otherwise work undue hardship upon the
property owner;



      (2)   Deferring the connection fee from collection would not
impair the financial standing of the village or the village’s sewage
disposal system;



      (3)   Deferring the collection of the connection fee is in the
best interest of the village; and



      (4)   No connection fee shall be deferred unless the property
owners execute a note to the village secured by a real estate mortgage of the
property being connected in order to ensure the eventual payment of the fee
with the following conditions:



         (a)   The balance(s) due upon any other mortgages that
are liens on the property to be connected and that have precedence over the
village’s mortgages are such as to leave a sufficient equity in the
property as to provide adequate protection and security to the village for
the eventual payment;



         (b)   The note and mortgage may provide for an extension
beyond the death of the mortgagor if necessary to protect the homestead of a
surviving spouse or other dependent of the mortgagor;



         (c)   The note may bear interest at a rate determined by
the Village Council;



         (d)   The note shall be payable in such number of years
as the Village Council may determine, but in any event, shall be due and
payable in full upon the death of the mortgagors or the sale of the property;



         (e)   The note shall provide that failure to pay real
property taxes upon or personal property taxes in connection with the
mortgaged property may be grounds for acceleration of the due date of such
note and mortgage; and



         (f)   The note shall require the mortgagor to keep the
real property insured with companies and in amounts acceptable to the village.



   (F)   Permit information. The Director shall keep a record of all
permits granted under the authority of this chapter which shall include the
name of the applicant and contractor, the location of the work, and the place
in the street where the connection is to be made.



   (G)   Transferability of connection permits. Connection permits are
issued for a specific property and are not transferable from one property to
another. A permit runs with the land and stays with the property for which
the permit was issued.



   (H)   Issuing connection permits to applicants outside village
limits. Except as may be otherwise provided in a separate written agreement
approved by no less than five of seven members of the Village Council, as
provided for in section §§ 50.01 and 51.02, when application is made for
permission to connect premises located outside of the village limits to the
village’s sanitary sewer system, the Village Council may authorize the
Village Manager to giant a permit for said connection upon the following
terms and conditions:



      (1)   The premises for which the connection application is
made abuts or is adjacent to a public right-of-way where a properly sized
sanitary sewer main exists;



      (2)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
submits with the application written permission from the governmental unit in
which the premises are located to make the connection and an agreement from
the governmental unit that it will place any delinquent sewage disposal
charges, plus interest and penalties on the real property taxes of this
property according to the procedures contained in Public Acts 94 of 1933,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 et seq., as amended;



      (3)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
acknowledges that all plumbing facilities within the building to be connected
are installed according to the Plumbing Code, Public Act 733 of 2002, being
M.C.L.A. 338.3511, currently enforced by the village;



      (4)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
agrees to place a water meter in a location that meets village requirements;



      (5)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
agrees to install in the building sewer line at or near the public
right-of-way line an approved mechanism that can be accessed only by the
village and that, when accessed, will stop the flow of waste to the sanitary
sewer main;



      (6)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
agrees to be bound by the rules and regulations of the village for the
furnishing of sewage disposal service to the connected building, including
rates, fees, and charges; and



      (7)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
shall pay at the time of application a connection fee equal to 200% of the
connection permit fee charged to premises situated within the village limits.



   (I)   Separate sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
line shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
courtyard, easement, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building, and the whole shall be considered as
one building sewer. No privately-owned sewer line, whether said line is
located on the property being connected to the sewage disposal system, on the
property of another as provided for in an easement, or in a public
right-of-way shall be used to connect more than one premises.



   (J)    Work on private property. Excavation and backfill for
building sewers on private property may be made by the owner. Connections and
installation of the building sewer on private property shall be made by a
licensed plumbing contractor or licensed sewer contractor.



   (K)   New use of existing sewers. Existing building sewers may be
used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the village, to meet all requirements of this chapter.



   (L)   Elevation of connection. Whenever possible, the building sewer
shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In
all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by means approved by the Director and discharged to the building sewer.



   (M)   Prohibited surface runoff connections. No person or owner
shall make connection of roof downspouts, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (N)   Prohibited groundwater connections. Exterior foundation drain
or other sources of groundwater shall not be connected to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-070)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)



§ 52.25  REGULATION OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   Limits.



      (1)   Use of public sewers shall be limited to those
discharges that are not harmful to the public sewerage system, the sewage
treatment plant, or the stream receiving the sewage treatment plant effluent.



      (2)   In the event that natural or human-made discharge(s)
(including new, increased contributions or changes in the nature of
pollutants) are detrimental to the water pollution control facilities, or to
the public health and welfare of the community, or do not meet applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such occurrences would cause
the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, any such discharge(s) could be
prohibited, wholly, or in part, at any time.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge.



      (1)   Except as herein provided, a user shall not introduce
into the POTW any pollutant(s) which cause “pass-through” or
“interference”, as defined in § 52.02. These general prohibitions and
the specific prohibitions in division (B)(2)(b) below apply to each user
introducing pollutants to the POTW whether or not the user is subject to
other national pretreatment standards, or any national, state, or local
pretreatment requirements.



      (2)   Further, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes, directly or
indirectly, to any public sewer:



         (a)   Broadly, any water or waste will be prohibited
that may cause damaging, hazardous, or unhealthful effects by:



            1.   Reacting chemically, either directly or
indirectly, with the water pollution control works;



            2.   Having a mechanical action that will destroy
or damage the water pollution control facilities;



            3.   Restricting the hydraulic capacity of the
water pollution control facilities;



            4.   Restricting the normal inspection or
maintenance of the water pollution control facilities;



            5.   Placing unusual demands on the water
pollution control facilities or process;



            6.   Limiting the effectiveness of the water
pollution control process;



            7.   Being dangerous to public health or safety; or



            8.   Causing obnoxious conditions contrary to the
public interest.



         (b)   Specifically, any of the following wastes shall be
prohibited:



            1.   Having a pH below six or above nine;



            2.   Containing more than ten mg/l of gases listed
in division (B)(2)(b)3. below;



            3.   Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, oxides of
nitrogen, or any of the halogens;



            4.   Containing any explosive liquid, solid, or
gas;



            5.   Containing any flammable substances with a
flash point lower than 187°F;



            6.   Having a temperature below 32°F (0°C) or
heat in amounts which would inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting
in interference, but in no case, heat in such quantities that the temperature
exceeds 104°F (40°C) at the head of the sewage treatment plant;



            7.   Containing grease or oil or other
substance(s) that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures below
100°F;



            8.   Containing an insoluble substance(s) in
excess of 10,000 mg/l;



            9.   Containing total solids (soluble or
insoluble) in excess of 20,000 mg/l;



            10.   Containing a soluble substance(s) in
concentrations that could increase the viscosity to greater than one and
one-tenth specific viscosity;



            11.   Containing an insoluble substance(s) having
a specific gravity greater than two and sixty-five hundredths;



            12.   Containing insoluble substance(s) that will
fail to pass a No. 8 standard sieve, or having any dimension greater than
one-half inch;



            13.   Containing gases or vapors, either free or
occluded, in concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals;



            14.   Having a chlorine demand greater than 15
mg/l in 30 minutes;



            15.   Containing more than five mg/l of any
antiseptic substance;



            16.   Containing phenols in excess of two-tenths
mg/l or as approved by the State Water Resources Commission;



            17.   Containing any toxic or irritation substance
which will create conditions hazardous to public health and safety;



            18.   Containing grease, oil, or any oil substance
exceeding 100 mg/l;



            19.   Containing radioactive wastes or isotopes;



            20.   Being of sufficient flow or concentration or
both to be defined as a slug under this chapter;



            21.   Containing any sludge or precipitates or
extractions resulting from any industrial or commercial treatment or
pretreatment of any wastes of such;



            22.   Containing any wastes of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required for processing;



            23.   Having discharge concentrations of
incompatible pollutants exceeding the standards of the latest published
guideline established by the state and federal governments for the effluent
of the village treatment plant as provided in this chapter;



            24.   Pollutants which create a fire of explosive
hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed
cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C, using the test methods specified
in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;



            25.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting
oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
“interference” or “pass-through”, as defined in this § 52.02;



            26.   Pollutants which result in the presence of
toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;



            27.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the POTW;



            28.   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which
will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; or



            29.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding
pollutants, released in a discharge at flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.



         (c)   1.   The following pollutant limits are
established to protect against pass-through and interference.



            2.   No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable
discharge limits.



 


Pollutant

 

Limit, mg/l






Arsenic

 

0.16




Cadmium

 

0.71




Chromium

 

41.7




Cyanide

 

2.3




Lead

 

3.4




Mercury

 

Non-detectable *




Molybdenum

 

24.8




Nickel

 

16.1




Selenium

 

0.988




Silver

 

0.27




Zinc

 

14



* is equal to 0.5 ng/l




 



            3.   No person shall discharge wastewater
containing pollutants in excess of the local limits for those pollutants
which have been established for the Village’s Wastewater Treatment Plant
(WWTP) using standard procedures, calculations, and methods acceptable to
protect against pass-through, interference, protection of village employees,
and adverse effects on wastewater residuals disposal. No industrial user
shall discharge process waste streams, unregulated waste streams, or dilute
waste streams in excess of the concentrations set forth by the Director.
Local limits shall be included as permit conditions and attached to each SIU
wastewater permit issued.



            4.   The established local limits are subject to
change and shall be modified as needed based on regulatory requirements and
standards, Wastewater Treatment Plant operation, performance, and processes,
the industrial user base, potable water quality, and domestic wastewater
characteristics.



Modifications to the established local limits must be reviewed and approved
by State Department of Natural Resources and Environment (MDNRE) prior to
implementation. Implementation shall be effective 30 days from notice of
acceptance of the modified limits by MDNRE. Permitted SIUs shall also be
issued an addendum to their wastewater discharge permit containing the new
local limits. The established local limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the WWTP. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. At his or her or
her discretion, the Director may impose mass limitations in addition to or in
place of the concentration-based limitations.



               a.   The local discharge limitation for
mercury is established at the level of detection in accordance with the
following.



                  i.   There shall be no detectable
amounts of mercury discharged to the village sanitary sewer. Mercury sampling
procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance
monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA Method 245. 1. The level of
detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 C.F.R.
pt 136, shall not exceed 0.2 mg/l for Mercury, unless higher levels are
appropriate due to matrix interference.



                  ii.   The evaluation of potential
matrix interference(s) shall include, at a minimum, the following:



                     A.   A demonstration that the
laboratory conducting the analysis is capable of achieving the level of
detection of 0.2 mg/l in reagent water;



                     B.   A demonstration that the
level of detection of 0.2 mg/l cannot be achieved in the effluent; and



                     C.   A demonstration that an
attempt has been made to resolve the matrix interference(s).



               b.   In cases where true matrix
interference(s) can be demonstrated, a discharge specific level of detection
will be developed in accordance with the procedure in 40 C.F.R. pt 136.
Discharge specific levels of detection will be incorporated into the
wastewater discharge permit of the nondomestic user.



               c.   Concentrations apply at the point where
the industrial waste is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for
metallic substances are for total metal, unless indicated otherwise.



            d.   At his or her discretion, the Superintendent,
may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration
based limitations above.



         (d)   The user shall have an affirmative defense in any
action bought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibition and
specific prohibitions established above in this division (B)(2)(d) if the
user can demonstrate that it did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge(s) from other sources,
would cause pass-through and/or interference, and:



            1.   A local limit designed to prevent
pass-through and/or interference has been developed by the POTW for each
pollutant in the user’s discharge that caused the pass-through and/or
interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit
directly prior to and during the pass-through and/or interference; or



            2.   A local limit designed to prevent
pass-through and/or interference has not been developed for pollutants that
caused the pass-through and/or interference, and the user’s discharge
directly prior to and during the pass-through and/or interference did not
change substantially in the nature or constituency from the users prior
discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the
POTW’s NPDES permit requirements, and in the case of interference,
applicable requirements for sewage, sludge use, or disposal.



   (C)   Point of application. The above preceding standards and
regulations, unless otherwise noted, are to apply at the point where the
wastes are discharged into a public sewer, and all chemical and/or mechanical
corrective treatment must be accomplished to practical completion before this
point is reached.



   (D)   Effluent limitations.



      (1)   In cases where pollutants contributed by user(s) result
in interference or pass-through and such violations are likely to reoccur,
the village may develop and enforce specific effluent limitations for
industrial user(s) and all other users as appropriate together with
appropriate changes in the POTW treatment plant, facilities or operations
which are necessary to ensure continued compliance with the POTW’s NPDES
permit or sludge use or disposal practices.



      (2)   If the village operates under this section and sets
specific effluent limitations, they shall not be developed nor enforced
without individual notice to groups who have requested such notice and those
individuals have had an opportunity to respond to the proposed effluent
limitations.



   (E)   Pretreatment standards required by state law. Nothing in this
chapter is intended to affect any pretreatment requirements, including
standards or prohibitions established by the state or local law, as long as
the state or local requirements are not less stringent than those set forth
in the national pretreatment standards, or any other requirements or
prohibitions established under the Act.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-080)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 146, passed
1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 52.26  MAIN EXTENSION.



   (A)   (1)   Anyone owning or having a legal interest in property
within the village limits, or on property outside of the village limits which
is the subject of a separate written agreement referenced in §§ 50.01 and
50.02, may request, on forms provided by the village, to construct an
extension of an already existing sanitary sewer main to that property.



      (2)   Owners of or anyone having a legal interest in property
outside the village limits making a request to construct an extension of an
already existing sanitary sewer main to that property are subject to the
additional requirement of § 50.02.



   (B)   When an extension is approved, such work shall be done under
the inspection of the village, its employees, or agents and to the
village’s specifications. The village has the exclusive right to determine
the type and size of mains and appurtenances required to render adequate
sewage disposal service. The expenses of any main extension shall be borne
entirely by the applicant.



   (C)   With the application for a main extension, the applicant shall
submit construction-type plans and drawings for review by the village. These
plans and drawings shall follow the requirements for such mains as contained
in the village’s subdivision regulations.



   (D)   Within ten days of approval of the extension, the developer
shall deposit a financial guarantee with the village. The nature, scope, and
amount of such guarantee shall follow the procedure adopted in the zoning
ordinance for financial guarantees.



   (E)   Among other factors contained in this chapter, the criteria to
be taken into consideration for a main extension are as follows.



      (1)   All extensions of mains shall be done in a public
right-of-way, unless specifically waived by the Village Council. Previously
recorded easements in plats or other evidence of prior intent to construct a
main in non-right-of-way area may be considered among other reasons by the
Village Council in granting a waiver.



      (2)   In determining the length of and necessity for any
extension requested, the end point of such extension shall be at the farthest
point of the most distant lot to be served.



   (F)   The Village Council by special action may grant an exception
to the main extension regulations and the charges deriving from those
regulations. The granting of a particular application for an exception to
these main extension regulations, or the charges and fees deriving therefrom
shall not be construed as a precedent in any other case.



   (G)   Upon completion of a privately financed main extension and
acknowledgment by the Village Manager that the construction was done
satisfactorily, the applicant shall convey ownership of the main extension to
the village and, upon acceptance thereof by the Village Council, it shall
become part of the village’s sewage disposal system.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-085)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)




PRETREATMENT




§ 52.40  CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Federal categorical pretreatment standards.



      (1)   (a)   National pretreatment standards specifying
quantities or concentrations of pollutant or pollutant properties which may
be discharged to a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific
industrial subcategories are set forth under 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N. These
standards, unless specifically noted otherwise, shall be in addition to all
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements established by national,
state or local law.



         (b)   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical
pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this chapter. The Superintendent shall notify all affected
users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. An
existing source shall comply with a categorical pretreatment standard within
three years of the date the standard becomes effective unless a shorter time
is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N.



         (c)   Unless it meets the definition of a “new
source”, as defined in § 52.02, any existing source which becomes an
industrial user subsequent of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard
shall be considered an existing industrial user. New sources shall install
and start up all pollution control equipment required to meet all applicable
pretreatment standards prior to discharging to the POTW. Within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable
pretreatment standards.



      (2)   (a)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment
standard are expressed in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production,
the village may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed as
mass of pollutant discharge per day of effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to an individual industrial user.



         (b)   Any equivalent limitation promulgated by the
village shall be deemed a pretreatment standard for the purpose of § 307(d)
of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d). Users will then be required to comply
with equivalent limitations in lieu of any promulgated categorical standard
from which the equivalent limitation was derived.



   (B)   Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards.



      (1)   Where the village’s wastewater treatment system
achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment
standards, the village may apply to the approval authority for modification
of specific standards.



      (2)   CONSISTENT REMOVAL shall mean reduction in the amount of
pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is
achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured according to
the procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7(c)(2), (see C.F.R. pt. 403,
“general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of
pollution”), promulgated pursuant to the Act. The village may then modify
pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the
requirements contained in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, are fulfilled and prior
approval from the Approval Authority is obtained.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-090)  (Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 52.41  PRETREATMENT GENERALLY.



   (A)   Discharge permit. Persons who discharge incompatible
pollutants or compatible pollutants to the public sanitary sewer in excess of
the limits established in this chapter, or as amended, shall obtain a
discharge permit in accordance with this chapter, and provide pretreatment of
their discharge at their expense in accordance with this chapter. Persons who
provide pretreatment shall obtain a discharge permit from the Director.
Grease, oil, and sand traps required by the Director shall be installed at no
expense to the village.



   (B)   Dilution. Attainment of allowed concentration shall not be
achieved by increased use of process water or any other attempt to dilute as
a partial, complete, or substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with any provision of this chapter, unless expressly authorized by
an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.



   (C)   Incompatible pollutants.



      (1)   Persons discharging incompatible pollutants, other than
those described in this chapter, which are strictly prohibited from being
discharged into the sewerage system, shall reduce their incompatible
pollutants to levels attainable through the application of the best
practicable control technology currently available, as defined in § 304(b)
of the Federal Water Pollution Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-550),
being 33 U.S.C. § 1314(b), unless otherwise indicated in the discharge
permit.



      (2)   If it is found by the Director that certain incompatible
pollutants can be reliably removed by the treatment plant, the Director may
enter into a contract with the person making the discharge for the purpose of
treatment of the pollutants for a fee or extra strength surcharge and allow
the discharge. This shall be so indicated in the discharge permit. This
credit may be rescinded at any time. All persons discharging or proposing to
discharge any toxic pollutant, as defined by § 307(a)(1) of the Federal
Water Pollution Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), shall apply for permission
for such discharge from the Director.



   (D)   Excess pollutants.



      (1)   Persons discharging pollutants in excess of the limits
listed below shall be subject to review by the Director. The Director shall
determine the type or amount of pretreatment required at the user’s
expense, or he or she may enter into a contract with the person making the
discharge for the purpose of treatment of the pollutants for a fee and allow
the discharge. The Director’s determination shall be based on an
engineering study prepared at the user’s expense.



      (2)   The discharge from a user shall be subject to provisions
of this chapter when the following limits are exceeded:



         (a)   Five-day BOD greater than 250 mg/l;



         (b)   Oil or grease greater than 100 mg/l;



         (c)   Total phosphorous greater than 15 mg/l;



         (d)   Average daily flow exceeding 3% of the total daily
design flow of the sewage treatment plant; and



         (e)   Suspended solids greater than 300 mg/l.



   (E)   Control manholes. When the Director has determined that it is
necessary to ascertain the character of discharge to the public sewage
system, the owner of such property served by a sewer connection or
connections shall install approved control manholes on the connections to
allow observations, sampling, and measurements of all substances discharged
therein. The cost of the manholes and all equipment considered necessary by
the Director for sampling and metering, and all installation and operation of
the sampling and metering equipment, shall be at the expense of the user. The
Director shall approve all equipment prior to installation.



   (F)   Control manhole locations. All control manholes shall be
located on the user’s property within ten feet of the property line. The
control manholes shall be constructed on the sewer connection or the storm
sewer connection. If the property is fenced, a gate shall be provided at the
manhole location, with provision for a lock to be provided by the Director.
If the user does not want direct access to his or her property for security
or other reasons, he or she shall, at his or her expense, construct a
security fence around the control manhole of an area acceptable to the
Director. The Director may allow control manholes in the street right-of-way
in an approved manner and location. Those control manholes that cannot be
constructed within ten feet of the property line shall be in an open and
accessible area.



   (G)   Right of inspection. The Director may inspect the facilities
of any user to determine whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and
all discharge requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of
premises where sewage or other wastes are created or discharged shall allow
the Director ready access at all reasonable times, and make provisions for
emergency access, to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspecting, photo documenting, sampling, or in the performance of such
governmental function.



   (H)   Requirements for sewer outfalls. Access to and inspection of
sewer outfalls to the river and sewer meters shall be as outlined above.



   (I)   Facility drawings. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures and effluent characteristics shall be
submitted to the Director for review and approval before construction of the
facility. The approval of such plans and procedures will in no way relieve
such persons from the responsibility of modifying the facility, if necessary,
to produce an acceptable effluent. Any changes in the approved facilities or
method of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Director.



   (J)   (1)   Any person to which pretreatment standards are
applicable shall be in compliance with such standards in the shortest
reasonable time, but not later than three years from the date of promulgation
of U.S. EPA guidelines. In addition, pretreatment facilities for incompatible
pollutants introduced into the sewer system by a major contributing industry
shall commence construction within 18 months from the date of the final
promulgation of the effluent limitations guidelines defining best practicable
control technology currently available.



      (2)   The Director shall require the development of a
compliance schedule, by each person discharging industrial wastes, for the
installation of such pretreatment or equalization technologies.



   (K)   (1)   The Superintendent may adjust categorical
pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the
industrial users intake water in accordance with the provisions of this
division (K)(1). Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for an intake
pollutant must make application to the Superintendent.



      (2)   The industrial user the applicable standard will be
calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for
pollutants in the intake water) provided the following conditions are met.



         (a)   The industrial user demonstrates that the control
system it proposes to use to meet applicable categorical pretreatment
standards would, properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters;



         (b)   Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical
oxygen demand, total suspended solids, and oil and grease will not be
granted, unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the
generic measure in the user’s effluent are substantially similar to the
constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate
additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the
outfall or elsewhere;



         (c)   Credit shall be granted only to the extent
necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards up to a
maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be
necessary to determine eligibility for credits in compliance with standards
adjusted under this section; and



         (d)   A credit shall be granted only if the user
demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as
that into which the POTW discharges. The Superintendent may waive this
requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will occur.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-100)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 146, passed
1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 52.42  DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Persons required to obtain permits. Persons required by this
chapter to provide pretreatment and persons engaged in any activity listed in
§ 306(b)(1)(A) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1316(b)(1)(A), which are
listed below, shall obtain a permit prior to connecting to or discharging to
the sewerage system:



      (1)   Pulp or paper mills;



      (2)   Paper board, building, and board mills;



      (3)   Meat product and rendering processing;



      (4)   Dairy product processing;



      (5)   Grain mills;



      (6)   Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables processing;



      (7)   Canned and preserved seafood processing;



      (8)   Sugar processing;



      (9)   Textile mills;



      (10)   Cement manufacturing;



      (11)   Feedlots;



      (12)   Electroplating and other plating;



      (13)   Organic chemicals manufacturing;



      (14)   Inorganic chemicals manufacturing;



      (15)   Plastic and synthetic materials manufacturing;



      (16)   Soap and detergent manufacturing;



      (17)   Fertilizer manufacturing;



      (18)   Petroleum refining;



      (19)   Iron and steel manufacturing;



      (20)   Nonferrous metals manufacturing;



      (21)   Phosphate manufacturing;



      (22)   Steam and electric generation plants;



      (23)   Ferroalloy manufacturing;



      (24)   Leather tanning and finishing;



      (25)   Drum or barrel cleaning plants;



      (26)   Glass and asbestos manufacturing;



      (27)   Rubber processing; or



      (28)   Timber products processing.



   (B)   Application procedure.



      (1)   (a)   Such persons presently discharging to the
sewerage system shall, within 60 days from the effective date of this
chapter, complete and file an application for a permit with the Director. The
Director may also require any other person who is discharging or proposing to
discharge wastes into the system to obtain a permit.



         (b)   The Director may change the conditions of the
permit as circumstances or laws or regulations enacted by the state or
federal governments may require. Limitations on the discharge of wastes into
the system shall be in accordance and agreement with the current effluent
guidelines developed by the Federal EPA. The Director shall direct the form
the permit application shall use.



      (2)   (a)   Users required to obtain a permit hereto shall
complete and file with the village, an application in the form prescribed by
the village, and accompanied by a fee as set by the Council.



         (b)   In support of the application, the user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:



            1.   Name, address, and location (if different
from the address);



            2.   SIC number according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;



            3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this chapter as determined
by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed
in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of
the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136, as
amended;



            4.   Time and duration of contribution;



            5.   Average daily and three-minute peak
wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations if
any;



            6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation;



            7.   Description of activities, facilities, and
plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could
be discharged;



            8.   Where known, the nature and concentration of
any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any village, state or
federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment
is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;



            9.   a.   If additional pretreatment and/or
operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard.



               b.   The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule:



                  i.   The schedule shall contain
increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, and the like);



                  ii.   No increment referred to in
division (B)(1) above shall exceed nine months; and



                  iii.   Not later than 14 days
following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met
on such date and, if not, the expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return the const ruction to the schedule established. In no event shall more
than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Superintendent.



            10.   Each product produced by type; amount,
process or processes, and rate of production;



            11.   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



            12.   Number and type of employees, and hours of
operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system; or



            13.   Any other information as may be deemed by
the village to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



      (c)   The village will evaluate the data furnished by the user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the village may issue a permit subject to the terms and
conditions provided herein.



   (C)   Conditions. A holder of a permit shall comply with all
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements established by federal,
state, or local law. The conditions of the permit shall be enforced by the
Director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit holder
who exceeds the conditions and provisions of the permit will be subject to
enforcement provisions of this chapter and applicable state and federal laws.



   (D)   Annual reports. Each person issued a permit shall comply with
the reporting requirements under § 52.43.



   (E)   Accidental discharge.



      (1)   All persons discharging wastes to the sewerage system
shall immediately notify the water pollution control plant upon accidentally
discharging wastes in violation of this chapter, or the user’s permit,
including a “slug loading”, as defined in § 52.02. The notification
shall be made as soon after the accidental discharge as possible, but in no
case more than 30 minutes after the accidental discharge.



      (2)   This notification shall be followed within five days by
a detailed written report to the Superintendent describing the causes of the
accident and measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Dates shall
be set for completion of such measures and the completion of such measures
shall be reported to the Director. Notification will not relieve the user of
liabilities for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the discharge, or
for any fines imposed on the village account thereof.



   (F)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge.



      (1)   (a)   Further, all users of the village’s POTW with
a potential to discharge toxic substances or prohibited pollutants shall
provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances.



         (b)   Any facility constructed or designed to prevent
accidental discharge of toxic substances or prohibited materials shall be
provided for and maintained a the owner’s or user’s cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing these facilities and the operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the village for review and
shall be approved by the village before construction of such a facility.



      (2)    All existing applicable users shall complete such a
plan according to a timetable determined by the Director. No user shall be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the village POTW until its accidental
discharge procedures have been approved by the village. Review of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility
to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of the
Director.



   (G)   Other discharges that could cause problems to the POTW. All
categorical and non-categorical industrial users shall notify the POTW
immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW,
including any “slug loadings”, as defined in § 52.02.



   (H)   Creation of a plan to control slug discharges.



      (1)   The Superintendent will evaluate at least every two
years, whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug
discharges. For the purpose of this division (H), a SLUG DISCHARGE is any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to,
an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.



      (2)   Upon request by the Superintendent to prepare a slug
control plan, the significant industrial user will prepare such a plan,
including at a minimum the following:



         (a)   A description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



         (b)   A description of stored chemicals;



         (c) Procedures for immediate notification to the POTW of
slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition
under § 52.25(B) with procedures for written follow up within five days; and



         (d)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse
impacts from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of
storage areas, handling and transferring of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site run off, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic or organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.



   (I)   Confidential status of information.



      (1)   All information and data on a user obtained for reports,
questionnaires, permit application, permits, and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests the information be classified confidential on the
basis of a proprietary process.



      (2)   When information is classified confidential, the
Director shall provide proper and adequate facilities and procedures to
safeguard the confidentiality of a manufacturing proprietary process, except
that confidentiality shall not extend to waste products discharged to the
waters of the state.



   (J)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.



   (K)   Village right of revision. The village reserves the right to
establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply
with the objectives presented in section § 53.01.



   (L)   Wastewater discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge,
without a village permit, to any natural outlet within the village, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said village, and/or to the POTW, any
wastewater, except as authorized by the Superintendent in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (M)   Permit modifications.



      (1)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater permits users subject to
such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a
national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by this chapter,
the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 60 days
after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards.



      (2)   In addition, the user with an existing wastewater
contribution permit shall submit, to the Superintendent, within 60 days after
the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard,
the information required by this section.



   (N)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the village.



      (1)   Permits may contain the following:



         (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



         (b)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



         (d)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities;



         (e)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;



         (f)   Compliance schedules;



         (g)   Requirements for submission of technical reports
or discharge reports;



         (h)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant
records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the village and
affording village access thereto;



         (i)   Requirements for notification of the village of
any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in
the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system;



         (j)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
and



         (k)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
village to ensure compliance with this chapter.



      (2)   In the case of an industrial user, the permit will
contain the following:



         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five
years);



         (b)   A statement that the permit is non-transferable
without, at a minimum, prior notification to the POTW and a provision that a
copy of the existing control mechanism shall be provided to the new owner or
operator;



         (c)   Effluent limitations based on applicable general
pretreatment standards contained in § 52.25(B), categorical pretreatment
standards and state and local law;



         (d)   The applicable self-monitoring, sampling,
reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements, including an
identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling locations,
sampling frequency, and sample type; and



         (e)   A statement of the applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, in any
applicable compliance schedule.



   (O)   Permit’s duration.



      (1)   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or
may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user’s
existing permit.



      (2)   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the village, as the requirements identified in this chapter
are modified, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.



   (P)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, a
different premise, or a new or changed operation, without the approval of the
village. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and
conditions of the existing permit.



   (Q)   Monitoring facilities.



      (1)   The village shall require to be provided and operated at
the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s
premises, but the village may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed
by landscaping or parked vehicles.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
village’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the village.



   (R)   Inspection and sampling.



      (1)   The village shall inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the village or their
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records, examination or in
the performance of any of their duties.



      (2)   The village, approval authority, and the EPA, shall have
the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the village,
approval authority, and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for
the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.



   (S)    Pretreatment.



      (1)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations.



      (2)   Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the village shall be provided, operated, and maintained
at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the village for review, and
shall be acceptable to the village before construction of the facility.



      (3)   The review of such plans and operating procedures will
in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility
as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the village under the
provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to
the village prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



   (T)   Publishment of noncompliance.



      (1)   The village shall annually publish, in a newspaper
distributed locally, a list of the users which were in significant
non-publish with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once
during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.



      (2)   For this provision, a user is in significant non-publish
if its violation meet one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more, of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;



         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here are those in which 33% or more of all the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period, equal or exceeds the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit, multiplied by the
applicable TRC (equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants, except pH);



         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent
limitations (daily maximum or longer-



term average) that the Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference, or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has
resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;



         (e)   Failure to meet within 90 days after the schedule
date, a compliance schedule mile stone or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;



         (f)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due
date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, or reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;



         (g)   Failure to accurately report non-publish; and



         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations which
the Superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.



   (U)   Availability of records. All records relating to compliance
with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA
or approval authority upon request.



   (V) Changes in nature of the discharge. All industrial users shall
notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste for which the industrial user has submitted
notification under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p).



   (W)   Bypass. A “bypass”, as defined in § 52.02 is subject to
the following provisions.



      (1)   An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which
does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated only if
the bypass is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
Bypasses of this type are not subject to the notice provision contained in
divisions (W)(2) and (W)(3) below.



      (2)   If an industrial user knows in advance the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Superintendent at least ten days
before the date of such bypass.



      (3)   (a)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
Superintendent within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be submitted to the
Superintendent within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware
of the bypass.



         (b)   This written submission shall include a
description of the bypass, its cause, the duration, including exact dates and
times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue, and steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The Superintendent may waive the
written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.



      (4)   Other than a bypass allowed in division (W)(1) above, a
bypass is prohibited by an industrial user and the Superintendent may take
enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass unless:



         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage. For this section, SEVERE
PROPERTY DAMAGE means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can be reasonably expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGES does not include
economic loss caused by delays in production;



         (b)   There was no feasible alternatives to the bypass
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment down time. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occur during normal periods of equipment downtime or prevention
maintenance; and



         (c)   The industrial user submitted notice as required
under divisions (W)(2) and (W)(3) above.



   (X)   Effect of an upset.



      (1)   An “upset”, as defined in § 52.02, shall constitute
an affirmative defense to an action brought for non-publish with categorical
pretreatment standards if the industrial user, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence demonstrates:



         (a)   The cause of the upset; and



         (b)   At the time of the upset the facility was being
operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and was in compliance with all
applicable operation and maintenance procedures.



      (2)   Within 24 hours of becoming aware of an upset, the
industrial user shall submit to the Superintendent a description of the
indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance, the period of noncompliance,
including exact dates or times, or if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue and steps being taken and/or planned to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent reoccurrence of the noncompliance. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days.



   (Y)   Prevention of discharge. The POTW shall have the authority to,
after informal notice to the discharger, immediately and effectively halt or
prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appear to
present imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The POTW
shall also, upon notice to the effected industrial user, along with the
opportunity to respond, have the authority to halt or prevent any discharge
to the POTW which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment
or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW.



   (Z)   Notification. Thirty days after approval by the approval
authority of a list of significant industrial users, prepared by the
Superintendent, the village shall notify each such significant industrial
user of its status as such and all requirements applicable to it as a result
of such status.



   (AA)   Discharge of hazardous substances.



      (1)   An industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA
regional waste management division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities, in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which
if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth
in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other).



      (2)   If the industrial user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification
shall contain the following information to the extent that such information
is known and readily available to the industrial user:



         (a)   An identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the waste;



         (b)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of
such constituents in the waste stream discharge during that calendar month;
and



         (c)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the
waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.



      (3)   Any notification under this division (AA)(3) need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge, however,
notifications of changed discharges must be submitted. The notification
requirements in this section do not apply to pollutants already reported
under the self-monitoring requirements.



      (4)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of this
division (AA)(4) during a calendar month in which no more than 15 kilograms
of hazardous waste are so discharged, unless the waste are acute hazardous
waste as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).



      (5)   Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute
hazardous waste in a calendar month or any quantity of acute hazardous waste
as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.



      (6)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA,
being 42 U.S.C. § 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous
waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the
industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge
of such substances within 90 days of the effective date of such regulation.



      (7)   In the case of any notification made under this division
(AA)(7), the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-110)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-30-1980; Ord. 146, passed
1-29-1985; Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 52.43  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after a final administrative
decision made upon a category determination under the Act, whichever is
latter, existing industrial users shall submit to the Superintendent a report
indicating the following:



      (1)   The name and address of all operators and owners;



      (2)   A list of all environmental control permits held by the
facility;



      (3)   A brief description of the process, including the
standard industrial classification, information on the nature and average
rate of production, and a schematic showing points of discharge to the POTW;



      (4)   Information on the average daily and maximum daily flow
rate in gallons per day for each process;



      (5)   The identity of each pretreatment standard applicable to
each regulated process;



      (6)   (a)   Sampling and analysis results identifying the
nature and concentration (or mass where required by the standard or
Superintendent) of regulated pollutants and the discharge from each regulated
process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass where
required) shall be submitted. Samples shall be representative of daily
operations.



         (b)   A minimum of four grab samples must be taken for
pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics.
For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through
flow proportional composite sampling techniques, where feasible. The
Superintendent may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any
industrial user who demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is not
feasible.



         (c)   In such incidents, samples may be obtained through
time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four
grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. The user shall take a
minimum of one representative sample to comply the data necessary to comply
with the requirements of this division (A)(6).



         (d)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream
from the pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream
from the regulated process if no pretreatment facilities exist. The baseline
report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling and methods of
analysis and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative
of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.



      (7)   A statement as to whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative
of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional; and



      (8)   In the case of a new source or a source that becomes an
industrial user subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, at least 90 days prior to discharging to the POTW, the user will
submit a report to the Superintendent containing the information listed in
divisions (A)(1) through (A)(7) above. New sources shall provide estimates
for the information requested in divisions (A)(4) through (A)(6) above. New
sources shall include in this report information on the method of
pretreatment the source intends to use to meet the pretreatment standard(s).



   (B)   Compliance with pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days
following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or in the case of a new source, the commencement of introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report
containing the information contained in division (A)(1) through (A)(7) above.



   (C)   Periodic compliance reports.



      (1)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new
source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to
the Superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a
report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent
which are limited by such pretreatment standards.



      (2)   All reports submitted shall:



         (a)   Include a record of all daily flows, which during
the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in division
(C)(2)(d) below. At the discretion of the Superintendent, and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles, and the like, the Superintendent may agree to alter the months
during which the above reports are to be submitted.



         (b)   Be based upon data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, and
be representative of conditions during the reporting period. The
Superintendent shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess
and ensure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.



         (c)   If the Superintendent has imposed mass limitations
on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations
are appropriate, in such cases, any report required by this section shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass when requested by the Superintendent,
of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in
the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to §
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 and amendments thereto
or with any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
Administrator.



         (d)   If the industrial users is subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established by the Superintendent, the report
required in this section shall contain a reasonable measure of the users
long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
the report required by this section shall include the users actual average
production rate for the reporting period.



   (D)   Reporting requirements for industrial users not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards. Every June and December, industrial users
with discharges not subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall
submit to the Superintendent a report which includes a description of the
nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported to
the Superintendent. This report shall be based on sampling and analysis
performed in the preceding six months. In the event the POTW collects all the
information required for the report itself, a non-categorical significant
industrial user will not be required to submit the report.



   (E)   Sampling and analysis.



      (1)   Reports required under this section shall contain the
results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and
nature and concentration, or production in mass where requested by the
Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable pretreatment standards. All sampling analysis required in
preparation of all the report in this chapter shall be conducted in
accordance with the techniques described in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 and amendments
thereto.



      (2)   Where 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
POTW or other parties approved by the EPA.



   (F)   Sampling by POTW. Sampling and analysis may be performed by
the POTW in lieu of the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the required
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the user will not be
required to submit the compliance report required under division (I) below,
nor submit the certification required under division (C) above. In addition,
where the POTW itself collects all the information required for a report,
including flow data, the industrial user will not be required to submit the
report.



   (G)   Reporting of additional monitoring. If an industrial user
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Superintendent,
results of the additional monitoring information shall be included in the
applicable report.



   (H)   Notification of violation.



      (1)   If the sampling performed by the industrial user
indicates a violation, the user shall notify the POTW within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.



      (2)   The industrial user is not required to resample if the
POTW performs sampling, at the industrial user at a frequency of at least
once per month, or at the user between time when the user performs its
initial sampling and at the time when the user receives the results of the
repeat sampling.



   (I)   Certification of signatures.



      (1)   Any report required to be submitted to the
Superintendent, under this chapter shall include the following certification
signed by the appropriate signature:



 

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations



 



      (2)   An appropriate signature is any of the following:



         (a)   A responsible corporate officer if the industrial
user submitting the report is a corporation. For the purpose of this chapter
A RESPONSIBLE CORPORATE OFFICER means a President, Secretary, Treasurer, or
Vice-President of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the
corporation;



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or a sole
proprietorship, the reports are required to be signed by a general partner or
a proprietor respectively; and



         (c)   By a duly authorized representative of the
individual designated in divisions (I)(2)(a) above if:



            1.   Authorization is made in writing by the
individual described in divisions (I)(2)(a) above;



            2.   The authorization specifies either an
individual or a position having the responsibility for the overall operation
of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates such as a
plant Manager, operator of a well, or a well field Superintendent, or a
position of equivalent responsibility or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and



            3.   The written authorization is submitted to the
Superintendent. If the authorization under this division (I)(2) is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for
the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
above requirements must be submitted to the Superintendent prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative.



   (J)   Record maintenance.



      (1)   Any industrial user subject to the recording
requirements established by this chapter shall maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this chapter.



      (2)   Such records shall include for all samples:



         (a)   The date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples;



         (b)   The dates the analysis were performed;



         (c)   Who performed the analysis;



         (d)   The analytical techniques/method used; and



         (e)   The results of such analysis.



   (K)   Record retention.



      (1)   (a)   Any industrial user subject to recording
requirements established under this chapter shall retain for a minimum of
three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not
such monitoring activities are required by this chapter) and shall make such
records available for inspection and copying by the EPA, MDNR, or village
officials.



         (b)   The period of retention shall be extended during
the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW
or when requested by the EPA or MDNR.



      (2)   (a)   Any reports submitted by an industrial user
shall be retained by the POTW for a minimum of three years and the POTW shall
make such reports available for inspection and copying by the EPA, MDNR, and
village officials.



         (b)   The period of retention shall be extended during
the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants
by the industrial user or the operation of the POTW pretreatment program or
when requested by the EPA or MDNR.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-120)  (Ord. 227, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction. Any person violating any of the
provisions this chapter, inclusive of §§ 52.06 and 52.07(A) through (E)
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the
penalties and sanctions provided for in this code of ordinances. In addition
to the penalties and sanctions provided under this chapter, the village may
recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, court reporter’s fees,
and other expenses of litigation against the person found to have violated
this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this
chapter.



   (B)   Misdemeanor. Any person who violates section § 52.07(F) shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
a penalty of a fine not to exceed $500 and/or by imprisonment in the County
Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.



(1984 Code. § 7-01-03-150)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS



Section



   53.01   Requests for water supply service



   53.02   Mandatory connection



   53.03   Private wells prohibited



   53.04   Connections to the village water supply system



   53.05   Cross-connections



   53.06   Meters



   53.07   Discontinuing water supply service



   53.08   Fire hydrants



   53.09   Main extension



   53.10   Shutting off for repairs



   53.11   Plumbing and service line leaks



   53.12   Summer restricted water usage; drought and other emergencies



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01 REQUESTS FOR WATER SUPPLY SERVICE.



   Property owners desiring original water supply service to their
property shall make written application on a form provided by the village.
The application shall be filed at least seven days before the requested
connection date. No application shall be accepted unless accompanied by the
required fee. Failure to submit the application timely may result in delays,
but not in the rejection of the application.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-010)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 53.02  MANDATORY CONNECTION.



   (A)   All premises with primary structures, as defined by the Ch.
157, or, in the case of properties outside the boundaries of the village
covered by an agreement referenced in § 50.01, all premises with primary
structures as defined in the zoning ordinance of the governmental entity
having zoning jurisdiction over said property, shall connect to the
village’s water supply system, provided a public water main is within 200
feet (61 meters) of the property and there is sufficient capacity in the
water supply system. All expenses to plumb the structure for connection and
to construct the water service line and public appurtenances for connection
to the public water main shall be borne by the owner of the connected
premises.



   (B)   Premises with primary structures not connected to a public
water main and meeting the criteria for connection shall connect to a public
water main within 90 days of receipt of a notice to do so. Property owners
have 21 days from receipt of the notice to request a waiver from the Village
Council from the requirement to connect.



   (C)   Upon an application from the property owner, the Village
Council may waive the mandatory connection requirement on the basis of unique
circumstances when an alternative water supply system provided for in this
chapter is used. The Council may limit the time period or attach any
reasonable conditions to the granted waiver.



   (D)   The village is not liable for any damage caused to a connected
property by breakage or leakage arising from the connection to the water
supply system or for the failure of the water supply or the freezing or
deterioration of pipes and fixtures of the village.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-020)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)



§ 53.03  PRIVATE WELLS PROHIBITED.



   No private well may be drilled, dug, developed, or otherwise created,
continued, maintained, or improved on either a permanent or temporary basis
within the village or within any area outside of the boundaries of the
village covered by an agreement referenced in §§ 50.01 and 50.02, unless it
meets the following criteria:



   (A)   The well is used for a non-potable water supply and the water
is not discharged to the village’s sewage disposal system; or



   (B)   The Village Council waived the requirement for connection to
its water supply system by action taken under section § 53.02.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-030)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.04  CONNECTIONS TO THE VILLAGE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.



   (A)   Upon approval of the original application to supply water
service to a premises and the payment of the connection fee, the village will
tap the main water supply line, insert a corporation cock, install a curb
stop, and install the water meter. The village shall be responsible for
maintenance and repairs of the line from the water main to the curb box.



   (B)   Service lines beyond the curb box shall be installed and
maintained by and at the expense of the consumer and shall be of size and
quality approved by the village. Installation of service lines shall meet or
exceed village specifications for such work, which specifications shall be as
adopted from time to time by the Village Council.



   (C)    If any service line, or portions thereof, passes over or
through premises which at the time of installation are the property of
persons other than the owner of the premises to be supplied by the service
line, evidence of an easement acceptable to the village must be presented to
the village before a connection permit will be issued for such service line.



   (D)   No service line shall be laid in the same ditch or trench with
any gas pipe, sewer pipe, or any other facility of a public service utility
nor within three feet of any open excavation, conduit, or vault.



   (E)   No person other than the village shall open, close, operate,
or otherwise meddle or tamper with any curb stop.



   (F)   The cost of water service connections from the village water
mains to private premises may not be paid from the proceeds of a bond issue
or from the revenues of the water supply system.



   (G)   Property owners who, by reason of financial hardship, are
unable to pay the connection fee may request to have the fee deferred until a
later time under the following conditions and according to policies adopted
by Council from time to time:



      (1)   Paying such fee would, by reason of age, indigency, or
any other factor affecting ability to pay, tend to cause the property owner
to become a public charge, or would otherwise work undue hardship upon the
property owner;



      (2)   Referring the connection fee from collection would not
impair the financial standing of the village or the village’s sewage
disposal system;



      (3)   Deferring the collection of the connection fee is in the
best interest of the village; and



      (4)   The connection fee shall be deferred unless the property
owners execute a note to the village secured by a real estate mortgage of the
property being connected in order to ensure the eventual payment of the fee
with the following conditions:



         (a)   The balance(s) due upon any other mortgages that
are liens on the property to be connected and that have precedence over the
village’s mortgages are such as to leave a sufficient equity in the
property as to provide adequate protection and security to the village for
the eventual payment;



         (b)   The note and mortgage may provide for an extension
beyond the death of the mortgagor if necessary to protect the homestead of a
surviving spouse or other dependent of the mortgagor;



         (c)   The note may bear interest at a rate determined by
the Village Council;



         (d)   The note shall be payable in such number of years
as the Village Council may determine, but in any event shall be due and
payable in full upon the death of the mortgagors or the sale of the property;



         (e)   The note shall provide that failure to pay real
property taxes upon or personal property taxes in connection with the
mortgaged property may be grounds for acceleration of the due date of such
note and mortgage; and



         (f)   The note shall require the mortgagor to keep the
real property insured with companies and in amounts acceptable to the village.



   (H)   The Director shall keep a record of all water service line
connection permits granted under the authority of this chapter, which record
shall include the name of the applicant and contractor, the location of the
work, and the place in the street where the connection is to be made.



   (I)   Water service line connection permits are issued for a
specific property and are not transferable from one property to another. A
permit runs with the land and stays with the property for which the permit
was issued.



   (J)   Except as may be otherwise provided in a separate written
agreement approved by no less than five of seven members of the Village
Council, when application is made for permission to connect premises located
outside of the village limits to the village’s water supply system, the
Village Council may authorize the Village Manager to grant a permit for said
connection upon the following terms and conditions:



      (1)   The premises for which the connection application is
made abuts or is adjacent to a public right-of-way where a properly sized
water supply main exists;



      (2)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
submits with the application written permission from the governmental unit in
which the premises are located to make the connection and an agreement from
the governmental unit that it will place any delinquent water supply charges
or assessments, plus interest and penalties, on the real property taxes of
this property according to the procedures contained in Public Acts of 94 of
1933, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 et seq;;



      (3)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
acknowledges that all plumbing facilities within the building to be connected
are installed according to the Plumbing Code, Public Act 733 of 2002, being
M.C.L.A. § 338.3511, currently enforced by the village;



      (4)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
agrees to place a water meter in a location that meets village requirements;



      (5)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
agrees to install in the building water line at or near the public
right-of-way line an approved mechanism that can be accessed only by the
village and that, when accessed, will stop the flow of water to the sanitary
sewer main;



      (6)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
agrees to be bound by the rules and regulations of the village for the
furnishing of water supply service to the connected building including rates,
fees, and charges; and



      (7)   The owner of the premises for which connection is sought
shall pay at the time of application a connection fee equal to 200% of the
connection permit fee charged to premises situated within the village limits.



   (K)   (1)   A separate and independent water service line shall
be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear
of another on an interior lot and no private water service line is available
or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
courtyard, easement, or driveway, the building water service line serving the
front building may be extended to the rear building, and the whole shall be
considered as one building water service line.



      (2)   No privately owned water service line, whether said line
is located on the property being connected to the water supply service
system, on the property of another as provided for in an easement, or in a
public right-of-way, shall be used to connect more than one premises.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-040)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)



§ 53.05  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The village adopts by reference the Water Supply
Cross-Connection Rules of the State Department of Public Health (being State
Administrative Code Rules 325.11401 through 325.11407).



   (B)   The Village Manager or the Manager’s designee shall inspect
all properties serviced by the public water supply system where
cross-connections with the public water supply system is deemed possible.



   (C)   (1)   The Village Manager or the Manager’s designee shall
have the right to enter any property served by a connection to the public
water supply system at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting the
internal piping system(s) for cross-connections. On request, the owner,
lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish the village with
any pertinent information regarding the piping system(s) under inspection.



      (2)   Refusing access or to provide information, when
requested, shall be deemed prima facie evidence as to the presence of
cross-connections.



   (D)   The potable water supply made available on premises served by
the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this chapter and by the state and Village Plumbing Code, Public
Act 733 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 338.3511. Any water outlet that could be
used for potable or domestic purposes and that is not supplied by an approved
water supply system shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows:
“Water Unsafe for Drinking”.



   (E)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing or any
Plumbing Code adopted and administered by the village. It is supplementary to
those Codes.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-050)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 53.06  METERS.



   (A)   Water supply provided by the village or entering into the
village’s sewage disposal system, whichever is applicable, shall be
measured by a meter installed and controlled by the village.



   (B)   The charge for connection to the water supply system includes
furnishing the property with the properly configured and sized meter. The
meter remains at all times the property of the village. No person other than
properly identified village employees or agents shall repair, adjust, remove,
replace, or tamper with in any way a village water meter or do any act to
limit or interfere with its regular operation.



   (C)   The property owner shall provide a location agreeable with the
village for placing the meter and protecting the meter from the extremes of
heat and cold, accidents, and other contingencies. At the village’s option,
it may install remote meter reading devices at a nominal cost to the property
owner to correct inaccessible meter locations or to make meter reading
operations more cost effective.



   (D)   The property owner shall provide access to the meter at
reasonable times for properly authorized village employees or agents to
replace, inspect, test, repair, and read the meter.



   (E)   The property owner shall pay for damage to meters caused by
freezing, by hot water or any other action external to the meter.



   (F)   A separate connection, service line, and meter shall be
provided to each primary structure or multiple unit within a primary
structure, except in cases of apartment houses, condominiums, mobile home
parks, and commercial buildings and shopping centers where upon special
authorization of the Village Manager a single tap to be connected to a yoke
on which separate meters are provided for each consuming unit. The fee for
connection shall be treated as if each consuming unit was an individual
connection.



   (G)   When a remote reading device is installed and used to read the
measurement of the quantity of water supplied or disposed of, any
disagreement between the figures shown on the remote reading device and the
inside meter, the figure shown on the inside meter shall be the one used to
calculate water usage or supplied.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-060)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 53.07  DISCONTINUING WATER SUPPLY SERVICE.



   (A)   The village shall make every reasonable effort to provide the
property with an adequate supply of potable water. The village is not liable
for deficiency in or the failure of the water supply when occasioned by an
authorized shutting off of the water because of repairs, additions,
betterments, an act of God, or any other cause beyond its control.



   (B)   In addition to discontinuing water supply service for
nonpayment as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the village may discontinue
service after using the noticing procedure for nonpayment for any of the
reasons noted below:



      (1)   Any misrepresentation in an application;



      (2)   Any violation of the rules and regulations for the
provision of water supply service or sewage disposal service, or both, as
applicable;



      (3)   Willful or indifferent waste of water due to any cause;



      (4)   Using water supply service or sewage disposal service,
or both for a purpose other than that authorized by the application for
service;



      (5)   Molesting or tampering with any service pipe, meter,
curb stop, seal, or any other device of the village controlling or regulating
water supply or sewage disposal, as applicable;



      (6)   Making or refusing to sever any cross-connection between
a pipe or fixture carrying water furnished by the village water supply system
and a pipe or fixture carrying water from a source other than the village
water supply system;



      (7)   Failing to protect from injury or damage the meter and
connection, or failing to protect and properly maintain the service pipe or
fixture on the property;



      (8)   Failing to provide village employees or agents free and
reasonable access to the premises supplied water service; and



      (9)   Failing to place the meter or other device intended to
regulate or control the property’s water supply according to village
directions.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-070)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



Cross-reference:



   Billings, see § 51.13



§ 53.08  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   All fire hydrants installed on the village’s water supply
system are deemed to be owned by and a responsibility of the village. No
hydrant shall be installed that does not meet the specifications of the
village. The village determines the siting of fire hydrants. The costs of
installing fire hydrants, placed as a result of a main extension or building
project, shall be borne by the project developer or builder. Fire hydrants
placed on private property at the direction of the village shall require
execution of an easement acceptable to the village before the village grants
any final certificates of occupancy.



   (B)   No person, except duly authorized Fire Department personnel or
village employees or agents, shall open, close, meddle, or tamper with any
fire hydrant unless specifically authorized by the village.



   (C)   The village may install meters on fire hydrants for use by
contractors. Such meters shall not impair or interfere with the operation of
the hydrants for fire protection. Only village authorized personnel or agents
shall open and close the hydrants. The contractor shall deposit a sum
equivalent to the current charge for 10,000 gallons of water against the
actual charges for this service. The contractor shall be responsible for all
damages arising from this use.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-080)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 53.09  MAIN EXTENSION.



   (A)   Anyone owning or having a legal interest in property within
the village limits, or outside the village limits covered by an agreement
referenced in §§ 50.01 and 50.02, may request, on forms provided by the
village, to construct an extension to an already existing water main to that
property. Owners of or anyone having a legal interest in property outside the
village limits making a request to construct an extension to an already
existing water main to that property are subject to the additional
requirements of § 50.02.



   (B)   When an extension is approved, such work shall be done under
the inspection of the village, its employees, or agents and to the
village’s specifications. The village has the exclusive right to determine
the type and size of mains and appurtenances required to render adequate
water supply service. The expenses of any main extension shall be borne
entirely by the applicant.



   (C)   With the application for a main extension, the applicant shall
submit construction-type plans and drawings for review by the village. These
plans and drawings shall follow the requirements for such mains as contained
in the village’s subdivision regulations.



   (D)   Within ten days of approval of the extension, the developer
shall deposit a financial guarantee with the village. The nature, scope and
amount of such guarantee shall follow the procedure adopted in Ch. 157 for
financial guarantees.



   (E)   Among other factors contained in this chapter, the criteria to
be taken into consideration for a main extension are as follows.



      (1)   All extensions of mains shall be located in a public
right-of-way, unless specifically waived by the Village Council. Previously
recorded easements in plats or other evidence of prior intent to construct a
main in non-right-of-way area may be considered among other reasons by the
Village Council in granting a waiver.



      (2)   In determining the length of and necessity for any
extension requested, the end point of such extension shall be at the farthest
point of the most distant lot to be served.



   (F)   The Village Council, by special action, may grant an exception
to the main extension regulations and the charges deriving from those
regulations. The granting of a particular application for an exception to
these main extension regulations, or charges and fees derived therefrom,
shall not be construed as a precedent in any other case.



   (G)   Upon completion of a privately financed main extension and
acknowledgment by the Village Manager that the construction was done
satisfactorily, the applicant shall convey ownership of the main extension to
the village and, upon acceptance thereof by the Village Council, it shall
become part of the village’s water supply system.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-090)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 352, passed
11-10-2002)



§ 53.10  SHUTTING OFF FOR REPAIRS.



   The village reserves the right to shut off water in its mains at any
time without notice for making repairs, extensions or alterations, but the
village shall make reasonable effort to notify consumers of the intention to
shut off in advance.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-100)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 53.11  PLUMBING AND SERVICE LINE LEAKS.



   (A)   No allowance shall be made by the village for water used,
lost, stolen, or wasted through leaks, carelessness, neglect, or any other
similar conditions once the water passes through the meter.



   (B)   (1)   Once a property owner has been advised that a leak
exists in a service line, the line shall be repaired within seven days of the
receipt of the notice to repair.



      (2)   The consumer is responsible for all water used, but
unmetered after the curb stop.



      (3)   The village shall estimate the quantity of water used
from the time of discovery to repair. The consumer of the water supply
service shall be billed accordingly.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-110)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997)



§ 53.12  SUMMER RESTRICTED WATER USAGE; DROUGHT AND OTHER EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   Use of water by any customer of the village water system for
lawn and garden watering, car washing, and other outdoor uses is restricted
to even numbered dates for residences and businesses with even numbered
addresses and odd numbered dates for residences and businesses with odd
numbered addresses, during the period from June 1 through August 31 each year



   (B)   In addition, the village retains the right in times of extreme
drought or other emergency to otherwise restrict in whole or in part the use
of water as to any or all consumers of such service.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to use any water
of the village water system in violation to the provisions of this section.



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-120)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal civil
infraction and any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity
responsible for same shall be subject to the penalties and sanctions set
forth in § 10.99



(1984 Code, § 7-01-04-130)  (Ord. 277, passed 6-10-1997; Ord. 376, passed
9-1-2005)



CHAPTER 54:  REFUSE COLLECTION



Section



   54.01   Definitions



   54.02   Organization and management of the system



   54.03   Implementation of the system



   54.04   Determination of charges



   54.05   Establishment of funds and order of priority of deposits



   54.06   Billing and enforcement



   54.07   Violations and sanctions



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES. Residue from fires used for cooking and heating.



   BULK ITEMS. Waste items of large size not customarily suitable for
landfill disposal, including, but not limited to, automobile parts less than
four feet in length and weighing less than 40 pounds, discarded furniture and
appliances, Christmas trees, box springs and mattresses, sofas,
refrigerators, freezers, and water heaters and similar items.



   COMMERCIAL UNIT. Any unit engaged in general or professional office,
retail sales, religious, educational, or service activities on either a
profit or nonprofit basis and multiple-family residential buildings
containing four or more residential units.



   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Waste materials resulting from alteration, repair,
or construction of buildings or structures.



   COUNCILand VILLAGE COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Holly.



   HOUSEHOLD WASTES. All waste organic matter subject to rapid
decomposition, including animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods, and cardboard, paper, cartons,
boxes, tin cans, plastics, bottles, glass, crockery, clothing, toys, and
similar materials.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, public or private corporation,
partnership, trust, public or private agency or any other entity, or any
groups of such persons.



   REFUSE COLLECTION CONTRACT. Collectively, means the contract entered
into by the village pursuant to the provisions of § 54.03, and any other
additional contracts entered into pursuant thereto.



   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE. Ashes, bulk items, household wastes, and yard
wastes, but does not include:



      (1)   Chunks of asphalt or concrete, dirt, sod, stumps, or
rocks;



      (2)   Automobile parts greater than four feet in length or
weighing more than 40 pounds; or



      (3)   Construction waste.



   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any single-family detached dwelling unit, and any
attached dwelling unit contained within a multiple-family residential
building containing no more than four attached units, located in the village.



   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal
containers, wood, glass, crockery, or litter of any kind that may be a
detriment to the public health and safety.



   SYSTEM. The village residential refuse collection system established
pursuant to § 54.02.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Holly, Oakland County, Michigan.



   YARD WASTE. Waste residues from growing organic matter, including, but
not limited to, branches less than four inches in diameter, twigs, shrub
clippings, weeds, leaves, and grass, within the yard of any residential unit.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-010)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990)



§ 54.02  ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE SYSTEM.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created and established the village
residential refuse collection system (the “system”) to serve all
residential units. Each residential unit shall be a part of the system. From
and after the date of adoption of this chapter, the system shall be operated
by the village as authorized by law.



      (2)   It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of
the Village Council to establish and maintain reasonable and uniform rates
and charges applicable to the users of the system so as to provide funds to:



         (a)   Apply on the contractual payments the village is
obligated to make pursuant to the residential refuse contracts; and



         (b)   Operate and maintain any facilities of the system
which the village operates and maintains.



   (B)   The system shall have an operating and fiscal year commencing
on July 1 and ending on June 30 of each year.



   (C)   From and after the date of adoption of this chapter, the rates
and charges for the services and benefits provided by the system shall be as
prescribed in this chapter as amended from time to time by the Council. Such
rates and charges shall be levied against all residential units.



   (D)    In pursuance of and within the limits of applicable laws, the
operation and maintenance of the system shall be under the supervision and
control of the Village Council. The Village Council shall have control of
collection and disposition of revenues of the system and have ultimate
responsibility for the system and for enforcement of this chapter and any
additional rules and regulations adopted with respect to the system.



   (E)   All officers, employees, and agents of the village, insofar as
their functions pertain to the system, shall be held strictly accountable for
performance of the powers and duties delegated to them and shall not vary
from or exceed the authority conferred upon them.



   (F)   All revenues of the system shall be deposited in funds as
provided in § 54.05.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-020)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990)



§ 54.03  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SYSTEM.



   (A)   (1)   The village, upon resolution of the Village Council,
is authorized to enter into a contract or contracts with a person or persons
for the collection and disposal of residential refuse (collectively, the
“refuse collection contract”).



      (2)    It is the responsibility of the residential unit
occupant to remove any empty containers from the curb within 12 hours after
collection of the residential refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any residential refuse in any
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the village or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the village.



      (3)   Except as specified above, refuse containers must be
stored behind the front plane of the residential unit.



   (C)   All residential refuse (other than bulk items) shall be placed
in water-tight metal or plastic containers equipped with tight-fitting covers
or in plastic bags which are securely tied; provided, however, that yard
wastes, if not placed in such containers or bags, may be neatly tied in
bundles which do not exceed four feet in length or weigh more than 50 pounds.
Containers shall not exceed 20 gallons in capacity and shall be limited to a
maximum weight of 60 pounds when full. Plastic bags containing household
wastes, ashes, and yard wastes shall not exceed 50 pounds when full.



   (D)   (1)   Collection of residential refuse shall take place
Monday through Friday only, except when, due to holidays or unforeseen
circumstances, it is necessary for collection to occur on Saturday.



      (2)   Unless otherwise provided by amendment to this chapter
or by resolution of the Village Council, no collection of residential refuse
shall be permitted on Sunday. Collection of residential refuse shall not take
place on official holidays, including New Year’s Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other
holidays designated as such from time to time by resolution of the Village
Council. All residential refuse normally scheduled for collection on the day
upon which such holiday falls will be collected on the day following such
holiday before starting any collection that may otherwise be regularly
scheduled for the day following the holiday.



   (E)   Collection of residential refuse shall not commence before 6
a.m., local prevailing time, and shall not continue past 7:00 p.m., local
prevailing time, unless otherwise provided by resolution of the Village
Council.



   (F)   The disposal of residential refuse shall be made in a lawful
manner at any licensed and approved landfill or incinerator and in accordance
with Oakland County Waste Management Plan (approved 6-15-2000) as amended and
approved from time to time.



   (G)   If the owner of a residential unit is not an occupant thereof,
such owner shall be jointly responsible with all occupants of such
residential unit for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (H)   The village may also enter into agreements with any commercial
unit for the collection of rubbish (but no other materials) from such
commercial unit on such terms and conditions as may be established from time
to time by the Village Manager. The rates and charges for the services
provided to such commercial unit shall be as prescribed in this chapter as
amended from time to time by the Council.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-030)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990;  Ord. 448, passed
7-25-2017)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.04  DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.



   The charges for collection and disposal of residential refuse shall be
determined by resolution of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-040)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990)



§ 54.05  ESTABLISHMENT OF FUNDS AND ORDER OF PRIORITY OF DEPOSITS.



   (A)   All of the revenues from the system shall be deposited into
the Solid Waste Fund which is hereby established for that purpose and shall
be used and applied as set forth in divisions (B) through (D) below.



   (B)   The monies in the Solid Waste Fund shall first be set aside in
each month of operations in a separate revenue line item designated (and
hereby established) as the garbage collection fee in an amount sufficient to
subsidize the estimated current expenses of administration and operation of
the system, including an amount allocated to general administration.



   (C)   The Solid Waste Fund is hereby established for the purpose of
making payments on the residential refuse Contract, subject to the obligation
to reimburse the village for any moneys advanced from other funds for the
purpose of making payments on the residential refuse collection contract
pursuant to division (D) below.



   (D)   (1)   The Village Council intends that the revenues of the
system shall be used for no other purpose. The Village Council shall
establish such rates and charges which, together with any other funds
provided by the Village Council, if any, are sufficient to raise revenues to
meet the payment obligations of the village under the residential refuse
contract. Based upon the audit for the system required in division (F) below,
rates and charges for services rendered by the system shall be reviewed at
least annually and may be revised as necessary to meet system expenses,
including all obligations pursuant to the residential refuse contract.



      (2)   If for any reason such revenues are not sufficient to
fully pay such obligations, the Village Council may advance monies from the
General Fund or other fund of the village designated by the Village Council
to pay such obligations on a “to be reimbursed” basis. After such
advance, any monies remaining in the contract payment fund after payment of
the then-current month’s obligations under the residential refuse contract
shall be transferred as reimbursement to the general fund or such other fund,
as appropriate, to the extent of such advance.



   (E)   The Solid Waste Fund may be commingled or placed in one or
more depository accounts, as the Village Council shall provide by resolution,
provided that the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain separate records for
each such fund.



   (F)   (1)   The village shall cause to be maintained and kept
proper books of record and account, in which shall be made full and correct
entries of all transactions relating to the system. Not later than two months
after the close of each fiscal year, the village shall cause to be prepared a
statement in reasonable detail, showing the cash income and disbursements of
the system at the beginning and close of the operating year and such other
information as may be necessary to enable any taxpayer of the village, user
or beneficiary of the services furnished to be fully informed as to all
matters pertaining to the financial operation of the system dining such year.



      (2)   Such annual statement shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk, where it will be open to public inspection. Such books of
record and account shall be audited annually by a certified public
accountant, to be designated by the Village Council, and a certified copy of
such audit shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-050)



§ 54.06  BILLING AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all
charges shall be billed and collected quarterly or otherwise as determined by
the Village Council. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may establish such billing
procedures, consistent with this chapter, as may be necessary to effect
efficient collection of bills. Receipt of a bill by any person liable for
payment thereof, shall be notice to such person that subsequently such bill
will be due quarterly thereafter, and the failure to receive a bill
thereafter shall not excuse failure to pay the bill and any penalty thereon
as though such bill had been received. Quarterly bills may be mailed
separately or with or as a part of the village tax bills or water bills, but
the amounts billed hereunder must be separately identified. All bills shall
be payable on or before the due date without discount.



   (B)   Bills shall be mailed, quarterly, if possible, for services
rendered for the period from July 1, 1990, through June 30, 1991 and each
such bill shall be due on or before the date set forth therein. Such bills
may be mailed separately or with or as a part of the village tax bills or
water bills, but the amounts billed hereunder must be separately identified.
If it is not possible to mail the bills for the July 1, 1990 through June 30,
1991 service year on a quarterly basis, such bills shall be mailed and
scheduled for payment so that the bill for the last quarter of the July
1,1990 through June 30, 1991 service year is mailed and due before the end of
such service year.



   (C)   Bills not paid on or before the due dates stated in division
(B) above and this division (C) shall be deemed to be delinquent from such
due dates. If a bill remains unpaid after its due date, there shall be added
thereto as of such due date and collected thereon a penalty in the amount of
10%.



   (D)   All charges shall be a personal obligation of the owner of the
premises and shall also be a lien upon the premises until paid. Until such
charges and penalties are paid, the village may, at the option of the Village
Council, proceed in a personal action against the owner or in foreclosure of
the aforesaid lien, or both, to the extent necessary to collect such amounts
and collection charges related thereto.



   (E)   Any amounts owed on premises which are past due for three
months or more shall be certified to the tax assessing officer of the village
to be entered upon the next tax roll against such premises. Such amounts
shall be collected and such lien shall be enforced in the same manner as
provided in respect to village taxes assessed on such roll.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-060)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990)



§ 54.07  VIOLATIONS AND SANCTIONS.



   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to accept civil
fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the Violations Bureau,
no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-070)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990; Ord. 302, passed
7-14-1998)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at the Violations Bureau. If the civil fine is paid
at the Village Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



      (1)   In the case of another offense within one year of the
date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall be
known as the second offense.)



      (2)   In the case of another offense within one year of the
date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



      (3)   In the case of another offense within one year of the
date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be known
as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



(1984 Code, § 3-10-070)  (Ord. 209, passed 12-18-1990; Ord. 302, passed
7-14-1998)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC RULES



      71.   BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, AND MOPEDS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   TRAINS



      74.   MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY



      75.   TRUCK ROUTES



      76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      77.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   70.01   Uniform Traffic Code; adoption



   70.02   References to governmental unit construed



   70.03   Deletions, changes, and additions



   70.04   Publication



   70.05   Adoption of Motor Vehicle Code



   70.06   Local references



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE; ADOPTION.



   The 2002 Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages,
promulgated by the Director of State Police, effective January 27, 1981, and
published in the 1979 edition of the State Administrative Code and amendments
as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 edition of the
State Administrative Code, in accordance with Public Act 62 of 1956, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 through 257.954, is hereby adopted by reference as in
this chapter modified.



(1984 Code, § 2-01-010)  (Ord. 115, passed 6-16-1981)



§ 70.02  REFERENCES TO GOVERNMENTAL UNIT CONSTRUED.



   Reference in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships,
and Villages to GOVERNMENTAL UNIT shall mean the Village of Holly.



(1984 Code, § 2-01-020)  (Ord. 115, passed 6-16-1981)



§ 70.03  DELETIONS, CHANGES, AND ADDITIONS.



   The following changes which modify the said Uniform Traffic Code are
hereby adopted.



   (A)   Section 1.018a is added to read as follows.



      Sec. 1.018a. Operate.



      “Operate” or “operating” means being in actual physical
control of a vehicle regardless of whether or not the person is licensed as
an operator or chauffeur.



   (B)   Sections 2.5a through 2.5g are amended to read as follows.



      (1)   As used in this division (B)(1), ABANDONED VEHICLE means
vehicle which has remained on public property or private property for a
period of forty- eight (48) hours after a police agency or other governmental
agency designated by the police agency has affixed a written notice to the
vehicle.



      (2)   If a vehicle has remained on public or private property
for a period of time so that it appears to the police agency to be abandoned,
the police agency shall do all of the following:



         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.



         (b)   Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written
notice shall contain the following information:



            (i)   The date and time the notice was affixed.



            (ii)   The name and address of the police agency
taking the action.



            (iii)   The name and badge number of the police
officer affixing the notice.



            (iv)   The date and time the vehicle may be taken
into custody and stored at the owner’s expense or scrapped if the vehicle
is not removed.



            (v)   The year, make and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle, if available.



      (3)   If the vehicle is not removed within forty-eight (48)
hours after the date the notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned
and the police agency may have the vehicle taken into custody.



      (4)   A police agency which has a vehicle taken into custody
shall do all of the following:



         (a)   Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been
reported stolen.



         (b)   Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the
vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement
information network.



         (c)   Within seven (7) days after taking the vehicle
into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the
records of the Secretary of State, by first class mail or personal service,
notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice
shall be furnished by the Secretary of State. Each notice form shall contain
the following information:



            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle if available.



            (ii)   The location from which the vehicle was
taken into custody.



            (iii)   The date on which the vehicle was taken
into custody.



            (iv)   The name and address of the police agency
which had the vehicle taken into custody.



            (v)   The business address of the custodian of the
vehicle.



            (vi)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.



            (vii)   The procedure to contest the fact that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees
and daily storage fees.



            (viii)   A form petition which the owner may file
in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the
police agency’s action.



            (ix)   A warning that the failure to redeem the
vehicle or to request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the
notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all
rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of
the sale.



      (5)   The registered owner may contest the fact that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees
and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall
be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within
twenty (20) days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a
hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to
sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of
the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to the
accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who
requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and
storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court
finds that the vehicle was not property deemed abandoned, the police agency
shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage
fees.



      (6)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may
obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the
custodian of the vehicle.



      (7)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a
hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the secured
party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to
the custodian of the vehicle and the police agency for its accrued costs.



      (8)   Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of
the hearing described in subsection (5) or, if a hearing is not requested,
not less than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the police
agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale pursuant to section
2.5g.



      (9)   If the ownership of a vehicle which has been deemed
abandoned under this section cannot be determined either because of the
condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the
records of the Secretary of State does not reveal ownership, the police
agency may sell the vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5 g, not
less than thirty (30) days after public notice of the sale has been published.



      Sec. 25.b. Abandoned scrap vehicle procedures.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         (a)   “Registered abandoned scrap vehicle” means a
vehicle which meets all of the following requirements:



            (i)   Is on public or private property.



            (ii)   Is seven (7) or more years old.



            (iii)   Is apparently inoperable or is extensively
damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is
operational and safe as required by section 5.71 would exceed the fair market
value of that vehicle.



            (iv)   Is currently registered in the State of
Michigan or displays current year registration plates from another state.



            (v)   Is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours
after a written notice as described in section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the
vehicle.



         (b)   “Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle” means
vehicle which meets all of the following requirements:



            (i)   Is on public or private property.



            (ii)   Is seven (7) or more years old.



            (iii)   Is apparently inoperable or is extensively
damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is
operational and safe as required by section 5.71 would exceed the fair market
value of that vehicle.



            (iv)   Is not currently registered in this state
and does not display current year registration plates from another state.



            (v)   Is rot removed within forty-eight (48) hours
after a written notice as described in section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the
vehicle.



      (2)   A police agency may have an unregistered abandoned scrap
vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of
the following:



         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.



         (b)   Take two (2) photographs of the vehicle.



         Should read Sec. 2.5b.



         (c)   Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an
unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following
information:



            i.   The year, make, and vehicle identification
number if available.



            ii.   The date of abandonment.



            iii.   The location of abandonment.



            iv.   A detailed listing of the damage or the
missing equipment.



            v.   The reporting officer’s name and title.



            vi.   The location where the vehicle is being held.



         (d)   Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the
vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information
network.



      (3)   Within twenty-four (24) hours, excluding Saturday,
Sunday, and legal holidays, after taking the vehicle into custody, the police
agency shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing
service or a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who
shall then transmit that release form to the Secretary of State and apply for
a certificate of the title or a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the
release form and application, the Secretary of State shall issue a
certificate of title or a certificate of scrapping.



      (4)   The release form described in subsection (3) shall be
furnished by the Secretary of State and shall include a certification
executed by the applicable police agency when the abandoned scrap vehicle is
released. The certification shall state that the police agency has complied
with all the requirements of subsection (2)(b) and (c).



      (5)   The Secretary of State shall retain the records relating
to an abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two (2) years. The two (2)
photographs taken pursuant to subsection (2)(b) shall be retained by the
police agency for not less than two (2) years. After the certificate of
scrapping has been issued, a certificate of title for the vehicle shall not
be issued again.



      (6)   A police agency may have a registered abandoned scrap
vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of
the following:



         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been stolen.



            (b)   Take two (2) photographs of the vehicle.



            (c)   Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as
a registered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following
information:



            (i)   The year, make and vehicle identification
number if available.



            (ii)   The date of abandonment.



            (iii)   The location of abandonment.



            (iv)   A detailed listing of the damage or the
missing equipment.



            (v)   The reporting officer’s name and title.



            (vi)   The location where the vehicle is being
held.



         (d)   Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the
vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information
network.



         (e)   Within seven (7) days after taking the vehicle
into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the
records of the Secretary of State, by first class mail, or personal service,
notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice
shall be furnished by the Secretary of State. Each notice form shall contain
the following information:



            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification
number if available.



            (ii)   The location from which the vehicle was
taken into custody.



            (iii)   The date on which the vehicle was taken
into custody.



            (iv)   The name and address of the police agency
which had the vehicle taken into custody.



            (v)   The business address of the custodian of the
vehicle.



            (vi)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.



            (vii)   The procedure to contest the fact that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees
and daily storage fees.



            (viii)   A form petition which the owner may file
in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the
police agency’s action.



            (ix)   A warning that the failure to redeem the
vehicle or to request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the
notice may result in the termination of all rights of the owner and the
secured party to the vehicle.



      (7)   The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap
vehicle may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or
the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a
hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the
court specified in the notice within twenty (20) days after the date of the
notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a
hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a
hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage
bond with the court in an amount as determined by the court. The owner of a
vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying
the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond.
If the court finds that the vehicle was not property deemed abandoned, the
police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing
and storage fees.



      (8)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may
obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the
custodian of the vehicle.



      (9)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a
hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the secured
party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to
the custodian of the vehicle.



      (10)   Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of
the hearing described in subsection (7), or if a hearing is not requested,
not less than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice described in
subsection (6)(3), the police agency shall follow the procedures established
in subsections (3) to (5).



      Sec. 2.5c. Vehicle removed from private property.



      (1)   When a vehicle is removed from private property at the
direction of a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a
police agency, the custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the
police agency from whose jurisdiction the vehicle was towed. The custodian
shall supply that information which is necessary for the police agency to
enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.



      (2)   Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection
(1) the police agency immediately shall do all of the following:



         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.



         (b)   Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement
information network.



      (3)   The owner of the vehicle removed as described in
subsection (1) may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing
and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the
vehicle, the custodian shall notify the police agency of the disposition of
the vehicle.



      (4)   If the vehicle described in subsection (1) is not
claimed by the owner within seven (7) days after the police agency has been
notified by the custodian that is has been taken into custody, the vehicle is
deemed abandoned and the procedures prescribed in section 2.5a (4) (c) to (9)
shall apply.



      Sec. 2.5d. Vehicle removed by police.



      (1)   A police agency or a governmental agency designated by
the police agency may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from
public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the
registered owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances:



         (a)   If the vehicle is in such a condition that the
continued operation of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an
immediate hazard to the public.



         (b)   If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the
highway in such a manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an
obstruction of traffic.



         (c)   If a vehicle is parked in a posted tow away zone.



         (d)   If there is reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle or any part of the vehicle is stolen.



         (e)   If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence
of a crime, or when there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was
used in the commission of a crime.



         (f)   If removal is necessary in the interest of public
safety because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or human-made disaster,
or other emergency.



         (g)   If the vehicle is hampering the use of private
property by the owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a
manner which impedes the movement of another vehicle.



      (2)   A police agency which authorizes the removal of a
vehicle under subsection (1) shall do all of the following:



         (a)   Check to determine if the vehicle has been
reported stolen.



         (b)   Within twenty-four (24) hours after removing the
vehicle, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network if
the vehicle has not been redeemed. This subdivision does not apply to a
vehicle that is removed from the scene of a motor vehicle traffic accident.



         (c)   If the vehicle has not been redeemed within ten
(10) days after moving the vehicle, send to the registered owner and the
secured party as shown by the records of the Secretary of State, by first
class mail or personal service, a notice that the vehicle has been removed,
however, if the police agency informs the owner or operator of the vehicle of
the removal and the location of the vehicle within twenty-four hours after
the removal, and if the vehicle has not been redeemed within thirty (30) days
and upon complaint from the towing service, the police agency shall send the
notice within thirty (30) after the removal. The notice shall be by a form
furnished by the Secretary of State. The notice form shall contain the
following information:



            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.



            (ii)   The location from which the vehicle was
taken into custody.



            (iii)   The date on which the vehicle was taken
into custody.



            (iv)   The name and address of the police agency
which had the vehicle taken into custody.



            (v)   The location where the vehicle is being held.



            (vi)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.



            (vii)   The procedure to contest the fact that the
vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing and daily
storage fees.



            (viii)   A form petition which the owner may file
in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the
police agency’s action.



            (ix)   A warning that the failure to redeem the
vehicle or to request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the
notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all
lights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of
the sale or to both the vehicle and the proceeds.



      (3)   The registered owner may contest the fact that the
vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing fees and
daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be
made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within
twenty (20) days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a
hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to
sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of
the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount
equal to the accrued towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who
requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and
storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court
finds that the vehicle was not properly removed, the police agency shall
reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees.



      (4)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may
obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the
custodian of the vehicle.



      (5)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a
hearing with twenty (20) days, the secured patty may obtain the release of
the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle
prior to the date of the sale.



      (6)   Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of
the hearing described in subsection (3), or if a hearing is not requested,
not less than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice described in
subsection (2)(c) the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a
public sale unless the vehicle is redeemed. The public sale shall be held
pursuant to section 2.5g.



      (7)   If the ownership of the vehicle which has been removed
under this section cannot be determined either because of the condition of
the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the
Secretary of State does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the
vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5g, not less than thirty (30)
days after public notice of the sale has been published.



      Sec. 2.5e. Abandoned vehicle, jurisdiction of court.



      (1)   The following courts shall have jurisdiction to
determine if a police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under
section 2.5a, 2.5b(6) to (10), 2.5c, or 2.5d:



         (a)   The district court.



         (b)   A municipal court.



         (c)   The common pleas court of the City of Detroit.



      (2)   The court specified in the notice prescribed in section
2.5a(4)(c), 2.5b(6), 2.5c(4), or 2.5d(2)(c) shall be the court which has
territorial jurisdiction at the location from where the vehicle was removed
or deemed abandoned. Venue in the district court shall be governed by section
8312 of Act. No. 136 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, being section
600.8312 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.



      (3)   If the owner tails to pay the accrued towing and storage
fees, the towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure release of
the vehicle under section 2.5a, 2.5b, 2.5c, or 2.5d shall be used to pay the
towing and storage fees.



      Sec. 2.5f. Abandoned vehicle, duties of court.



   (1)   Upon receipt of a petition prescribed in section 2.5a, 2.5b,
2.5c, or 2.5d, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has been taken into
custody, the court shall do both of the following:



      (a)   Schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days for the
purpose of determining whether the police agency acted properly.



      (b)   Notify the owner and the police agency of the time and
place of the hearing.



   (2)   At the hearing specified in subsection (1), the police agency
shall have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it
has complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned
vehicle or vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d.



   (3)   After the hearing the court shall make a decision which shall
include one (1) or more of the following:



      (a)   A finding that the police agency complied with the
procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a
vehicle removed under section 2.5d, and an order providing a period of twenty
(20) days after the decision for the owner to redeem the vehicle. If the
owner does not redeem the vehicle within twenty (20) days, the police agency
shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant to section 2.5b or 2.5g.



      (b)   A finding that the police agency did not comply with the
procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a
vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d. After making such a finding, the
court shall issue an order directing that the vehicle immediately be released
to the owner, and that the police agency is responsible for the accrued
towing and storage charges.



      (c)   A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were
reasonable.



      (d)   A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were
unreasonable and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction.



      Sec. 2.5g. Abandoned vehicle, public sale.



      (1)   A public sale for a vehicle which has been deemed
abandoned under section 2.5a or 2.5c or removed under section 2.5d shall be
conducted in the following manner:



         (a)   It shall be under the control of the police agency
or agent of the police agency.



         (b)   It shall be open to the public and consist of open
auction bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the
person submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police
agency or agent of the police agency.



         (c)   Except as provided by sections 2.5a(9) and
2.5d(7), it shall be held not less than five (5) days after public notice of
the sale has been published. and



         (d)   The public notice shall be published at least once
in a newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the
vehicle was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the
vehicle for sale.



      (2)   The money received from the public sale of the vehicle
shall be applied in the following order of priority:



         (a)   Towing and storage charges.



         (b)   Expenses incurred by the police agency.



         (c)   To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the
debt outstanding on the vehicle.



         (d)   Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall
be made to mail the remainder to the registered owner. If delivery of the
remainder cannot be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of
the unit of government that the police agency represents.



      (3)   If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police
agency may do one (1) of the following:



         (a)   Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to
satisfy charges against the vehicle.



         (b)   Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency
or the unit of government the police agency represents, by doing the
following:



            (i)   Paying the towing and storage charges.



            (ii)   Applying for title to the vehicle.



         (c)   Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection
(1).



      (4)   A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under
subsection (1) or (3), which vehicle has been designated as a distressed
vehicle, shall make application for a salvage certificate of title within
fifteen (15) days after obtaining the vehicle.



      (5)   Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall
cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network.



   (C)   The following provisions in Sec. 5.15 are amended to read as
follows.



      Sec. 5.15. Driving while intoxicated or visibly impaired.



      (1)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a
vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this village if either of the following applies:



         (a)   The person is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance.



         (b)   The person has a blood alcohol content of 0.10
grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per
67 milliliters of urine.



      (2)   The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in
control of a vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to
be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or
generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of motor vehicles, within this village by a person who is under the
influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, who has an alcohol content of
0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
67 milliliters of urine, or whose ability to operate the motor vehicle is
visibly impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor, a controlled
substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.



      (3)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a
vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this village when, due to the consumption of intoxicating
liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance, the person’s ability to operate the vehicle is
visibly impaired. If a person is charged with violating subsection (1), a
finding of guilty under this subsection may be rendered.



      (4)   A person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age,
whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other
place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles,
including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this village
if the person has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection, any
bodily alcohol content means either of the following:



         (a)   An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or
more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath,
or per 67 milliliters of urine.



         (b)   Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body
resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption
of intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service
or ceremony.



      (5)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a
vehicle in violation of subsection (4) while another person who is less than
16 years of age is occupying the vehicle. A person who violates this
subdivision is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows:



         (a)   Community service of not more than 60 days.



         (b)   A fine of not more than $500.



         (c)   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.



      In the judgment of sentence under this section, the court may,
unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section MCL 257.625b, order
vehicle immobilization as provided in section MCL 257.904d.



      (6)   If a person is convicted for violating subsection (1)
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the
following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 45 days.



         (b)   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.



         (c)   A fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.



      (7)   A person who is convicted of violating subsection (2) is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days
or a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, or both.



      (8)   A person who is convicted of violating subsection (3),
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 45 days.



         (b)   Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.



         (c)   A fine of not more than $300.



      (9)   If a person is convicted of violating subsection (4),
all of the following apply:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b),
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the
following:



            (i)   Community service for not more than 45 days.



            (ii)   A fine of not more than $250.



         (b)   If the violation occurs within seven years of one
or more prior convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the
following:



            (i)   Community service for not more than 60 days.



            (ii)    A fine of not more than $500.



            (iii)   Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.



      (10)   In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under
this section, the court may order the person to pay the costs of the
prosecution under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 760.1 to
776.22.



      (11)   A person sentenced to perform community service under
this section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or
the village for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or the village
as a result of the person’s activities in that service.



      (12)   If a person is charged with a violation of subsection
(1), (3), or (5), or MCL 275.625m, the court shall not permit the defendant
to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of violating
subsection (4) in exchange for dismissal of the original charge. This
subsection does not prohibit the court from dismissing the charge upon the
prosecuting attorney’s motion.



      (13)    Except as otherwise provided in subsection (15), if a
person is charged with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance in violation of subsection (1), the court shall require the jury to
return a special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court
convicts the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere, the court shall make a finding as to whether the person was under
the influence of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating
liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the violation.



      (14)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (15), if a
person is charged with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to
operate the vehicle was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a
controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance in violation of subsection (3), the court shall require the jury to
return a special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court
convicts the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere, the court shall make a finding as to whether, due to the
consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor
and a controlled substance, the person’s ability to operate a motor vehicle
was visibly impaired at the time of the violation.



      (15)   A special verdict described in subsections (13) and
(14) is not required if a jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to
either of the following.



         (a)   Whether the defendant was under the influence of a
controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance at the time of the violation.



         (b)   Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to
his or her consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the violation.



      (16)   If a jury or court finds under subsection (13), (14),
or (15) that the defendant operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or
while impaired due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a
combination of a controlled substance and an intoxicating liquor, the court
shall do both of the following:



         (a)   Report the finding to the Secretary of State.



         (b)   On a form or forms prescribed by the state court
administrator, forward to the Department of State Police a record that
specifies the penalties imposed by the court, including any term of
imprisonment, and any sanction imposed under sections MCL 257.625n or MCL
257.904d.



      (17)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a record described
in subsection (16)(b) is a public record and the Department of State Police
shall retain the information contained on that record for not less than seven
years.



      (18)   In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (4), the
defendant bears the burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating
liquor was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by
a preponderance of the evidence.



      (19)   If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to
section MCL 257.625a(6) or this ordinance, or submits to a chemical test or a
chemical test is performed pursuant to a court order and the test reveals an
unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to
submit to the test shall do all of the following:



         (a)   On behalf of the Secretary of State, immediately
confiscate the person’s license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and,
if the person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue, pursuant
to MCL 257.625g a temporary license or permit to the person, The temporary
license or permit shall be on a form provided by the Secretary of State.



         (b)   Except as provided in subsection (2), immediately
do all of the following:



            (i)   Forward a copy of the written report of the
person’s refusal to submit to a chemical test required under section MCL
257.625d to the Secretary of State.



            (ii)   Notify the Secretary of State by means of
the law enforcement information network that a temporary license or permit
was issued to the person.



            (iii)   Destroy the person’s driver’s license
or permit.



      (20)   If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant
to section MCL 257.625a(6) that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a
report of the results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the
peace officer who requested the person to the test shall comply with
subsection (l)(a) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals
an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to
submit to the test shall immediately comply with subsection (l)(b). If the
report does not reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who
requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately notify the
person of the test results and immediately return the person’s license or
permit by first-class mail to the address given at the time to arrest.



      (21)   A temporary license or permit issued pursuant to MCL
257.625g as provided for in this section is valid for one of the following
time periods:



         (a)   If the case is not prosecuted, for 90 days after
issuance or until the person’s license or permit is suspended pursuant to
section MCL 257.625f, whichever occurs earlier. The prosecuting attorney
shall notify the Secretary of State if a case referred to the prosecuting
attorney is not prosecuted. The arresting law enforcement agency shall notify
the Secretary of State if a case is not referred to the prosecuting attorney
for prosecution.



         (b)   If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal
charges against the person are dismissed, the person is acquitted of those
charges, or the person’s license or permit is suspended, restricted, or
revoked.



      (22)   As used in this section, “unlawful alcohol content”
means any of the following as applicable:



         (a)   If the person tested is less than 21 years of age,
0.02 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.



         (b)   If the person tested was operating a commercial
motor vehicle within this state, 0.04 grams or more of alcohol per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine.



         (c)   If the person tested is not a person described in
subsection (a) or (b), 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.



      Sec. 5.15a. Motor vehicles: Driving under the influence of
intoxicating liquor; test, evidence.



      (1)   A peace officer, without a warrant, may arrest a person
when the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was,
at the time of an accident, the operator of a vehicle involved in the
accident in the Village of Holly while in violation of section 5.15(1), (3)
or (4).



      (2)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that
a person was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to
the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of vehicles, in the Village of Holly, and
that the person by consumption of intoxicating liquor may have affected his
or her ability to operate a vehicle, or reasonable cause to believe that a
person was operating a commercial vehicle within the Village of Holly while
the person’s blood contained any measurable amount of alcohol by weight, or
while the person had any detectable presence of intoxicating liquor, or
reasonable cause to believe that a person who is less than twenty-one (21)
years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place
open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of vehicles, within the Village of Holly,
while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in
section 5.15(4), may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis. The following provisions shall apply with respect to a
preliminary chemical breath analysis:



         (a)   A peace officer may arrest a person based in sole
or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.



         (b)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath
analysis are admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in
section 5.15c(l) or in an administrative hearing solely to assist the court
or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an arrest.
this subdivision does not limit the introduction of other competent evidence
offered to establish the validity of an arrest.



         (c)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis shall remain subject to the requirements of sections 5.15c or
5.15d, for the purposes of chemical tests described in those sections.



         (d)   Except as provided in subsection (4), a person who
refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful
request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction.



      (3)   A person who is operating a commercial motor vehicle and
who is requested to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis under
this section, shall be advised that refusal of the request of a police
officer to take a test described in this section is a misdemeanor, punishable
by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than
Five Hundred ($500) Dollars, or both, and will result in the issuance of a
twenty-four (24) hour out-of-service order.



      (4)   A person who is operating a commercial vehicle and who
refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful
request by a police officer is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or fine of not more than
Five Hundred ($500) Dollars, or both.



      (5)   The following provisions apply with respect to chemical
tests and analysis of a person’s blood, urine, or breath, other than
preliminary chemical breath analysis.



         (a)   The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance or both in a driver’s blood at the time alleged as shown by
chemical analysis of the person’s blood, urine, or breath is admissible
into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding.



         (b)   A person arrested for a crime described in section
5.15c(l) shall be advised of all of the following:



            (i)   That if he or she takes a chemical test of
his or her blood, urine or breath administered at the request of a peace
officer, he or she has the right to demand that a person of his or her own
choosing administer one (1) of the chemical tests; that the results of the
test are admissible in a judicial proceeding as provided under this act and
shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the
innocence or guilt of the defendant; and that he or she is responsible for
obtaining a chemical analysis of a test sample obtained pursuant to his or
her own request.



            (ii)   That if he or she refuses the request of a
peace officer to take a test described in subparagraph (i), a test shall not
be given without a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain such
a court order.



            (iii)   That his or her refusal of the request of
a peace officer to take a test described in subparagraph (i) shall result in
the suspension of his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license or
operating privilege, and in the addition of six (6) points to his or her
driver record.



         (c)   A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be
taken and collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or a
licensed nurse or medical technician under the direction of a licensed
physician and qualified to withdraw blood acting in a medical environment, at
the request of a peace officer, may withdraw blood for the purpose of
determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or
both in the person’s blood, as provided in this subsection. Liability for a
crime or civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing
blood and related procedures shall not attach to a qualified person who
withdraws or analyzes blood or assists in the withdrawal or analysis in
accordance with this act unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a
negligent manner.



         (d)   A chemical test described in this subsection shall
be administered at the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds
to believe the person has committed a crime described in section 5.15c(l). A
person who takes a chemical test administered at the request of a peace
officer, as provided in this section, shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to have a person of his or her own choosing administer one (1) of the
chemical tests described in this section within a reasonable time after his
or her detention, and the results of the test shall be admissible and shall
be considered with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or
guilt of the defendant. If the person charged is administered a chemical test
by a person of his or her own choosing, the person charged shall be
responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the test sample.



         (e)   If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle
involved in the accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of
the driver’s blood is withdrawn at that time for the purpose of medical
treatment, the results of a chemical analysis of that sample shall be
admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol
or presence of a controlled substance or both in the person’s blood at the
time alleged, regardless of whether the person had been offered or had
refused a chemical test. The medical facility or person performing the
chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the analysis to a prosecuting
attorney who requests the results for use in a criminal prosecution as
provided in this subdivision. A medical facility or person disclosing
information in compliance with this subsection shall not be civilly or
criminally liable for making the disclosure.



         (f)   If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle
involved in the accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent’s blood
shall be withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner for the
purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or the presence of controlled
substance, or both, in the decedent’s blood. The medical examiner shall
give the results of the chemical analysis of the sample to the law
enforcement agency investigating the accident, and that agency shall forward
the results to the Department of State Police.



      (6)   The provisions of subsection (5) relating to chemical
testing do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing
upon the question of whether or not a person was impaired by, or under the
influence of, intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination
of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or whether the person had
a blood alcohol content of 0.10 percent or more, or if the person is less
than twenty-one (21) years of age whether the person had any bodily alcohol
content within his or her body. As used in this section, “alcohol
content” means either of the following:



         (a)   A blood alcohol content of not less than 0.02% or
more than 0.07% by weight of alcohol.



         (b)   Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body
resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor.



      (7)   If a chemical test described in subsection (3) is
administered, the results of the test shall be made available to the person
charged or the person’s attorney upon written request to the prosecution,
with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall
furnish the results at least two (2) days before the day of the trial. The
results of the test shall be offered as evidence by the prosecution in that
trial. Failure to fully comply with the request shall bar the admission of
the results into evidence by the prosecution.



      (8)   Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation
of section 5.15(2), the amount of alcohol in the driver’s blood at the time
alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person’s blood, urine or
breath shall give rise to the following presumptions.



         (a)   If there was at the time 0.07 percent or less by
weight of alcohol in the defendant’s blood, it shall be presumed that the
defendant’s ability to operate a vehicle was not impaired due to the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, and that the defendant was not under the
influence of intoxicating liquor.



         (b)   If there was at the time in excess of 0.07 percent
but less than 0.10 percent by weight of alcohol in the defendant’s blood,
it shall be presumed that the defendant’s ability to operate a vehicle was
impaired within the provisions of section 5.15(3) due to the consumption of
intoxicating liquor.



         (c)   If there was at the time 0.10 percent or more by
weight of alcohol in the defendant’s blood, it shall be presumed that the
defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.



      (9)   A person’s refusal to submit to a chemical test as
provided in subsection (3) shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution for
a crime described in section 5.15c(l) only for the purpose of showing that a
test was offered to the defendant, but not as evidence in determining
innocence or guilt of the defendant. The jury shall be instructed accordingly.



      Sec. 5.15b. Operating Commercial Vehicle Under Influence.



      From and after January 1, 1993:



      (1)   A person, whether licensed or not, whose blood contains
0.04% or more but not more than 0.07% by weight of alcohol shall not operate
a commercial motor vehicle within the state.



      (2)   A police officer may, without a warrant, arrest a person
if the police officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at
the time of an accident, the driver of a commercial motor vehicle involved in
the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of this section or of
a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section.



      (3)   A person who is convicted of a violation of this section
or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine
of not more than $300.00, or both, together with costs of the prosecution.
Further, as required by section 257.625m(3) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, as
part of the sentence, the court shall order the Secretary of State to suspend
the vehicle group designations on the person’s operator’s or
chauffeur’s license pursuant to section 257.319b(l)(c) of the Michigan
Vehicle Code or, if the vehicle was carrying hazardous material required to
have a placard pursuant to 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199, in accordance with
section 257.319b(l)(d) of the Michigan Vehicle Code. The court shall not
order the Secretary of State to issue a restricted license that would permit
the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle.



      Sec. 5.15c. Implied consent; blood sample from killed driver.



      (1)   A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or
other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor
vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within
the Village of Holly is considered to have given consent to chemical tests of
his or her blood, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the amount
of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in his or her blood,
in all of the following circumstances:



         (a)   If the person is arrested for a violation of
section 5.15(1), (3) or (4).



         (b)   If the person is arrested for felonious driving,
negligent homicide, manslaughter or murder resulting from the operation of a
motor vehicle, and the peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
the person was operating the vehicle while impaired or under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or while having a blood
alcohol content of 0.10 percent or more, or if the person is less than
twenty-one (21) years of age while having any bodily alcohol content. As used
in this subsection, “any bodily alcohol content” means either of the
following:



            (i)   A blood alcohol content of not less than
0.02% or more than 0.07% by weight of alcohol.



            (ii)   Any presence of alcohol within a person’s
body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor.



      (2)   A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or
a condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a
physician shall not be considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of
blood.



      (3)   The tests shall be administered as provided in section
5.15a(3).



      Sec. 5.15d. Right to refuse chemical test.



      (1)   If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to
submit to a chemical test offered pursuant to section 5.15a(3), a test shall
not be given without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain the
court order.



      (2)   A written report shall immediately be forwarded to the
Secretary of State by the peace officer. The report shall state that the
officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a
crime described in section 5.15c(l) and that the person had refused to submit
to the test upon the request of the peace officer and had been advised of the
consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and
furnished by the Secretary of State.



      Sec. 5.15f. Suspend or revoke; hearing.



      (1)   If a person who refuses to submit to a chemical test
pursuant to section 5.15d does not request a hearing within 14 days of the
date of notice pursuant to section 5.15e, the Secretary of State shall
suspend or deny the person’s operator’s or chauffeur’s license or
permit to drive, or nonresident operating privilege, for a period of 6
months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within a period of 7 years, for
1 year. If the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a
vehicle in the state, the Secretary of State shall deny to the person the
issuance of a license or permit for a period of 6 months, or for a second or
subsequent refusal within a period of 7 years, for 1 year.



      (2)   If a hearing is requested, the Secretary of State shall
hold the hearing in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided
in section 257.322 of the Michigan Vehicle Code. A person shall not order a
hearing officer to make a particular finding on any issue enumerated under
subdivisions (a) to (d). Not less than 5 days’ notice of the hearing shall
be mailed to the person requesting the hearing, to the peace officer who
filed the report under section 5.15d, and if the prosecuting attorney
requests receipt of the notice, to the prosecuting attorney of the county
where the arrest was made. The hearing officer may administer oaths, issue
subpoenas for the attendance of necessary witnesses, and grant a reasonable
request for an adjournment. Not more than 1 adjournment shall be granted to a
party and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed 14 days. A hearing
under this subsection shall be scheduled to be held within 45 days after the
date of arrest and shall, except for delay attributable to the unavailability
of the defendant, a witness, or material evidence, or due to an interlocutory
appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket
congestion, be finally adjudicated within 77 days after the date of arrest.
The hearing shall cover only the following issues:



         (a)   Whether the peace officer had reasonable grounds
to believe that the person had committed a crime described in section
5.15c(l).



         (b)   Whether the person was placed under arrest for a
crime described in section 5.15c(l).



         (c)   If the person refused to submit to the test upon
the request of the officer, whether the refusal was reasonable.



         (d)   Whether the person was advised of the rights under
section 5.15a(3).



      (3)   The hearing officer shall make a record of proceedings
held pursuant to subsection (2). The record shall be prepared and transcribed
in accordance with section 86 of the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969,
Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, being section 24.286 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws. Upon notification of the filing of a petition for judicial
review pursuant to section 257.323, the hearing officer shall transmit to the
court in which the petition was filed, not less than 10 days before the
matter is set for review, the original or a certified copy of the official
record of the proceedings. Proceedings at which evidence was presented need
not be transcribed and transmitted if the sole reason for review is to
determine whether or not the court will order the issuance of a restricted
license. The parties to the proceedings for judicial review may stipulate
that the record be shortened. A parry unreasonably refusing to stipulate to a
shortened record may be taxed by the court in which the petition is filed for
the additional costs. The court may permit subsequent corrections to the
record.



      (4)   After a hearing, if the person who requested the hearing
does not prevail, the Secretary of State shall suspend or deny issuance of a
license or driving permit or a nonresident operating privilege of the person
for a period of 6 months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within 7
years, for 1 year. If the person is a resident without a license or permit to
operate a vehicle in the state, the Secretary of State shall deny to the
person the issuance of a license or permit for a period of 6 months, or for a
second or subsequent refusal within 7 years, for 1 year. The person may file
a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the attest was made to
review the suspension or denial as provided in section 323 of the Michigan
Vehicle Code. If after the hearing the person who requested the hearing
prevails, the peace officer who filed the report under section 5.15d may,
with the consent of the prosecuting attorney, file a petition in the circuit
court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the determination
of the hearing officer as provided in section 323 of the Michigan Vehicle
Code.



      (5)   When it has been finally determined that a
nonresidents’ privilege to operate a vehicle in the state has been
suspended or denied, the Department shall give notice in writing of the
action taken to the motor vehicle administrator of the state of the
person’s residence and of each state in which he or she has a license to
operate a motor vehicle.



      Sec. 5.15g. Chemical Test Refusal



      (1)   If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to
section 5.15a(3), or submits to the chemical test and the test reveals a
blood alcohol content of 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol, the peace
officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all of the
following:



         (a)   On behalf of the Secretary of State, immediately
confiscate the person’s license or permit to operate a motor vehicle, and,
if the person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a
temporary license or permit to the person that is valid until the criminal
charges against the person are dismissed, or until the person pleads guilty
or nolo contendere to, or is found guilty of, those charges. The temporary
license or permit shall be on a form provided by the Secretary of State.



         (b)   Except as provided in subsection (2), immediately
do all of the following:



            (i)   Forward a copy of the written report of the
person’s refusal to submit to a chemical test to the Secretary of State.



            (ii)   Notify the Secretary of State by means of
the law enforcement information network that a temporary license or permit
was issued to the person.



            (iii)   Except as provided in subsection (2),
destroy the person’s driver’s license or permit.



      (2)   If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant
to section 5.15a(3) that requires the withdrawal of blood and a report of the
results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the peace officer
who requested the person to submit to the test shall comply with subsection
(l)(a) pending receipt of the test report. If, upon receipt, the report
reveals a blood alcohol content of 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol, the
peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall
immediately comply with subsection (l)(b). If, upon receipt, the report
reveals a blood alcohol content of less than 0.10% by weight of alcohol, the
peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall
immediately notify the person of the test results, and immediately return the
person’s license or permit by first-class mail to the address given at the
time of arrest.



      Sec. 5.15h. Preliminary chemical breath analysis



      (1)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that
a person was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to
the general public, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
in the state, and that the person by the consumption of intoxicating liquor
may have affected his or her ability to operate a vehicle, may require the
person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis.



      (2)   A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in
part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.



      (3)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis
shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in
section 5.15a(l) or in an administrative hearing under section 5.15f, solely
to assist the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the
validity of an arrest. This subsection does not limit the introduction of
other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest.



      (4)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis shall remain subject to the requirements of sections 5.15a, 5.15c,
5.15d, 5.15e, and 5.15f for the purposes of chemical tests described in those
sections.



      (5)   A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a
civil infraction.



      (6)   Section 5.15g shall apply to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis.



      Sec. 5.15i. Vehicle Immobilization



      The following are the procedures utilized when vehicle
immobilization is authorized by state law.



      (1)   When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor
vehicle for a violation of a law of this state or local ordinance for which
vehicle immobilization is required, the peace officer shall do all of the
following:



         (a)   Immediately confiscate the vehicle’s
registration place and destroy it.



         (b)   Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for
the vehicle in the same form prescribed by the Secretary of State for
temporary registration plates issued under section MCL 257.226a or 257.226b.



         (c)   Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on
the vehicle in the manner required by the Secretary of State.



         (d)   Notify the Secretary of State through the law
enforcement information required by the Secretary of State that the
registration plate was confiscated and destroyed, and a temporary plate was
issued.



      (2)   A temporary vehicle registration plate issued as
provided for in this section is, pursuant to  MCL 257.625g, valid until the
charges against the person are dismissed, the person pleads guilty or nolo
contendere to those changes, or the person is found guilty of or is acquitted
of those changes.



      (3)   A court shall order a vehicle immobilized under section
MCL 257.904d by the use of any available technology approved by the court
that locks the ignition, wheels, or steering of the vehicle or otherwise
prevents any person from operating the vehicle or that prevents the defendant
from operating the vehicle. If a vehicle is immobilized under this section,
the court may order the vehicle stored at a location and in a manner
considered appropriate by the court. The court may order the person convicted
of violating this section to pay the cost of immobilizing and storing the
vehicle.



      (4)   A vehicle subject to immobilization under this section
may be sold during the period of immobilization, but shall not be sold to a
person who is exempt from paying a use tax under section 3(3)(a) of the use
tax act, 1937 PA, MCL 205.93 without a court order.



      (5)   A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor
vehicle by vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease, or otherwise
obtain a motor vehicle during this immobilization period.



      (6)   A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or
attempt to remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he or she knows or
has reason to know has been installed on a vehicle by court order by vehicle
immobilization or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he or she
knows or has reason to know has been ordered immobilized.



      (7)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not move than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $100.00, or both.



      (8)   To the extent that another village ordinance regarding
the storage or removal of vehicles conflicts with an order of immobilization
issued by the court, the village ordinance is preempted.



      (9)   If a peace officer stops a vehicle that is being
operated in violation of an immobilization order, the vehicle shall be
impounded pending an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (10)   The court shall require the defendant or a person who
provided immobilization services to the court under this section to certify
that a vehicle ordered immobilized by the court is immobilized as required.



      Sec. 5.15j. Emergency Response Cost Recovery



      (1)   Purpose and Intent.



This section is adopted for the purpose and intent of requiring the
reimbursement of costs inclined by the Village of Holly in making emergency
responses to accidents or incidents involving persons who operate motor
vehicles while under the influence of or impaired by intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, or a combination thereof.



      (2)   Definitions.



         When used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:



         Emergency Response means the dispatch, provision or
utilization of police, fire fighting, emergency medical and/or rescue
services by the village or by a law enforcement agency or private individual
or entity operating at the request or direction of the village in connection
with an incident resulting in a traffic stop or arrest, or at an accident
involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating a
motor vehicle while impaired by, or under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a controlled substances or a combination of intoxicating liquor and
a controlled substance.



         Expense of an emergency response means the direct and
reasonable costs incurred by the village or a private person or entity
operating at the request or direction of the village, when making an
emergency response to the accident or incident, including the costs of
providing law enforcement, firefighting, and emergency medical and/or rescue
services at the scene. These costs further include, but are not limited to,
all the salaries and wages of the personnel responding to the incident, all
salaries and wages of the village personnel engaged in investigation,
supervision and report preparation, all costs connected with the
administration and provision of all chemical tests of his or her blood,
breath, or urine and all costs related to any prosecution of the person
causing the incident.



      (3)   Liability for expense of an emergency response.



         (a)   Person responsible. Any person is liable for the
expense of an emergency response, if while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or the combined influence of
an intoxication liquor or a controlled substance, such person’s operation
of a motor vehicle proximately creates or causes any incident or accident
resulting in an emergency response.



         (b)   Presumptions. For the purpose of this section, a
person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance, or the combined influence of an intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, when his or her physical or mental abilities are
impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a
motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary
prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor if a chemical
analysis of his or her blood, urine, or breath indicates that the amount of
alcohol in his or her blood was in excess of seven one-hundredths of one
percent (0.07)



         (c)   Charge against person. The expense of an emergency
response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under
this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible
by the village in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a
contract, express or implied.



         (d)   Cost of recovery schedule. The village shall, by
resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expenses of an
emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from
either the Village Clerk or the law enforcement agency.



         (e)   Billing. The Village Clerk, or the Clerk’s
designee, may within thirty (30) days of receiving the itemized costs, or any
part thereof, incurred by the village for emergency response, submit a bill
for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable
for the expenses as enumerated under this article. The bill(s) shall require
full payment in thirty (30) days from the date of service.



         (f)   District Court. The 52-2 Judicial District Court
is authorized to collect the above-described debt for the village as part of
a sentence of a person deemed liable for the expense and may charge a service
fee for such collection in an amount mutually agreed upon by the court and
the village. If the 52-2 District Court imposes costs as part of a sentence
in an amount different than set hereunder, the Clerk shall adopt that sum as
the expense of an emergency response in lieu of the schedule of costs adopted
by the Village.



         (g)   Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any
failure by the person described in this article as liable for the expense of
an emergency response, to pay the bill within thirty (30) days of service
shall be considered to be in default. The failure to pay may further be
considered a violation of probation if the payment was ordered by the court
at the time of sentencing. The village may commence civil suit to recover the
expenses and all costs allowed by law.



   (D)   The following provisions in Sec. 5.62a are amended to read as
follows.



      Sec. 5.62a. Driving while license suspended, revoked, denied or
never applied



      (1)   A person whose operator’s or chauffeur’s license or
registration certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been
notified as provided in section MCL 257.212 of that suspension or revocation,
whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a
license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open
to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this village.



      (2)   A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle
owned by the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the
general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within this village by a person whose
license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose
application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a
license, except as permitted under this ordinance.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person
who violates subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as
follows: for a first violation, by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not more than $500, or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used
with the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed
driver to operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall
be canceled by the Secretary of State upon notification by a peace officer
pursuant to MCL 257.226a and 257.226b.



      (4)   Before a person is arraigned before a district court
magistrate or judge on a charge of violating this section, the arresting
officer shall obtain the person’s driving record from the Secretary of
State and shall furnish the record to the court. The driving record of the
person may be obtained from the secretary of state’s computer information
network.



      (5)   This section does not apply to a person who operates a
vehicle solely for the purpose of protecting human life or property is the
life or property is endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential.



      (6)   A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or
revoked and who has been notified as provided in section MCL 257.212 of that
suspension or revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group
designation has been denied as provided in this act or who has never applied
for a vehicle group designation and who operates a commercial motor vehicle
within this state, except as permitted under this ordinance, while any of
those conditions existing is guilty of a misdemeanor or punishable, except as
otherwise provided in this section, by imprisonment for not less than 3 days
or more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both.



      (7)    For purposes of this section, a person who never
applied for a license includes a person who applied for a license, was
denied, and never applied again.



   (E)   The following provisions in Sec. 5.82 are amended to read as
follows.



      Sec. 5.82. Mandatory child restraints.



      (1)   Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise
provided by law, a rule promulgated pursuant to Act. No. 306 of the Public
Acts of 1969, as amended, being sections 24.201 to 24.315. of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, or federal regulation, each driver transporting a child in a
motor vehicle shall properly secure each child in a child restraint system as
follows:



         (a)   Any child less than one (1) year of age in a child
restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213.



         (b)   Any child one (1) year of age or more but less
than four (4) years of age, when transported in the front seat in a child
restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213.



         (c)   Any child one (1) year of age or more but less
than four (4) years of age, when transported in the rear seat, in a child
restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213,
unless the child is secured by a safety belt provided in the motor vehicle.



      (2)   This section does not apply to a nonresident driver
transporting a child in this state or to any child being nursed.



      (3)   This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being
driven is a bus, school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor
vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts under section 257.710b
of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or federal law or regulations.



      (4)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a
civil infraction.



      (5)    Points shall not be assessed for a violation of this
section.



      (6)   The Secretary of State may exempt by rules promulgated
pursuant to Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, as amended, a class of
children from the requirements of this section, if the Secretary of State
determines that the use of the child restraint system required under
subsection (1) is impractical because of physical unfitness, a medical
problem, or body size. The Secretary of State may specify alternate means of
protection for children exempted under this subsection.



(1984 Code, § 2-01-030)  (Ord. 116, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 133, passed
3-29-1983; Ord. 220, passed 1-28-1992; Ord. 253, passed 11-22-1994; Ord. 255,
passed 4-11-1995; Ord. 328, passed 9-23-1999; Ord. 329, passed 11-4-1999;
Ord. 360, passed 5-28-2003)



§ 70.04  PUBLICATION.



   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall publish the ordinance from which this
chapter derived in the manner required by law and shall, at the same time,
publish a supplementary notice setting forth the purpose of the said Uniform
Traffic Code and of the fact that complete copy of the Code is available at
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for inspection by the public at all times.



(1984 Code, § 2-01-040)  (Ord. 115, passed 6-16-1981)



§ 70.05  ADOPTION OF MOTOR VEHICLE CODE.



   The State Motor Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 257.1 to 257.923 is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein



(1984 Code, § 2-01-050)  (Ord. 363, passed 12-28-2003)



§ 70.06  LOCAL REFERENCES.




References in the State Vehicle Code to LOCAL AUTHORITIES shall mean the
“Village of Holly”.




(1984 Code, § 2-01-060)  (Ord. 363, passed 12-28-2003)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for a person to violate the provisions of
this chapter, unless that violation is by this chapter or the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code declared to be a civil infraction.



   (B)   Those violations which constitute civil infractions shall be
punishable by payment of a civil fine in the amounts specified by M.C.L.A. §
257.907 of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time.



CHAPTER 71:  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, AND MOPEDS



Section



   71.01   Operation of bicycles in the Downtown Business District



   71.02   Portable recreational structures



   71.03   Skateboards, roller skates, coasters, and similar devices;
definitions



   71.04   Operation of skateboards



   71.05   Parental responsibilities



   71.06   Taking device into physical custody as an alternative to
prosecution



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES IN THE DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   A person shall not operate a bicycle in the Downtown Business
District either in the roadway or on the sidewalks, between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle who approaches the Downtown
Business District shall dismount from said vehicle and shall walk the bicycle
through the Downtown Business District.



   (C)   The Downtown Business District shall include Saginaw Street
from Maple Street to the railroad tracks and include Battle Alley.



   (D)   Any person violating these provisions shall be responsible for
a civil infraction.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-020)  (Ord. 119, passed 10-13-1981)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.02  PORTABLE RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PORTABLE RECREATIONAL STRUCTURE. Any man-made object, excluding
motor vehicles, having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land
whether or not affixed to land and includes basketball poles, support
structures, and nets and street hockey nets and skateboard ramps.



      STREET. Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways,
freeways, parkways, lanes, alleys, and other ways used for or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.



   (B)   Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, erect or cause to be placed or erected any portable recreational
structure on any street for a period exceeding 24 hours.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-050)  (Ord. 119, passed 10-13-1981; Ord. 419, passed
10-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, AND SIMILAR DEVICES;
DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 71.04(A), 71.06, and Ch. 76, Sch. II, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   OPERATE. To move or propel a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades,
coasters, or a similar device with the operator riding thereon or without a
rider thereon while such device is not under the immediate physical control
of an operator.



   SKATEBOARD, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, COASTER, or SIMILAR DEVICE.
Every device, except for a bicycle, propelled by human power upon which any
person may ride, which has wheels and which is being used for recreational
purposes.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-060)  (Ord. 219, passed 12-10-1991)



§ 71.04  OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS.



   (A)   Operation of skateboards and in the like in pedestrian areas.
Any person who operates a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, coaster,
or similar device on any public sidewalk, public right- of-way, or area
commonly frequented by pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing or
approaching such pedestrian from any direction.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-070)



   (B)   Operation of skateboards and the like in parking lots or
privately-owned sidewalks open to the public. Where it has been posted by the
property owner as being not permitted, it shall be unlawful to operate a
skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, coaster, or scooters or any similar
device, which is propelled by human power.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-071)



(Ord. 219, passed 12-10-1991; Ord. 335, passed 12-14-2000)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.05  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any parents, legal guardian, legal custodian,
or other person having the responsibility or custody of any minor child under
the age of 17 years to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, or encourage said
minor to violate the provisions of § 71.04(B), either by overt act, by
failing to act, or by lack of supervision and control over said minor. The
fact that a minor under the age of 17 is apprehended while violating §
71.04(B) shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section and
subject to the same fines and penalties as the juvenile offender.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-072)  (Ord. 335, passed 12-14-2000)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.06  TAKING DEVICE INTO PHYSICAL CUSTODY AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO
PROSECUTION.



   Whenever a duly certified police officer of the village witnesses a
person violating this chapter, said police officer may, in lieu of initiating
a prosecution of such person for said violation, take into physical custody
the skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, coaster, or similar device used
in such violation subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   The identity of the owner or operator of the device shall be
ascertained;



   (B)   The device shall be placed in the Police Department property
room under the identification procedures established by the Chief of Police;



   (C)   The owner or operator shall be given a receipt for such device
indicating the day and time when the device was taken into custody and the
day and time after which the device may be returned to the owner or operator;



   (D)   The device shall be released to the owner or operator any time
after 9:00 a.m. on the day following the day on which the device was taken
into physical custody; and



   (E)   The device shall be released to the owner or operator upon
presentation by such owner or operator of the receipt issued for said device
except where the owner or operator is a minor in which case the device shall
be released only to the parent or legal guardian of such minor.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-090)  (Ord. 219, passed 12-10-1991)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty of up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine of $500.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-090)  (Ord. 219, passed 12-10-1991)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section




Special Parking Prohibitions




   72.01   Parking during snow season; prohibited during snow emergency



   72.02   Parking restrictions



   72.03   Signs to be installed



   72.04   Violations




Handicapped Parking




   72.15   Ordinance adoption



   72.16   Definitions



   72.17   Spaces required



   72.18   Accessibility



   72.19   Prohibited parking



 



   72.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parking Schedules, see Ch. 77




SPECIAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS




§ 72.01  PARKING DURING SNOW SEASON; PROHIBITED DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.



   (A)   No parking on any village street during a snow emergency. A
snow emergency is declared when two inches of snow or more are predicted by
the National Weather Service out of Flint or White Lake, whichever is higher.



   (B)   Parking will remain prohibited until 24 hours after the
snowfall has ended.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-010)  (Ord. 144, passed 11-13-1984; Ord. 226, passed
8-11-1992; Ord. 238, passed 8-3-1993; Ord. 400, passed 5-17-2009; Am. Ord.
452, passed 5-8-2018)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   No person shall park a commercially licensed vehicle or a trailer with
a load capacity greater than 9,000 pounds or both on any street where parking
of vehicles is permitted for a period of time longer than one hour, except
when loading or unloading a delivery.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-030)  (Ord. 256, passed 7-25-1995)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.03  SIGNS TO BE INSTALLED.



   Traffic signs shall be installed at all public street accesses to the
village indicating said prohibitions with regard to the parking of vehicles
on public street and at the designated areas within village-owned parking
lots.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-040)  (Ord. 144, passed 11-13-1984; Ord. 238, passed
8-3-1993; Ord. 256, passed 7-25-1995)



§ 72.04  VIOLATIONS.



   Violators of this chapter shall be responsible for a civil infraction.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-080)  (Ord. 149, passed 10-29-1985; Ord. 194, passed
10-24-1989; Ord. 238, passed 8-3-1993; Ord. 256, passed 7-25-1995)  Penalty,
see § 72.99




HANDICAPPED PARKING




§ 72.15  ORDINANCE ADOPTION.



   Pursuant to Public Act 235 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.941 et
seq., as amended, an ordinance shall be adopted to regulate and control
traffic in parking areas; and to provide a penalty for violations thereof.



(1984 Code, § 2-03-010)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)



§ 72.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKING AREA. An area used by the public as a means of access to or any
egress from, and for the free parking of motor vehicles by patrons of a
shopping center, business, factory, hospital, institution, or similar
building or location.



   SHOPPING CENTER. A minimum area of three acres of land on which there
is located one or more stores or business establishments, and where there is
provided a parking area.



(1984 Code, § 2-03-020)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)



§ 72.17  SPACES REQUIRED.



   (A)   On the effective date of this subchapter, all owners and
persons in charge of the general operation and control of a parking area of a
shopping center shall provide accessible parking spaces for the physically
impaired in accordance with the following table and identified by signs as
being reserved for physically handicapped persons.



   (B)   Signs shall be located approximately six feet above grade.
Each reserved parking space shall be not less than 12 feet wide. Where a curb
exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined
approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one foot in 12 feet
and a width of not less than four feet shall be provided for wheelchair
access. Parking spaces for the physically impaired shall be located as close
as possible to walkways and entrances.



   (C)   Signs shall be provided when necessary, indicating the
direction of travel to an accessible entrance.



 


Total Parking In Lot

 

Required Number of Accessible Spaces






0-25

 

1




25-50

 

2




51-75

 

3




76-100

 

4




101-150

 

5




151-200

 

6




201-300

 

7




301-400

 

8





 



(1984 Code, § 2-03-030)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)



§ 72.18  ACCESSIBILITY.



   Nothing herein shall prohibit the owner or person in control of a
parking area of a shopping center from providing more accessible parking
spaces than this chapter requires.



(1984 Code, § 2-03-050)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)



§ 72.19  PROHIBITED PARKING.



   (A)   A vehicle shall not be parked in a parking space, clearly
identified by an official sign as being reserved for use by the physically
impaired, which is on public property or private property available for
public use, unless the person is physically impaired as described in Public
Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.19a or unless the person is parking
the vehicle for the benefit of a physically impaired person.



   (B)   In order for the vehicle to be parked in a handicapped parking
space, the vehicle shall display one of the following:



      (1)   A certificate of identification issued to a physically
impaired person under Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.675(5)
which has been affixed to the lower left corner of the front windshield;



      (2)   A special registration plate issued under Public Act 300
of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.803d to a physically impaired person;



      (3)   A similar certificate issued by another state to a
physically impaired person;



      (4)   A similar registration plate issued by another state to
a physically impaired person; or



      (5)   A special registration plate to which a handicapped tab
is attached, issued under Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.803f.



(1984 Code, § 2-03-060)  (Ord. 173, passed 4-12-1988)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Anyone who, as a result of violating a provision of §§ 72.01
through 72.04, receives a parking violation notice, upon a determination of
responsibility thereon, shall pay a fine at the Village Parking Violations
Bureau as follows:



      (1)   Thirty dollars for a violation of § 72.01 (parking
during snow season - prohibited during certain hours) and Ch. 77, Schd. I
(parking during snow season - prohibited in parking lots during certain
hours); and



      (2)   Forty dollars for a violation of § 72.03, “parking
restrictions”, Ch. 77, Schd. III, “Downtown Parking Prohibited”, and
Ch. 77, Schd. IV, “Restrictions on Alley Street and Battle Alley”.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-090)



   (B)   (1)   A person who violates §§ 72.15 through 72.18 in
failing to provide accessible parking spaces for the physically impaired is
responsible for a civil infraction; and violations shall be processed in the
same manner as a civil infraction under Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 to 257.923.



(1984 Code, § 2-03-040)



      (2)   A person who violates § 72.19 is responsible for a
civil infraction and shall be fined not less than $100 together with the
costs of prosecution.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-070)



(Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 173, passed 4-12-1988; Ord. 219, passed
12-10-1991; Ord. 269, passed 8-13-1996)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAINS



Section



   73.01   Blocking streets; times; limitations



   73.02   Speed; restriction



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  BLOCKING STREETS; TIMES; LIMITATIONS.



   No railroad corporation or company owning or operating a railroad
within the corporate limits of the village shall permit its engines, cars, or
trains to obstruct any public street or highway for a longer period than five
minutes at any one time.



(1984 Code, § 2-06-010)  (Ord. 3, passed 10-23-1962)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  SPEED; RESTRICTION.



   No railroad or railway corporation or company owning or operating a
railroad within and through the corporate limits of the village shall
maintain or permit the rate of speed of its engines, cars, or trains to
exceed the rate of 25 mph.



(1984 Code, § 2-06-020)  (Ord. 3, passed 10-23-1962; Ord. 5, passed
4-27-1965; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fries, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau. If the civil fine is paid at
the Village Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



      (1)   In the case of another offense within one year of the
date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall be
known as the second offense.)



      (2)   In the case of another offense within one year of the
date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



      (3)   In the case of another offense within one year of the
date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be known
as the fourth offense.)



      (4)   All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



(1984 Code, § 2-06-030)  (Ord. 3, passed 10-23-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 294, passed 7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 74:  MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY



Section



   74.01   Motor Carrier Safety Act; adoption



   74.02   Publication



 



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT; ADOPTION.



   The village hereby adopts by reference the Motor Carrier Safety Act,
Public Act 181 of 1963, being M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11 et seq.



(1984 Code, § 2-07–010)



§ 74.02  PUBLICATION.



   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall publish the ordinance from which this
chapter derived in the manner required by law and shall, at the same time,
publish a supplementary notice setting forth the purpose of the Motor Carrier
Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, being M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11 et
seq., and of the fact that a complete copy of the Act is available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for inspection by the public at all times.



(1984 Code, § 2-07-030)  (Ord. 402, passed 5-31-2009)



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations of this chapter which constitute a “serious
safety defect” shall be punishable by payment of a civil fine of $300 for
each violation.



   (B)   All other violations of this chapter shall be responsible for
a civil infraction punishable by a fine of $250 for each violation.



(1984 Code, § 2-07-020)



CHAPTER 75:  TRUCK ROUTES



Section



   75.01   Purpose



   75.02   Traffic-control signs



   75.03   Traffic routes maps



   75.04   Motor vehicle or restricted class



   75.05   Travel into or out of the village



   75.06   Travel within the village, truck routes; exceptions



   75.07   Civil infraction



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the orderly
operation of trucks on streets of the village. The primary objectives are to
facilitate the transfer of goods and services by trucks to businesses and to
preserve the quality of life of neighborhoods.



   (B)   Prime considerations involved with the purpose of this chapter
are:



      (1)   The safety of citizens;



      (2)   Avoidance of unreasonable or unnecessary disturbance or
reduction in property values due to truck noise, vibrations, and/or air
pollution;



      (3)   Protection against the deterioration of those streets
not designated for truck traffic; and



      (4)   Provide adequate truck service to businesses and
residences in an expeditious manner, having due regard for economical vehicle
operation.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-010)



§ 75.02  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS.



   Where density of traffic, protection of life and property, construction
and condition of the roadway, or any hazardous conditions make it advisable,
the direction of traffic flow, and routing of buses, trucks, and heavy
vehicles, will be made by this chapter by duly posting traffic-control signs
and it shall be unlawful to drive or cause to be driven, any vehicle in
violation of such direction and routing.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-020)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.03  TRAFFIC ROUTES MAPS.



   (A)   The streets designated as forming the truck route system are
indicated upon the village truck route map as approved from time to time by
resolution of the Village Council. A copy of the village truck route map
shall be available for public inspection at the Village Police Department and
at the Village Hall.



   (B)   The village truck route map, as approved by resolution of the
Village Council, together with all notations, references, or other
information located thereon, are made a part of this chapter and shall have
the same force and effect as if it was fully set forth or described herein.
The map shall be properly attested to by the Village Clerk-Treasurer.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-030)



§ 75.04  MOTOR VEHICLE OR RESTRICTED CLASS.



   Motor vehicles of the restricted class as used in this chapter are
defined as all motor vehicles having a weight of 14,000 pounds or more
including the load therein, except vehicles carrying or designated to carry
passengers, all governmentally-owned or leased vehicles, public utility
vehicles, and vehicles used for private refuse handling.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-050)



§ 75.05  TRAVEL INTO OR OUT OF THE VILLAGE.



   Motor vehicles of the restricted class, which do not have a pick-up,
delivery, or service within the village, shall enter and exit the village on
truck routes only.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-060)



§ 75.06  TRAVEL WITHIN THE VILLAGE, TRUCK ROUTES; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Motor vehicles of the restricted class, while in the village,
shall travel on truck routes only, except as follows.



   (B)   The operation of authorized emergency vehicles may occur on
any roadway in the village.



   (C)   The operation of recreational vehicles as defined by state
law, which are of the restricted class, may use any roadway in the village.



   (D)   The operation of motor vehicles of the restricted class is
permitted on any roadway in the village for pick-up, delivery, or service
where the destination is not on a truck route; provided, that ingress and
egress thereto or therefrom is accomplished in the following manner.



      (1)   Vehicles of the restricted class shall utilize
designated truck routes to the point closest to delivery, pick-up, or service.



      (2)   Upon leaving or returning to the truck route, vehicles
of the restricted class shall utilize the shortest route available to reach
the delivery, pick-up, or service.



   (E)   The roadways designated as truck routes in Ch. 76, Schd. II
shall be posted with signs at appropriate intervals. Such signs shall consist
of the words “Truck Route” below which shall be placed an arrow
indicating the direction of the truck route.



   (F)   Non-truck route streets may be posted with signs at reasonable
intervals where appropriate. Such signs shall indicate “No Trucks” or
“Commercial Vehicles Prohibited”.



   (G)   It shall be the duty of any person driving or in charge or
control of any buses, trucks, or heavy vehicles, other than vehicles carrying
or designated to carry passengers upon any roadway not designated as a truck
route shall upon the request of a police officer, stop and answer any
questions regarding the weight of the truck, its destination, and its point
of origin; and such persons shall also present a DOT-approved log book,
weight slips, delivery slips, manifests, and other written evidence of
destination or point of origin, for the officer’s examination.



   (H)   If any designated truck route or portion thereof shall be
under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, motor vehicles of the
restricted class shall use such other temporary truck routes as may be
designated by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.



   (I)   In case of an emergency, a temporary permit allowing
exceptions to this chapter may be issued by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-070)



§ 75.07  CIVIL INFRACTION.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
a civil infraction and is subject to the same penalties, fines, and sanctions
provided for municipal civil infractions in § 10.99.



(1984 Code, § 8-12-080)



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 10.99, in addition to any other
costs or sanctions, repeat offenses within the same 12-month period shall be
subject to increased minimum civil fines as provided below.



 


Violation

 

Fine




Fine for 1st violation

 

$100




Fine for 2nd violation

 

$250




Fine for 3rd or subsequent violation

 

$500




 



(1984 Code, § 8-12-090)  (Ord. 382, passed 12-17-2006)



CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Truck routes



      II.   Downtown Business District; operation of skateboards
prohibited



SCHEDULE I.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   The following roadways, or portions of roadways, in the village, are
hereby designated as truck routes for the purposes of this schedule.



 


Street

 

Location




Grange Hall Road

 

From village limits (east) to village limits (west)




Maple Street

 

From village limits (west) to Saginaw Street




Saginaw Street

 

From Maple Street north to village limits




 



(1984 Code, § 8-12-040)



SCHEDULE II.  DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT; OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall operate any skateboard, roller skates, roller blades,
coaster, or a similar device on a public sidewalk, parking lot, highway,
street, or roadway frequented by pedestrians within the downtown business
district, the boundaries of which shall be Oakland Street as extended
eastward to the C & O Railroad tracks on the north, the Grand Trunk railroad
tracks on the south, Broad Street south of Maple, and the C & O Railroad
tracks north of Maple on the east and First Street on the west.



(1984 Code, § 2-02-080)  (Ord. 219, passed 12-10-1991)  Penalty, see §
71.99



CHAPTER 77:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Signs to be installed



      II.   Parking during snow season; during certain hours;
prohibited in parking lots during certain hours



      III.   Downtown parking prohibited



      IV.   Restrictions on Alley Street and Battle Alley



SCHEDULE I.  SIGNS TO BE INSTALLED.



   Traffic signs shall be installed on Saginaw Street, Broad Street,
Battle Alley, and on Alley Street noting the prohibitions in Ch.73.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-070)  (Ord. 149, passed 10-29-1985; Ord. 238, passed
8-3-1993; Ord. 256, passed 7-25-1995)



SCHEDULE II.  PARKING DURING SNOW SEASON; DURING CERTAIN HOURS; PROHIBITED
IN PARKING LOTS DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



   Pursuant to Uniform Traffic Code, § 8.10 et. seq., it is hereby
declared to be improper for any vehicles to be parked in village-owned
parking lots between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., from November 15
though April 15 of each year except in the following designated areas.



 


Location

 

Spaces Allotted

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Crapo park parking area
 

Entire parking lot

 

238

 

8-3-1993



The parking lot bounded by building(s) on the south side of Maple Street on
the north, Broad Street on the east, Battle Alley and shops on the south, and
the shops on the east side of S. Saginaw Street;
 

14 parking spaces center two parking lanes

 

238

 

8-3-1993



The parking lot bounded by Civic Drive and Maple Sheet and the shops on the
west side of S. Saginaw Street
 

11 parking spaces west side of middle island

 

238

 

8-3-1993



The surfaced area west of the village offices know as Parcel “B”
 

Entire area

 

238

 

8-3-1993




 



(1984 Code, § 2-04-020)  Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE III.  DOWNTOWN PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No vehicle shall be parked on Saginaw Street and Broad Street between
Maple and Junction Streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-050)  (Ord. 149, passed 10-29-1985; Ord. 238, passed
8-3-1993; Ord. 256, passed 7-25-1995)  Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE IV.  RESTRICTIONS ON ALLEY STREET AND BATTLE ALLEY.



   No vehicle shall be parked on Alley Street between Maple and Junction
Streets and on Battle Alley between Broad and S. Saginaw Street at any time.



(1984 Code, § 2-04-060)  (Ord. 149, passed 10-29-1985; Ord. 238, passed
8-3-1993; Ord. 256, passed 7-25-1995)  Penalty, see § 72.99



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      92.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



      93.   SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES



      94.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



      95.   MARINE SAFETY



      96.   PARKS



      97.   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   Short title



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Farm animals prohibited



   90.04   Wild and vicious animals



   90.05   Barking and other loud animal noises prohibited



   90.06   Animal care



   90.07   Restraint of animals



   90.08   Nuisances



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be referred to as the “Animal Control Regulations
Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-010) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Every non-human species of vertebrate or invertebrate creature,
both domestic and wild.



   AT LARGE. Any animal when it is off the property of any person keeping
or harboring such animal and not under the control of a competent person.



   KENNEL or CATTERY. Any premises wherein any person engages in the
business of boarding, breeding, buying or selling, training for a fee, or
letting for hire dogs and cats.



   PERSON. Any person, group of persons, association, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity.



   PET or COMPANION ANIMAL. An animal of a species that has been bred and
raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on
people for food and shelter; any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   RESTRAINT or RESTRAINT OF ANIMAL. An animal is secured by a leash or
lead and under the control of a responsible person; provided, that such
animal need not be on a leash or lead only if it is on the property of the
person keeping or harboring such animal and it is obedient to that person’s
commands.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   Any animal having poisonous bites;



      (2)   Any animal that has rabies or has been bitten by an
animal known to have or suspected of having rabies;



      (3)   Any warm-blooded, carnivorous, or omnivorous, wild or
exotic animal, dangerous, or undomesticated animal which is not of a species
customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily
be confined to a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the
wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise causes a
reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or property damage (including,
but not limed to, non-human primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, and wild
exotic cats; but excluding fowl, ferrets, and small rodents of varieties used
for laboratory purposes);



      (4)   Any animal with a propensity, tendency, or disposition
to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or other domestic animals;



      (5)   Any animal which attacked or bit a human being or other
domestic animal previously, other than under the type of circumstances that
would be justifiable; or



      (6)   Any animal which behaves in such a manner that the
person keeping or harboring such animal knows or should reasonably know that
the animal has tendencies to attack or bite human beings or other domestic
animals other than under the type of circumstances that would be justifiable.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-020) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998) (Ord. 396, passed
12-21-2008)



§ 90.03  FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor, have custody, or raise any
cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine (except the species sus scrofa, more
commonly known as “Vietnamese pot bellied pigs”), goats, or other
livestock in areas of the village not zoned for agricultural land uses.



   (B)    Rabbits, limited to six in number, and poultry and fowl
species, may be kept subject to the following:



      (1)   The keeping of chickens shall be done on a
non-commercial basis while limiting and mitigating any potential adverse
impacts on surrounding properties. The keeping of chickens shall be
exclusively used by the people occupying the property as a locally grown food
source for the consumption of eggs or meat;



      (2)   A maximum of six chickens may be kept per parcel.
Roosters are prohibited;



      (3)   The outdoor slaughtering of chickens is prohibited;



      (4)   Chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and
must be kept in the covered enclosure or an adjoining fenced enclosure at all
times. Chickens may be allowed to roam outside of the covered or fenced
enclosure if within a fully fenced side and/or rear yard and if supervised by
a person in the immediate vicinity of the chickens;



      (5)   All covered enclosures or fenced enclosures shall be
located in the rear yard shall be no closer than five feet to any property
line of an adjacent property and shall be located no closer than 25 feet to
any residential structure on an adjacent property;



      (6)   The total square footage of any covered enclosure and
fenced enclosure shall not exceed 80 square feet and shall be a maximum of
six feet in height;



      (7)   All covered enclosures shall be constructed in such a
way as to prevent rats, mice or other rodents from being harbored underneath
or within the walls of the enclosure. The enclosure shall be constructed in a
workmanlike manner. The coop and pen must be completely enclosed with a top
and/or cover;



      (8)   All feed and other items associated with the keeping of
chickens likely to attract rats, mice or other rodents or vermin shall be
secured and protected in sealed containers; and



      (9)   Egg laying chickens shall be kept in compliance with the
Michigan Department of Agriculture Generally Accepted Agricultural and
Management Practices for the Care of Farm Animals as amended except as
otherwise provided in this section.



   (C)   This section does not apply to animals displayed in circuses
or petting zoos, to animals used for giving rides or pulling carriages or
carts in parades or as part of a festival, or to similar ventures, if such
display or use is less than five days in duration.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-030) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998; Am. Ord. 450, passed
7-25-2017)   Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  WILD AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall own, possess, keep, or harbor any wild animal
contrary to state or federal law or regulations or any vicious animal.



   (B)   No person, while on public property or on river, lake, or pond
or other similar body of water shall feed any water fowl.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-040) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  BARKING AND OTHER LOUD ANIMAL NOISES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall harbor or keep any dog or other animal, which by loud
or frequent or habitual barking, yelping, howling, cackling, crowing, or
other loud noises shall cause a serious annoyance in the neighborhood, or to
people passing to and from upon the streets and sidewalks or public highways.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-050) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  ANIMAL CARE.



   (A)   Every person keeping or harboring any animal shall provide
such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, water in
sufficient quantities, proper air, shelter space, and protection from the
weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care
and treatment.



   (B)   No person shall beat, ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork,
or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight, other combat between animals or animals and humans.



   (C)   No person keeping or harboring an animal shall abandon such
animal.



   (D)   Every person keeping or harboring any animal shall keep or
harbor such animal in a sanitary and clean place that is free from all
refuse, obnoxious odors and animal offal, or spoiled food.



   (E)   No person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any
animal shall cause, suffer, or allow:



      (1)   Such animal to soil, defile, defecate, or to commit any
nuisance on any public thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area,
park, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever, or upon any private property without permission of the
owner of said property unless such person has in his or her immediate
possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement and an appropriate
depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located on
property owned or possessed such person; or



      (2)   This division does not apply to a person who is visually
or physically handicapped where such handicap prevents such person from
complying with this division.



   (F)   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the person
keeping or harboring such animal; in the event the person keeping or
harboring such animal cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall
at once report the accident to the Village Police Department.



   (G)   No person shall willfully and maliciously expose any known
poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall
be liable to be eaten by any animal, except that it shall not be unlawful to
expose on one’s own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable
substances.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-060) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   All animals shall be kept under restraint and shall not be
permitted to be at-large.



   (B)   No person shall fail to exercise proper care and control of
his or her animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.



   (C)   Every female animal in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such a manner that such female animal cannot come into
contact with another animal, except for planned breeding.



   (D)   While under restraint, no animal shall be permitted to enter
upon private property without the permission of the private property owner.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-070) (Ord. 261, passed 12-1-1998) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  NUISANCES.



   Violation of the provisions of these regulations is deemed a public
nuisance and the village shall have available to it the right to seek the
assistance of the Circuit Court by a suit for injunctive or other relief.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-090)  (Ord. 261, passed 11-7-1995; Ord. 261, passed
12-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum of 90 days in jail and/or a
fine of not more than $500.



(1984 Code, § 3-01-080)  (Ord. 95, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 399, passed
12-21-2008; Ord. 415, passed 8-22-2012)



CHAPTER 91:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Streets




   91.01   Crosswalks, driveway aprons, and curb cuts; permit required



   91.02   Street cuts, excavations; permits required



   91.03   Street openings required to be guarded



   91.04   Opening streets; payment of costs



   91.05   Plans, specifications; approval, bond




Sidewalks




   91.20   Sidewalks required



   91.21   Sidewalk specifications



   91.22   Construction required



   91.23   Unsafe sidewalks declared a public nuisance



   91.24   Unsafe sidewalk determination



   91.25   Appeal of order to construct or repair



   91.26   Construction or repair by village; cost to property owner



   91.27   Constructing or repairing sidewalks without an order



   91.28   Special assessment project



   91.29   Duty of property owner



   91.30   Declaration of snow hazard; snow and ice removal from
sidewalks



   91.31   Unnatural accumulation of snow and ice; removal



   91.32   Declaration of public nuisance and abatement



 



   91.99   Penalty




STREETS




§ 91.01  CROSSWALKS, DRIVEWAY APRONS, AND CURB CUTS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall construct, alter, or change any crosswalk,
driveway apron, or any opening in or through the curb in any street or public
way without first procuring a permit from the Village Manager or his or her
designate.



   (B)   No permit to cut any curb shall be issued unless the applicant
shall agree in such application, as a condition of the issuance of the
permit, to install a driveway apron of concrete or other material of
comparable quality within 90 days after completion of the cut.



(1984 Code, § 7-03-010)  (Ord. 19, passed 8-31-1971; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  STREET CUTS, EXCAVATIONS; PERMITS REQUIRED.



   No person shall make any excavation or opening on or under any street
or public place without first procuring a permit from the Village Manager or
his or her designate.



(1984 Code, § 7-03-020)  (Ord. 19, passed 8-31-1971; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  STREET OPENINGS REQUIRED TO BE GUARDED.



   (A)   No person making an opening in a street, alley, or public
place shall fail to fully guard the same during the period of construction;
and no person causing any such opening to be used, or the user thereof, shall
fail to guard or barricade the same while in use, so as to protect the safety
of the public.



   (B)   No person using any street opening, or causing the same to be
used, shall fail to close the opening in accordance with the directions of
the Village Manager or his or her designate.



(1984 Code, § 7-03-030)  (Ord. 19, passed 8-31-1971; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  OPENING STREETS; PAYMENT OF COSTS.



   Each applicant for a permit to open a street shall pay the estimated
costs, to be determined by the Village Manager, of restoring the surface of
the street to its proper condition. If the applicant restores the surface
promptly to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village Manager, the deposit
shall be refunded. The Council may, from time to time by resolution, set up a
schedule of rates for restoration of surfaces of streets, which rates shall
be followed in estimating cost of restoration.



(1984 Code, § 7-03-040)  (Ord. 19, passed 8-31-1971; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 91.05  PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS; APPROVAL, BOND.



   (A)   No work for which a permit is required under this subchapter
shall be done by any person, except in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Village Manager, and all work shall be done in
compliance with such specifications.



   (B)   No permit shall be granted for the doing of any work under
this subchapter until a bond or policy of insurance has been filed with the
Village Manager. The bond or policy of insurance shall be in the sum of
$10,000 unless a larger bond shall be required by the Village Council. All
bonds or policies of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the
streets of the village and to hold the village harmless of every other
nature, whether to persons or property, for which such village shall be held
liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the doing of a thing or the
exercise of the privilege for which the permit was granted.



(1984 Code, § 7-03-050)  (Ord. 19, passed 8-31-1971; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 91.99




SIDEWALKS




§ 91.20  SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each owner with a lot that abuts or is adjacent to a village
right-of-way will provide a safe sidewalk within the street right-of-way for
the distance the lot abuts or is adjacent to that right-of- way.



   (B)   As of April 1, 1997, for those lots abutting or adjacent to a
village right-of-way without a sidewalk for the required distance or having
only part of a sidewalk, no owner will be required to provide a sidewalk,
except under the following conditions:



      (1)   When ordered by the Village Council;



      (2)   When constructing a new primary structure; or



      (3)   When structurally altering an existing primary structure
with the proposed structural alteration increasing the taxable value of the
existing primary structure by 50% or more.



   (C)   For those lots abutting or adjacent to a village right-of-way
with an existing sidewalk or a part of one that is unsafe, an owner will be
required to provide a sidewalk under the following conditions:



      (1)   When ordered by the Village Manager or his or her
designate;



      (2)   When constructing a new primary structure; or



      (3)   When structurally altering an existing primary structure
with the proposed structural alteration increasing the taxable value of the
existing primary structure by 50% or more.



   (D)   Neither the Zoning Official Nor the Building Official will
issue any permanent occupancy permits until the permit holder complies with
this section.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-010)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.21  SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Sidewalks will be constructed and, when necessary, repaired
according to the specifications approved by the Village Council and kept on
file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer. Copies of these specifications are
available to the public at no cost.



   (B)   The existing widths of sidewalks within the Central Business
District shall be maintained unless and until determined otherwise by the
Village Council. The Central Business District is the area of the village
identified as such in Ch. 157. All other sidewalks will conform to the widths
contained in the specifications on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   No person will construct or repair any sidewalk, except
according to the line, grade, slope, and specifications established for that
sidewalk. The village will furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary
for proper control of the work. Furnishing the stakes will not relieve the
owner of the responsibility for ensuring careful and accurate measurement in
contracting the sidewalk to the line furnished by the village. The property
owner will be charged the actual cost of replacement when it is necessary to
replace line and grade stakes disturbed or destroyed without any fault of the
village.



   (D)   The village may issue a stop-work order to any property owner
for failing to comply with the provisions of this subchapter. The village
will lift a stop-work order once the property owner complies.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-020)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.22  CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.



   The Village Council may order the owner of a lot without a sidewalk
within the street right-of-way for the distance the lot abuts or is adjacent
to that right-of-way to build one. When the Council takes this action, the
Village Clerk-Treasurer will give notice to the owner of the affected lot to
construct the sidewalk within the time established by Council.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-030)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.23  UNSAFE SIDEWALKS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The existence of an unsafe sidewalk or a portion thereof is declared to
be a public nuisance.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-040)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.24  UNSAFE SIDEWALK DETERMINATION.



   Whenever the Village Manager or his or her designate determines that a
sidewalk or a part of one is unsafe, the Clerk-Treasurer will give notice to
the owner of the affected lot to repair the sidewalk or the portion that is
unsafe within 30 days of receipt of the notice.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-050)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.25  APPEAL OF ORDER TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR.



   A property owner may request an exception from an order by the village
to construct or repair a sidewalk from the Village Council. In granting the
exception, the Village Council may attach any conditions it deems to be
reasonable in the furtherance of the purpose of requiring the construction or
repair of sidewalks. In granting or denying the exception, the Village
Council will state its reasons for the record.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-060)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.26  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR BY VILLAGE; COST TO PROPERTY OWNER.



   (A)   If the owner of any lot fails to build or repair any sidewalk
as described in the notice to construct or repair, the Village Manager is
hereby directed and authorized to cause such sidewalk to be constructed or
repaired.



   (B)   The expense for constructing or repairing such sidewalk will
be charged to the property and its owner and collected as provided in this
code for single lot or parcel assessments. The Village Council may establish
any financing or cost sharing arrangements to cover the expense for
constructing or repairing such sidewalk.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-070)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.27  CONSTRUCTING OR REPAIRING SIDEWALKS WITHOUT AN ORDER.



   (A)   Nothing will prevent the Village Council from establishing
financing or cost-sharing arrangements to partially reimburse an owner of a
lot who, without an order from the Village Council or the Village Manager,
constructs or repairs a sidewalk in the street rights-of-way.



   (B)   To secure any authorized reimbursement the owner shall:



      (1)   Show evidence that the sidewalk repair was completed
according to village specifications; and



      (2)   Show the zoning official invoices or other competent
evidence of expenditures on labor and/or materials.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-080)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.28  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROJECT.



   The Village Council may proceed anytime to establish a special
assessment district according to the provisions of this code of ordinances
for the construction or repair of sidewalks.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-090)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.29  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER.



   Each owner notified to construct or repair a sidewalk shall comply
within the time established by the notice, such time to be what a reasonably
prudent person would consider reasonable under all of the circumstances. If
the owner fails to act as noticed and by civil action, the village is
compelled to pay damages for any injury sustained because of that failure to
act, the owner shall be liable to the village for the amount of damages paid.
The village may take whatever action available to collect the amount owed.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-100)  (Ord. 274, passed 4-8-1997)



§ 91.30  DECLARATION OF SNOW HAZARD; SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.



   The owner(s) or occupant(s), or both, of any lot with a sidewalk that
abuts, is adjacent to, or is located within a public right-of-way shall
remove all naturally accumulated snow and ice from the sidewalk within 24
hours. Failure of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of any lot to remove naturally
accumulated snow or ice from such sidewalk within said 24-hour period shall
be a municipal civil infraction.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-101)  (Ord. 346, passed 9-16-2001)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.31  UNNATURAL ACCUMULATION OF SNOW AND ICE; REMOVAL.



   (A)   No person shall cause the unnatural or artificial accumulation
of snow or ice on a sidewalk. Whenever the Village Manager or his or her
designee determines that a sidewalk that abuts, is adjacent to, or is located
within a public right-of-way, or a part of such sidewalk, is unsafe due to
the unnatural or artificial accumulation of snow or ice thereon, he or she
may give notice to the owners and/or occupant(s) of the lot on which said
sidewalk is located to remove such unnaturally or artificially accumulated
snow and/or ice from the sidewalk within 24 hours.



   (B)   Failure of the owners) or occupant(s) of any lot to remove
unnaturally accumulated snow or ice from such sidewalk, after being directed
to do so, within said 24-hour period shall be a municipal civil infraction.
The owner of the affected lot may also be given notice to correct the
condition causing such unnatural or artificial accumulation in the manner
provided for in this subchapter for sidewalks requiring repair.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-102)  (Ord. 346, passed 9-16-2001)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.32  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT.



   (A)   In addition to any sanctions imposed by this code of
ordinances, the failure of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of any lot to remove
naturally accumulated snow or ice from a sidewalk within 24 hours or the
failure of the owners) or occupant(s) of any lot to remove unnaturally
accumulated snow or ice from a sidewalk within 24 hours after being directed
to do so shall constitute a public nuisance.



   (B)   If the owner(s) or occupant(s) of any lot refuses or fails to
remove naturally accumulated snow or ice from a sidewalk within 24 hours or
refuses or fails to remove unnaturally accumulated snow or ice from such
sidewalk within 24 hours after being directed to do so, the Village Manager
or his or her designee shall give a notice to said owner(s) or occupant(s)
advising said owner(s) or occupant(s) that, unless said accumulation of snow
or ice is removed by a date and time specified in the notice, the village
will abate the nuisance and cause said snow or ice to be removed.



   (C)   (1)   The expenses incurred by the village in removing such
snow or ice shall be paid by the owner of the land, and the village shall
have a hen against the land for the amount of the expense.



      (2)   The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by law
for the enforcement of construction liens.



      (3)   A minimum charge of $50 for the first hour of work or
part thereof and $25 for each additional hour or part thereof shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of the expenses incurred by the village in such snow or
ice removal.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-103)  (Ord. 346, passed 9-16-2001)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 91.01 through
91.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not to exceed $500 and, if applicable, not to exceed 90 days imprisonment,
plus costs of prosecution.



(1984 Code, § 7-03-060)



   (B)   (1)   General penalty clause. An violation of this §§
91.20 through 91.32 hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and
violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, 32.50 through
32.52, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



            1.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This
shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 7-02-01-110)



(Ord. 19, passed 8-31-1971; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 274, passed
4-8-1997; Ord. 307, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 346, passed 9-16-2001)



CHAPTER 92:  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section




General Provisions




   92.001   Noise disturbances




Preservation of Public Health




   92.015   Health Officer; authority



   92.016   Notice to abate nuisance source of filth or cause of
sickness



   92.017   Failure to comply with notice



   92.018   Occupants; liability



   92.019   Court; determination



   92.020   Applicability of state law




Dangerous Nuisances and Structures




   92.035   Dangerous nuisances and structures prohibited



   92.036   Designation as a public nuisance



   92.037   Notification of persons of interest



   92.038   Council determination



   92.039   Recovery of costs



   92.040   Notice of hearing



   92.041   Court action



   92.042   Savings clause




Weeds




   92.055   Title



   92.056   Enforcement; Commissioner of Noxious Weeds



   92.057   Intent



   92.058   Definition of noxious weeds



   92.059   Duty of owner, agent, or occupant



   92.060   Action by village upon failure of owner to comply



   92.061   Collection



   92.062   Notice of requirements




Prevention, Elimination, and Abatement of Litter, Trash, Garbage,
and Other Unsightly or Obnoxious Nuisances




   92.075   Acts declared nuisances; abatement



   92.076   Throwing glass, rubbish, and the like into streets, private
property, and the like



   92.077   Keeping animal or vegetable matter which causes offensive
odors; keeping animals or fowl in pens so as to create obnoxious conditions



   92.078   Vehicles hauling garbage, and the like to be covered;
vehicles used to haul garbage not to be parked on village streets



   92.079   Discharging foul or nauseous liquids into streets, sewers,
and the like; discharging steam, gas, and the like into sewers or drains



   92.080   Placing or discharging waste matter, rubbish, and the like
into rivers, lakes, or streams



   92.081   Definitions applicable to §§ 92.076 through 92.107



   92.082   Litter in public places generally



   92.083   Litter on occupied private property



   92.084   Litter on vacant lots



   92.085   Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent
scattering



   92.086   Duty to keep sidewalks, parkways, gutters, streets, and
alleys free of litter



   92.087   Litter thrown by persons in vehicles



   92.088   Truck causing litter



   92.089   Litter in parks



   92.090   Litter in lakes, rivers, and fountains



   92.091   Throwing or distributing handbills in public places



   92.092   Placing handbills on vehicles



   92.093   Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises



   92.094   Distributing handbills at inhabited premises; exemption for
certain items



   92.095   Dropping litter from aircraft



   92.096   Posting notices



   92.097   Unlawful storage of building materials



   92.098   Removal of abandoned property and building materials from
public premises



   92.099   Removal of trash from public premises



   92.100   Removal of abandoned property and building materials from
private premises



   92.101   Removal of trash from private premises



   92.102   Violations deemed nuisance; authority of village to abate



   92.103   Cost of removal to be paid by owner; removal by village;
collection of costs



   92.104   Limitation



   92.105   Notice of violations of sections §§ 92.076 through 92.101



   92.106   Provisions of §§ 92.076 through 92.105 not to constitute
permission to do acts prohibited by other law



   92.107   Abatement-enforcement officials



 



   92.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Environmental Impact, see Ch. 97




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 92.001  NOISE DISTURBANCES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which:



         (a)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of
humans or animals;



         (b)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensibilities; or



         (c)   Endangers or injures personal or real property.



      PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation,
and includes the village and other governmental entities.



      REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra
building real property divisions.



   (B)   Noise disturbances; prohibited acts.



      (1)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television,
phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device
which produces, reproduces, or amplifies the sound:



         (a)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance,
across real property boundaries;



         (b)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance
at 50 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a
public right-of-way or public space, or in a boat on public waters; or



         (c)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance
to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated by any
passenger on a common carrier.



      (2)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the
production of music in connection with any military, civic or authorized
parade, funeral procession, or religious ceremony, nor shall this section
apply to any musical performance conducted under the consent of the Village
Manager.



(1984 Code, § 3-02-010)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 350, passed
6-16-2002)  Penalty, see § 92.999




PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH




§ 92.015  HEALTH OFFICER; AUTHORITY.



   The Board of Health, through its health officer, shall examine all
nuisances, source of filth, and causes of sickness that may, in its opinion,
be injurious to the health of the inhabitants within the corporate limits of
the village, and after declaring the same to be a nuisance, shall destroy,
remove, or prevent, as the case may require.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-010)  (Ord. passed 8-8-1922)



§ 92.016  NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE SOURCE OF FILTH OR CAUSE OF SICKNESS.



   Whenever any nuisance source of filth or cause of sickness shall be
found on private property, the Village Council or its designate shall order
the owner or occupant thereof at his or her own expense to remove the same
within 24 hours.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-020)  (Ord. passed 8-8-1922; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)



§ 92.017  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.



   If the owner or occupant shall not comply with such order of the
Council or its designate, the Council or its designate may cause such
nuisance source of filth or cause of sickness to be removed and all expense
incurred thereby shall be paid by the owner of the premises. If the owner of
the premises shall refuse to pay such expense so incurred, any sum so paid
shall be assessed against such property and shall be collected and treated in
the same manner as special assessment and shall be collected under the
general laws of the state.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-030)  (Ord. passed 8-8-1922; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.018  OCCUPANTS; LIABILITY.



   If the occupant or any other person shall have cause or permitted said
nuisance to exist, he or she shall be liable to the owner of said premises
for any amount so paid by such owner or assessed against said property, which
amount shall be recoverable in an action at law.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-040)  (Ord. passed 8-8-1922)



§ 92.019  COURT; DETERMINATION.



   Whenever any person shall be convicted of a nuisance that may be
injurious to the public health, the court may, in its discretion, order said
nuisance to be removed or destroyed at the expense of the defendant, under
the direction of the Village Council, and the form of the warrant to the
County Sheriff or other officer may be varied accordingly.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-050)  (Ord. passed 8-8-1922; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)



§ 92.020  APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.



   In all other respects not herein provided for, the general laws of the
state in regard to the provisions of the public health shall be applicable to
the village.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-060)  (Ord. passed 8-8-1922)




DANGEROUS NUISANCES AND STRUCTURES




§ 92.035  DANGEROUS NUISANCES AND STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm owning or occupying any
real property within the village to cause or permit the existence thereon of
any condition which presents a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
public, or to cause or permit the existence thereon of any structure which is
so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin infested that
it is a serious hazard to the health or safety of the public.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-010)  (Ord. 23, passed 3-28-1972; Ord. 190, passed
8-22-1989)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.036  DESIGNATION AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The existence on any real property within the village or any condition
which presents a serious hazard to the health or safety of the public, or of
any structure which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
or vermin-infested, that it is a serious hazard to the health or safety of
the public is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-020)  (Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.037  NOTIFICATION OF PERSONS OF INTEREST.



   The Village Manager or his or her designee shall determine the names of
any person or firms having an interest in such real property or
responsibility in any way for the creation or maintenance of such public
nuisance and shall notify said person and firms of the conditions
constituting such public nuisance and demanding that said conditions be
remedied and the nuisance created thereby abated within a specified period of
time, which shall be no less than five, nor more than 30 days depending on
the nature of the nuisance and the time reasonably necessary to abate same;
provided, however, that when such nuisance presents an immediate threat to
the public health and safety, such time maybe less than five days.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-030)  (Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)



§ 92.038  COUNCIL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   If the public nuisance is not abated within the time set forth
in the notice, the Village Council may, after conducting a hearing as
provided in this subchapter, take any steps necessary and authorized by law
to have such nuisance abated including physically abating said nuisance by
its own action.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-040)



   (B)   After hearing and receiving all evidence, the Village Council
may, by majority vote, take any of the following actions:



      (1)   Determine that the conditions do not constitute a
nuisance;



      (2)   Determine that the conditions do constitute a public
nuisance:



         (a)   Order the person(s) responsible to take any steps
necessary to abate the nuisance within a specified time;



         (b)   Direct the Village Manager to take any steps
necessary to abate the nuisance at the expense of the village; and/or



         (c)   Where the nuisance is abated by the village,
direct that the costs thereof, including administrative, engineering, and
legal fees be specially assessed and constitute a lien upon the real property
and collected and enforced in the same manner as real property taxes and/or
special assessments.



      (3)   Any other action authorized by law and reasonably
calculated to secure compliance with this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-080)



(Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)



§ 92.039  RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   If such nuisance is abated by the village, the costs inclined in
abating such nuisance, including any administrative, engineering, and legal
fees may be specially assessed against the real property, shall constitute a
lien and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as real property
taxes and/or special assessments.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-050)  (Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)



§ 92.040  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   (A)   At least seven days prior to the hearing by the Village
Council, each person or firm having an interest in said real property, and/or
maintaining the condition causing the nuisance thereon shall receive notice
of said public hearing.



   (B)   Said notice shall state:



      (1)   The date, time, and place of the public hearing;



      (2)   The conditions deemed to be a nuisance under this
subchapter;



      (3)   The intent of the village to have said nuisance abated
and the manner(s) proposed for such abatement; and



      (4)   The fact that, if such nuisance is abated by the
village, the costs thereof will be specially assessed, and shall constitute a
lien on the real property.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-060)  (Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)



§ 92.041  COURT ACTION.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall preclude the village from
taking appropriate action in Circuit Court to abate nuisances.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-090)  (Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)



§ 92.042  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   If any section or provision of this subchapter is found invalid by a
duly constituted court, all other provisions shall prevail.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-110)  (Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989)




WEEDS




§ 92.055  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be referred to as “The Weed
Ordinance of the Village of Holly”.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-010)  (Ord. 33, passed 8-21-1973; Ord. 416, passed
8-22-2012)



§ 92.056  ENFORCEMENT; COMMISSIONER OF NOXIOUS WEEDS.



   The Village Manager or his or her duly authorized designate shall be
charged with the responsibility of enforcement of this subchapter and shall
be the commissioner of noxious weeds as provided in Public Act 359 of 1941,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.61 et seq.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-020)  (Ord. 33, passed 8-21-1973; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 174, passed 4-12-1988)



§ 92.057  INTENT.



   (A)   An owner, agent, or occupant of premises shall not permit or
maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds; nor any growth of
grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the
average; nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush on any lot.



   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to:



      (1)   Weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crop
such as wheat, oats, barley or rye;



      (2)   Cultivated gardens; and



      (3)   Plots of shrubbery.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-030)



§ 92.058  DEFINITION OF NOXIOUS WEEDS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Canada thistle (circium arvense), dodders (any species
of Custcuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species
of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot, (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa
incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), and
poison sumac (toxicondendron vernix).



(1984 Code, § 3-06-040)



§ 92.059  DUTY OF OWNER, AGENT, OR OCCUPANT.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or occupant of any premises
within the village to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such
noxious weeds and grass as often as may be necessary to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-050)



§ 92.060  ACTION BY VILLAGE UPON FAILURE OF OWNER TO COMPLY.



   (A)   If any person fails to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter by the specified time, the Village President or his or her
designee shall enter upon the land and cut the prohibited grasses and/or
destroy the noxious weeds.



   (B)   The President or his or her designee shall keep an accurate
account of all expenses incurred with respect to each parcel of land entered
upon in carrying out the provisions of this subchapter and shall make a sworn
statement of the account and present it to the Village Clerk-Treasurer.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-060)



§ 92.061  COLLECTION.



   Expenses incurred in the destruction shall be paid by the owner of the
land and the village shall have a lien against the land for the amount of the
expense.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-070)



§ 92.062  NOTICE OF REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall publish a notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county during the month of March that
weeds not cut by May 1 of that year or as often as required by this
subchapter may be cut or destroyed by the village and the owner of the
property charged with the costs.



   (B)   The notice shall describe methods of treating and eradicating
the noxious weeds and a summary of the provisions of this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-090)  (Ord. 416, passed 8-22-2012)




PREVENTION, ELIMINATION, AND ABATEMENT OF LITTER, TRASH, GARBAGE, AND OTHER
UNSIGHTLY OR OBNOXIOUS NUISANCES




§ 92.075  ACTS DECLARED NUISANCES; ABATEMENT.



    The acts, conditions, and the like, described in this subchapter are
hereby declared to be nuisances and may be abated in the manner prescribed by
law.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-010)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)



§ 92.076  THROWING GLASS, RUBBISH, AND THE LIKE INTO STREETS, PRIVATE
PROPERTY, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall, himself or herself or by another, throw,
place, deposit, or leave in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place,
or square or any private place or premises any glass, unbroken or broken, or
any matter, stone, earthenware, tacks, or other substances of any nature
likely to cause injury to travelers or pedestrians, to carriages,
automobiles, bicycles, or other vehicles, or injure any horse or other animal
or which might injure, cut or puncture any pneumatic tire.



   (B)   No person shall himself or herself or by another throw, place,
deposit, or leave in any street highway, lane or alley, public place, or
square, or in any private place or premises, any animal or vegetable
substance, dead animals, fish, shavings, paper, dirt, rubbish, filth, slops,
unclean, or nauseous water, liquid, or gaseous fluids, hay, straw, soot,
offal, garbage, swill, or any other article or substance whatever.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-020)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.077  KEEPING ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE MATTER WHICH CAUSES OFFENSIVE ODORS;
KEEPING ANIMALS OR FOWL IN PENS SO AS TO CREATE OBNOXIOUS CONDITIONS.



   (A)   No persons shall keep, place, or have on or in any private
house, place of business, lot, or premises within the village, any dead
carcass, putrid or offensive or unsound beef, pork, fish, hides, skins,
bones, horns, stinking, or rotten soap grease, tallow, offal, garbage, or
other animal a vegetable matter or substance which may cause any unwholesome
obnoxious or offensive smell.



   (B)   No person shall collect or confine any horse, cattle, sheep,
hog, fowl, or other domestic or undomesticated animal, bird or fowl, in pens,
cages, stables, coops, or otherwise so as to create an unwholesome,
unsightly, malodorous, obnoxious, or offensive condition.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-030)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.078  VEHICLES HAULING GARBAGE, AND THE LIKE TO BE COVERED; VEHICLES
USED TO HAUL GARBAGE NOT TO BE PARKED ON VILLAGE STREETS.



   Any cart, wagon, or truck or other vehicle used for the purpose of
conveying away swill, offal, garbage, or excrement shall be perfectly tight
and covered so as to prevent the contents from leaking, spilling, or becoming
offensive because of odor, and no such cart, wagon, or vehicle when not
actually in use, shall be allowed in any street, lane, alley, or public place
within the village.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-040)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.079  DISCHARGING FOUL OR NAUSEOUS LIQUIDS INTO STREETS, SEWERS, AND
THE LIKE; DISCHARGING STEAM, GAS, AND THE LIKE INTO SEWERS OR DRAINS.



   No distiller, dyer, machinist, manufacturer, or other person shall
himself or herself or by others, discharge out or from any still-house, dye
house, work shop, factory, machine shop, dwelling house, kitchen, or other
building any foul or nauseous liquid, water, or other substance into or upon
any highway, street, alley, lane, public space, or square, or into any
aforesaid road or ground or deposit or allow to be deposited any refuse,
drippings, or nauseous liquids or other substances from distributing pipes or
gas conductors into any sewer, receiving basin, gutter, or other place within
the village or force or discharge into any public or private sewer or drain,
any steam, vapor, or gas.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-050)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.080  PLACING OR DISCHARGING WASTE MATTER, RUBBISH, AND THE LIKE INTO
RIVERS, LAKES, OR STREAMS.



   No person shall place, deposit, throw, or empty, or permit to be
placed, deposited, thrown, or emptied into the waters of the village, or any
other body of water within the village, any dead carcass or any decaying
animal, vegetable or mineral matter, or any waste, oil, coal, tar, or
sawdust, or any chemical refuse or any industrial waste, or any straw, hay,
green boughs, manure, cord wood, vegetables, excrement, bones, horns, shells,
meats, hides, offal, rubbish, garbage, or any other substance of any
unwholesome, unsightly, malodorous, contaminating, polluting, or obnoxious
nature.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-060)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.081  DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO §§ 92.076 THROUGH 92.107.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Deteriorated, wrecked, or derelict property in
unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value,
if any, and which has been left unprotected from the elements, including,
without being so restricted, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperative, or partially
dismantled motor vehicles (except motor vehicle subject to removal under
Public Act 359 of 1941, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.61 et seq.), trailers, boats,
machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture, and
any other similar articles in such condition where such articles have been
allowed to remain in such condition for more than 30 days.



   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air, including, but not
limited to, airplanes, helicopters, tighter-than-air dirigibles, and balloons.



   AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized by the village.



   BUILDING MATERIALS. Any materials useful in the construction of
buildings or other structures and includes, but shall not be limited to,
lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical
wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete,
and cement.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee(s) of the village so designated by
the Village Manager.



   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed
or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature other
than a newspaper.



   LITTER. Abandoned property, garbage, refuse, rubbish, and trash as
defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as
herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and
welfare.



   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. Post Office Department, in
accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.



   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any
other public area in the village, owned or used by the village and devoted to
active or passive recreation.



   PARKWAY. A strip of land located between a sidewalk and a physical
street, whether such land is located on a part of the street right-of-way or
not.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any place other than a private premises, a public
building, or a public place.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling house, building, or other structure,
designed, or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule,
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house building, or other
structure and any portion of a street of right-of-way immediately adjoining
such premises which separates such premises from a roadway.



   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned or occupied by any governmental
agency.



   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any premises, including, but not limited to, streets,
including street rights-of-way, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, ground, and
buildings owned by, in possession of, or under the control of the United
States, the State of Michigan, County of Oakland, or the Village of Holly, or
any agency or political subdivision of any said government.



   PUBLIC RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle furnished
by any person or by a governmental agency for use by the public.



   REFUSE. Putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, leaves from trees, rubbish,
ashes, and solid market and industrial wastes.



   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar
materials.



   TRASH. Consists of:



      (1)   Garbage, i.e., all organic refuse and rejected food
wastes;



      (2)   Ashes, i.e., the residue left from burning of paper,
leaves, weeds, wood, and coal;



      (3)   Kitchen rubbish, i.e., all types of food containers and
wrappings, including cans, bottles, jars, broken glass, crockery, paper and
wood boxes, and metal objects;



      (4)   Household rubbish, i.e., all types of household
materials commonly discarded, such as newspapers, magazines, books,
wrappings, cartons, boxes, crates, excelsior, rags, clothing, bedding, floor
covering, wallpaper, leather objects, and sweepings; and



      (5)   Yard rubbish, i.e., all material which grow on the
property which are to be disposed of, such as grass clippings, weeds, leaves,
plants, garden trash, clippings from hedges and shrubs, branches under five
inches in diameter from trees and bushes, and small roots and stumps;
provided, that none of the items above-named were produced from the work of
commercial landscape, tree-trimming men, or utility companies.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-070)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982; Ord. 179, passed
1-10-1989)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.082  LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES GENERALLY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any sidewalk,
parkway, gutter, street, alley, or other public place within the village,
except in public receptacles, in authorized receptacles for collection, or in
official collection or disposal sites.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-080)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.083  LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
properly within the village, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain public
receptacles or authorized receptacles for collection in such manner that
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any place.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-090)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.084  LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the village, whether owned by such person or not.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-100)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.085  PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING.



    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any place.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-110)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.086  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS, GUTTERS, STREETS, AND ALLEYS
FREE OF LITTER.



   (A)   All persons occupying any place of business, public building,
or private premises shall keep said place of business, public building, or
private property, as the case may be, including the sidewalk, parkway,
gutter, catch basin, street, or alley adjoining or abutting to the place so
occupied, free and clear of litter.



   (B)   To this end:



      (1)   No person or authority owning, occupying, or in control
of a place of business, public building, or private premises shall sweep into
or deposit, or cause to be swept or deposited, in any sidewalk, parkway,
gutter, catch basin, street, or alley, or other public place within the
village an accumulation of litter, including leaves from trees, from any
place of business, public building, or private premises, except that this
section shall not necessarily apply during designated village clean-up days;
and



      (2)   (a)   The occupier of a place of business and the
authority in control of a public building shall collect and dispose of all
litter on the premises of such place of business or public building, as the
case may be, in authorized receptacles, including the sidewalk and parkway
adjoining or abutting to such premises.



         (b)   For purposes of this division (B), the operator of
any shopping center shall be deemed to be the occupier of all common areas of
such shopping center, including, but not limited to, parking areas, parking
lots, and landscaped areas which are not leased or rented to any particular
tenant, but not including any sidewalks, parkways, or gutters adjoining or
abutting to any premises rented to a particular tenant; and



      (3)   The occupier of any private premises shall keep said
premises free of all litter and shall dispose of such litter only in a manner
consistent with this section and other laws.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-120)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.087  LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person, while an operator or passenger in a vehicle, shall
throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the
village, or upon private property, nor shall any operator of a vehicle allow
or permit the throwing or disposing of any litter from such vehicle by
himself or herself or by any passenger thereof upon any street or other
public place within the village or upon private property.



   (B)   In any prosecution under this section, proof of ownership of
the vehicle involved shall constitute a prima facie showing that said owner
allowed or permitted the throwing or disposing of any litter from such
vehicle.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-130)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.088  TRUCK CAUSING LITTER.



   No person shall drive or move, or direct or employ a driver to drive or
move, any truck or other vehicle within the village unless the truck or other
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or
litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or other public
way; nor shall any person drive or move, or direct or employ a driver to
drive or move, any vehicle or truck within the village, the wheels or tires
of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley, or other public place
excessive mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-140)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.089  LITTER IN PARKS.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the
village, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter
will be prevented from being earned or deposited by the elements upon any
place.



   (B)   Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this section.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-150)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.090  LITTER IN LAKES, RIVERS, AND FOUNTAINS.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, river, or any other body of water, in a park or elsewhere within the
village.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-160)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.091  THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk,
parkway, gutter, street, or other public place within the village, nor shall
any person hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place
unless said handbill is distributed without charge to the receiver thereof,
only to any person willing to accept it.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-170)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.092  PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.



   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle;
however, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand
out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a handbill to any
occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-180)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.093  DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.



   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-190)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.094  DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS AT INHABITED PREMISES; EXEMPTION FOR
CERTAIN ITEMS.



   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any handbill in
or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other
person then present in or upon such private premises, except that such
person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon the inhabited private premises, if
the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill
from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or
other public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.



   (B)   The provisions of  division (A) above shall not apply to the
distribution of mail by the Untied States, nor to newspapers, except that
newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent
their being carried or deposited by the elements in an unbound condition upon
any sidewalk, parkway, gutter, street, alley, or other public place or upon
private property.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-200)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.095  DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.



   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit within the
village any litter, handbill, or any other object.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-210)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.096  POSTING NOTICES.



   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or
device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost,
public utility pole, or shade tree, or upon any public land, public
structure, or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-220)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.097  UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS.



   No person shall place or leave, or cause to be placed or left, building
materials on public premises within the village, nor keep, store, or cause or
permit to be placed, left, kept, or stored building materials on private
premises, except within the walls of a previously erected building within the
village unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the
village for construction upon said property and said materials are intended
for use in such construction, or unless such storage is explicitly permitted
by the zoning chapter, see Ch. 157.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-230)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.098  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY AND BUILDING MATERIALS FROM PUBLIC
PREMISES.



   (A)   When an enforcement officer shall find an item of abandoned
property or an accumulation of building materials on public premises within
the village, he or she shall cause a notice to be placed upon such item or in
the immediate vicinity of several such items in substantially the following
form.



 


NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY:


 

This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon
public property known as (setting forth brief description of location), and
in violation of (insert the appropriate section of the Chapter of Code of the
Village of Holly) and must be removed within days from the date of this
notice; otherwise, it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be
stored and otherwise disposed of by an order of the village.

 

Dated this (setting forth date of posting of notice)

 

Signed (setting forth title, business address and business telephone number
of enforcement officer.)



 



   (B)   (1)   Such notice shall not be less than eight inches by
ten inches and shall be sufficiently weather-proof to withstand normal
exposure to the elements.



      (2)   In addition to posting, the enforcement officer, shall
make reasonable efforts to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the
item or items; and if such is reasonably available to the enforcement
officer, he or she shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on or before
the date of posting.



   (C)   (1)   If, at the expiration of the time stated in such
notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned item or items
described in such notice has not removed them from the public premises, the
enforcement officer may cause the item or items of abandoned property to be
removed, stored, and/or otherwise disposed of, and the salvage value, if any,
of such item or items shall be retained by the village, to be applied against
the cost of disposal thereof in the event the salvage proceeds exceed the
cost of disposal of the abandoned property, such excess shall be held for a
period of six months for the benefit of the former owner of the property,
upon proof of such ownership within six months of such disposal of the
property.



      (2)   If after six months, such excess has not been properly
claimed, it shall be applied to the General Fund of the village.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the summary removal of
any property from public premises in order to alleviate emergency conditions.



(1984 Code, 3-09-240)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.099  REMOVAL OF TRASH FROM PUBLIC PREMISES.



   Trash on public premises may be removed without notice or compensation.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-250)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.100  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY AND BUILDING MATERIALS FROM PRIVATE
PREMISES.



   (A)   Whenever the enforcement officer shall find an item or items
of abandoned property or building materials on private premises within the
village in violation of this subchapter, he or she shall cause a notice to be
placed upon such item or in the immediate vicinity of several such items in
substantially the following form.



 


NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY


This property, to wit: (setting forth a brief description) located at
(setting forth brief description of the location) is improperly stored in
violation of(insert the appropriate section of the Chapter of Code of the
Village of Holly) and constitutes a nuisance. Unless this situation is
corrected within days from the date of this notice, the village will take
further actions to have the nuisance abated, which actions may include any or
all of the following:

 

1. Charging the owner or other party responsible with a misdemeanor, which
carries a punishment of 90 days in jail and/or a fine in the amount of $500;

 

2. Commencement of proceedings to have the nuisance abated by the village
with the cost of such action being charged as a lien against the property; and

 

3. Commencement of other legal proceedings as may be appropriate.

 

Dated this (setting forth date of posting of notice)

 

Signed (setting forth name, title, business address, and telephone number of
the enforcement officer)



 



   (B)   (1)   Such notice shall not be less than eight inches by
ten inches and shall be sufficiently weather-proof to withstand normal
exposure to the elements.



      (2)   In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall
mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the
abandoned item or items are located, as shown by the records of the assessor,
on or before the date of posting of such notice and to the owner of the
article or articles, if ownership can reasonably be ascertained.



   (C)   (1)   If, at the expiration of the time stated in such
notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned item or items
described in such notice has not removed the item or items and complied with
the ordinance provisions cited in the notice or requested a hearing on the
applicability of this subchapter provision to the property in question, the
enforcement officer may cause the item or items of abandoned property or
building materials to be disposed of, and the salvage value, if any, of such
item shall be detained by the village to be applied against the cost of
disposal of such abandoned property.



      (2)   If the proceeds from the salvage of the property be less
than such costs, the deficiency shall be charged against the premises from
which the abandoned property was removed in the manner herein prescribed. In
the event the salvage proceeds exceed said costs, any such excess shall be
held for a period of six months after such disposal of the property.



      (3)   If, after six months such excess has not been properly
claimed, it shall be applied to the General Fund of the village.



   (D)   If a hearing is requested within the time limits stated in
such notice by the owner of the private premises or a person claiming an
interest in personal property thereon, the Village Manager shall establish
and conduct a public hearing in order for the person requesting the hearing
to show cause why he or she should not remove the property in question or the
village should not dispose of said property.



   (E)   The hearing procedures shall be those established by the
Village Manager.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-260)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982; Ord. 179, passed
1-10-1989)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.101  REMOVAL OF TRASH FROM PRIVATE PREMISES.



   (A)   Whenever an enforcement officer shall find an accumulation of
trash on private premises within the village in violation of this section, he
or she shall cause a notice to be placed conspicuously on those premises in
substantially the following form.



 


NOTICE TO THE OWNER OF THESE PREMISES AND TO ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN ITS
MAINTENANCE


Trash, to wit: (setting forth a brief description) located at (setting forth
a brief description of the location), is improperly stored in violation of
(insert the appropriate section of the Chapter of Code of the Village of
Holly) and must days from the date of this notice; otherwise it shall be
removed by the village and the costs of removal shall be charged to the owner
of these premises



 



   (B)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten inches
and shall be sufficiently weather-proof to withstand normal exposure to the
elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall give notice
to the owner/or occupant of said premises in the manner herein prescribed.



   (C)   If at the expiration of the time stated in such notice, the
trash described herein has not been removed, the enforcement officer may
cause such trash to be removed, and the costs of removal shall be charged,
paid and collected in the manner hereinafter provided in this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-270)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.102  VIOLATIONS DEEMED NUISANCE; AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE TO ABATE.



   Any person who accumulates or permits the accumulation of litter and/or
abandoned building material, as herein defined, on property on which it is
prohibited by terms of this subchapter (§§ 92.076 through 92.107) shall be
deemed to commit the offense of creating a public nuisance by such actions
and the designated village officials are hereby authorized to enter into and
upon said real estate to abate such nuisance.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-271)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.103  COST OF REMOVAL TO BE PAID BY OWNER; REMOVAL BY VILLAGE;
COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   (A)   The cost of removal of litter and/or abandoned building
materials as herein defined shall be paid by the owner or owners of the
premises from which they are removed, in the event of the failure of the
owner to remove such litter and/or building materials, the village may use
its employees or contract for the removal at its expense and when such cost
has been determined, the Village Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and
directed to bill the owner or owners the cost of such removal.



   (B)   In the event of failure of the owner or owners to pay such
costs, the Village Manager is hereby authorized to hold a constitutionally
authorized due process hearing, and after such hearing, if the decision of
the hearing officer is that the charges are just and owing to the village,
the same may be added to the next ad valorem tax roll for collection and
collected in the manner of ad valorem taxes.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-272)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)



§ 92.104  LIMITATION.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to repeal, suspend, or modify
the provisions of any other ordinance or provision relating to the
abandonment or keeping of items or materials of any kind which are hazardous
to public health, safety, or welfare upon any premises, nor to hinder or
limit availability or injunction against the storage, accumulation, or
maintenance of such items or materials.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-280)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)



§ 92.105  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS OF SECTIONS §§ 92.076 THROUGH 92.101.



   (A)   An enforcement officer, in his or her discretion, may serve
upon an individual found violating any provision of §§ 92.076 through
92.101, a notice of said violation directing said person to correct said
violation within 24 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.



   (B)   Said notice shall advise said person that his or her failure
to correct such violation within said time period shall result in enforcement
action pursuant to this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-320)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.106  PROVISIONS OF §§ 92.076 THROUGH 92.105 NOT TO CONSTITUTE
PERMISSION TO DO ACTS PROHIBITED BY OTHER LAW.



   Nothing herein contained in §§ 92.076 through 92.105 shall be deemed
to constitute the granting of permission to do any act which is prohibited by
other law.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-330)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.107  ABATEMENT-ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.



   The Village Manager and/or his or her designate shall have the power
and duty to abate all nuisances herein designated. The Village Manager and/or
his or her designate shall not be liable to any person for damages on account
of such abatement or enforcement of this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-340)  (Ord. 127, passed 7-27-1982)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty for noise disturbances. Any person who shall violate
any provision of § 92.001 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
maximum of 90 days in jail and/or a fine of not more than $500.



(1984 Code, § 3-02-020)



   (B)   Penalty for the preservation of public health. Any violations
of the provisions of §§ 92.015 through 92.020 shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution, and in the imposition of any
fine and costs, the court may make a further sentence, that the offender be
imprisoned in the County Jail until the payment thereof, however, the period
of imprisonment in the County Jail shall not exceed the term of 90 days.



(1984 Code, § 3-04-070)



   (C)   Penalty for dangerous nuisances and structures.



      (1)   General penalty clause. Any violation of §§ 92.035
through 92.042 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and
violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



            1.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be known
as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified, in case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 3-05-100)



   (D)   Penalty for weeds.



      (1)   General penalty clause. A violation of §§ 92.055
through 92.062 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and
violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fines shall be $50.



            1.   In this case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fines shall be $200. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This
shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified in case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 3-06-080)



   (E)   (1)   Penalty for litter, trash, and the like; generally.



         (a)   General penalty clause. Any violation of §§
92.075 through 92.107 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction
and violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.50 through 32.52, and state law.



         (b)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



            1.   If the civil fine is paid at the Village
Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



               a.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



               b.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250.
(This shall be known as the third offense.)



               c.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500.
(This shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be
$500.



            2.   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby
authorized to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment
at the Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-290)



      (2)   Penalty for litter, trash, and the like; increase in
fine or imprisonment for second or subsequent violations. Persons found
guilty of violating §§ 92.075 through 92.107 on a second or subsequent
occasion shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $500
and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days in the County Jail. Any fine or
imprisonment levied against such a person shall exceed the fine or
imprisonment levied for the last previous offense subject to the maximum
allowed by law. Any person(s) found guilty of violating §§ 92.075 through
92.107 shall be assessed the costs of prosecution.



(1984 Code, § 3-09-310)



(Ord. passed 8-8-1922; Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 127, passed
7-27-1982; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 190, passed 8-22-1989; Ord. 298,
passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 301, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 350, passed 6-16-2002)



CHAPTER 93:  SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   No smoking in public places



   93.03   Smoking in designated areas



   93.04   Posting signs



   93.05   Rules



   93.06   Enforcement; remedies



   93.07   Effective date



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EDUCATIONAL FACILITY. A building owned, leased, or under the control of
a public school system.



   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A food service establishment as defined in
M.C.L.A. § 333.12905, as amended.



   HEALTH FACILITY. A health facility as defined in Article 17 of Public
Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L.A. § 333.20106(1), as amended.



   LICENSED PREMISES. Any portion of a building, structure, room, or
enclosure located on real estate which is owned, leased, used, controlled, or
operated by a licensee authorized by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.



   MEETING. A meeting as defined in § 2 of the Open Meetings Act, Public
Act 267 of 1976, being  M.C.L.A. § 15.262, as amended.



   PUBLIC BODY. A public body as defined in § 2 of the Open Meetings Act,
Public Act 267 of 1976, being  M.C.L.A. § 15.262.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Except as otherwise provided in division (3) below, means
both of the following as set out in divisions (1) and (2) below:



      (1)   An enclosed, indoor area owned or operated by a state or
local governmental agency and used by the general public or serving as a
place of work for public employees or a meeting place for a public body,
including an office, educational facility, health facility, auditorium,
arena, meeting room, or public conveyance;



      (2)   An enclosed, indoor area which is not owned or operated
by a state or local governmental agency, or used by the general public and is
one of the following:



         (a)   An educational facility;



         (b)   A health facility;



         (c)   An auditorium;



         (d)   An arena;



         (e)   A theater;



         (f)   A museum;



         (g)   A concert hall; and



         (h)   Any other facility during the period of its use
for a performance or exhibit of the arts.



      (3)   PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private, enclosed room,
or office occupied exclusively by a smoker, even if the room or enclosed
office may be visited by a nonsmoker.



   SMOKING. The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe,
or other lighted smoking device.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-010)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)



§ 93.02  NO SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an individual
shall not smoke in a public place or at a meeting of a public body, except in
a designated smoking area.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to a room, hall, or building used
for a private function if the seating arrangements are under the control of
the sponsor of the function and not under the control of the state or local
governmental agency or the person who owns or operates the room, hall or
building.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to a food service establishment
or to a licensed premises.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-020)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.03  SMOKING IN DESIGNATED AREAS.



   (A)   A smoking area may be designated by the Village Council or the
person who owns or operates a public place, except in a public place in which
smoking is prohibited by law. If a smoking area is designated, existing
physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the toxic
effect of smoke in both smoking and adjacent nonsmoking areas.



   (B)   In the case of a public place consisting of a single room, the
Village Council or the person who owns or operates the single room shall be
in compliance with this chapter if one-half of the room is reserved and
posted as a no smoking area.



   (C)   If smoking is permitted in a public place, the Village Council
or the person who owns or operates the public place shall develop a policy
for the separation of smokers and nonsmokers which provides, at a minimum,
for both of the following:



      (1)   Nonsmokers to be located closest to the source of fresh
air; or



      (2)   Special consideration to be given to individuals with a
hypersensitivity to tobacco smoke.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-030)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.04  POSTING SIGNS.



   The person who owns or operates a public place shall, at a minimum, do
both of the following in order to prevent smoking:



   (A)   Post signs which state that smoking in that public place is
prohibited, except in designated smoking areas, pursuant to this chapter; and



   (B)   Arrange seating to provide, as nearly as practicable, a smoke
free area.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-040)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)



§ 93.05  RULES.



   The Council may promulgate the appropriate rules to implement this
chapter.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-050)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)



§ 93.06  ENFORCEMENT; REMEDIES.



   (A)   The village may enforce this chapter and rules promulgated
under this chapter through an action commenced pursuant to § 90.99(B) or any
other appropriate action authorized by law.



   (B)   In addition to any other enforcement action authorized by law,
a person alleging a violation of this chapter may bring a civil action for
appropriate injunctive relief, if the person has used the public place within
60 days after the civil action is filed.



   (C)   The remedies under this section are independent and
cumulative. The use of one remedy shall not bar the use of other lawful
remedies or the use of a lawful remedy by another person.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-070)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)



§ 93.07  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication as required
by law.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-080)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village of Holly
Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fines shall be $50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall
be known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fines shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fines shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 3-03-060)  (Ord. 157, passed 2-10-1987; Ord. 297, passed
7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



Section




Fire Prevention Code




   94.01   International Fire Code



   94.02   Added provisions



   94.03   Definition



   94.04   Open fires prohibited; exceptions



   94.05   Permit required for open fires



   94.06   Proximity of fire to buildings



   94.07   Fires in streets and public places; nuisances



   94.08   Danger of spreading



   94.09   Attendance at fires



   94.10   Fires at night



   94.11   Emergency conditions



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-Reference:



   Fireworks, see § 96.20 and Ch. 134




FIRE PREVENTION CODE




§ 94.01  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   (A)   The village hereby adopts the International Fire Code, 2009
edition, and future editions in perpetuity, including Appx. Chs. A-G, as
published by the International Code Council, as the Village Fire Code.



   (B)   (1)   Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, and conditions and terms of the International Fire Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed
below.



      (2)   The following sections are hereby revised:



         (a)   Section 101.1 Insert: Village of Holly;



         (b)   Section 109.3. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500, 90 days;
and



         (c)   Section 11.4. Insert: $500, $500.



   (C)   The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the
2009 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:



      (1)   Section 3204.3.1,1 (geographic limits in which the
storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is
prohibited): In all districts, but M-Manufacturing;



      (2)   Section 3404.2.9.5.1 (geographic limits in which the
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited): In all districts, but M-Manufacturing;



      (3)   Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited):
In all districts, but M-Manufacturing; and



      (4)   Section 3804.2 (geographic limits in which the storage
of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas): Where such storage is allowed.



   (D)   This section and the rules, regulations, provisions,
requirements, orders, and matters established and adopted hereby shall take
effect and be in full force and effect 30 days from and after the date of its
final passage and adoption.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-010)  (Ord. 27, passed 1-1-1973; Ord. 390, passed
3-2-2008; Ord. 409, passed 7-31-2011)



§ 94.02  ADDED PROVISIONS.




The following provisions shall and hereby are added to § F2910.0, Art. 29 of
the Fire Prevention Code.




   F-2921.0   Burning of certain materials prohibited. The burning of
rubber, creosote, impregnated materials, tar paper, railroad ties, leaves,
brush or building materials except untreated wood, are prohibited in the
Village of Holly and the burning of garbage is prohibited unless done in an
incinerator constructed for such purpose.



   F-2922.0.   Burning inside buildings or structures. The burning of
waste materials of any kind is prohibited inside a building or structure,
unless the said materials are burned in a stove, furnace or incinerator,
which has a smoke pipe connected to a chimney which extends above the roof of
the building or structure.



   F-2923.0.    Outside burning; restrictions.



      (a)   Waste materials, refuse, paper or other combustible
materials, with the exception of lumber and seasoned firewood, shall be
burned in containers of metal or masonry construction which may contain
openings no larger than one inch in width on the sides and top during the
burning process. Access doors for loading or cleaning shall be kept closed
during the burning process.



      (b)   Outside burning containers used for burning waste
materials, refuse, paper or other combustible materials shall not be located
closer than 15 feet to any building.



      (c)   Outside burning in an area which is likely to be a
hazard to any building or property is prohibited.



      (d)   Any burning of waste materials, refuse, paper, lumber,
seasoned firewood, or other combustible material shall be done under the
charge and supervision of a person of mature years and discretion.



      (e)   Under no circumstances, anything in the contrary in the
code itself or contained herein notwithstanding, the burning of waste
materials, refuse, paper, lumber, leaves, brush or other combustible material
on any paved or blacktop village street is prohibited.



   F-2924.0.   Fire extinguishing equipment for the exhaust system and
the cooking equipment used there with in commercial, industrial,
institutional and similar cooking applications.



      (1)   Approved fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided
for the protection of duct systems, grease removal devices and hoods. Cooking
equipment which may be a source of ignition of grease in the hood, grease
removal device or duct (such as fat fryers, ranges, griddles and broilers)
shall also be protected by approved extinguishing equipment. If acceptable to
the authority having jurisdiction, that portion of the fire extinguishing
system required for protection of the duct may be omitted when all cooking
equipment is served by listed grease extractors. The extinguishing equipment
shall include both of the following types:



         (a)   Automatically operated fixed pipe systems, or
other automatic systems specifically listed for the hazard. Listed fire
extinguishing systems shall be installed in accordance with the terms of
their listing and the manufacturer’s instructions. Other fire extinguishing
equipment shall be installed in compliance with the applicable standards
listed:



            1.   Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing
Systems, NFPA No. 12.



            2.   Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler
Systems, NFPA No. 13.



            3.   Standard for Foam-Water Sprinkler Systems and
Foam-Spray Systems, NFPA No. 16.



            4.   Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing
Systems, NFPA No. 17.



      (2)   Portable inert gas or dry chemical extinguisher or other
types specifically listed for class B fires and having a minimum rating of
4B. See Standard for the Installation of Portable Fire Extinguisher, NFPA No.
10.



         (b)   Fixed pipe extinguishing equipment shall be
installed to conform with the following requirements:



            (1)   A readily accessible means to manually
actuate the fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided in a path of exit
or egress and shall be clearly identified. Such means shall be mechanical and
shall not rely on electric power for actuation unless a reserve power supply
is provided.



            (2)   All fixed pipe extinguishing systems, except
sprinkler systems in a single hazard area, shall be arranged for simultaneous
automatic operation upon actuation of any one of the systems. Note: For the
purposes of this requirement, a single hazard area is defined as one which
(a) includes all cooking equipment, hoods and duct work within one hundred
twenty five (125) running feet of duct from any hood served, and (b) any
other cooking equipment, hoods and duct work connection by less than one
hundred twenty five (125) running feet of duct from the closest hood served.



            (3)   The operation of any extinguishing system
shall automatically shut off all sources of fuel and heat to all cooking
equipment except for the fuel supply to provide gas pilots. A manual
operation shall be required to re-establish the fuel or heat supply. When
gaseous fuels are used, a permanent notice shall be required to re-establish
the fuel or heat supply. When gaseous fuels are used, a permanent notice
shall be posted at the reset device, cautioning the operator to shut off the
gas at all appliances before resetting the device.



            (4)   Visual means shall be provided to show that
the extinguishing system is energized if actuation is electrical.



            (5)   If required by the authority having
jurisdiction, detailed information of the system shall be submitted for
review.



            (6)   Installation of systems shall be made only
by persons properly trained and qualified by the manufacturer of the system
being installed. Extinguishing systems shall be inspected at least every six
months. Inspections shall be made only by properly trained and qualified
personnel. All actuation components, including remote manual pull stations,
mechanical or electrical devices, detectors, actuator, etc., shall be checked
for proper operation during the inspection. Fusible links shall be replaced
annually. Certificates of inspection shall be forwarded to the Fire Chief or
village superintendent.



            (7)   All plans and specifications shall be
approved by the Michigan Inspection Bureau before installation is started.



   F-2925.0   Recommended procedures for the use and maintenance of
equipment.



      (a)   Operating procedures:



         (1)   Exhaust systems should be operated during all
periods of cooking and should be equipped with a timing device which will
continue the operation of the exhaust system for at least two hours after
cooking devices are turned off to allow fat fryers and other appliances to
cool.



         (2)   Care must be exercised not to create flash grease
fires by placing solid fats on preheated cooking surfaces. Solid fats heated
too rapidly can be ignited at the edges before entirely melted.



         (3)   Filter equipped exhaust systems should not be
operated with filters removed.



         (4)   Openings provided for replacing air exhausted
through ventilating equipment should not be restricted by covers, dampers or
any other means which would reduce the operating efficiency of the exhaust
system.



         (5)   Instructions for manually operating the fire
extinguishing system should be posted conspicuously in the kitchen and should
be reviewed periodically with employees by the management.



         (6)   Listed grease extractors should be operated in
accordance with the terms of their listings and manufacturer’s instructions.



   F-2926.0   Inspection.



      (a)   An inspection and servicing of the fire extinguishing
system by qualified persons should be made at least every six months. See
requirements in Section F-2924.0(b)(6).



      (b)   Depending on the amount of cooking equipment usage, the
entire exhaust system, including grease extractors, should be inspected daily
or weekly to determine if grease or other residues have been deposited
within. When grease or other residues are in evidence as deposits within the
hood, grease removal devices and/or ducts, the system should be cleaned in
accordance with Section F-2927.0.



   F-2927.0   Cleaning.



   (a)   Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts and other
appurtenances which are part of the exhaust system should be cleaned by
scraping, brushing, washing or other positive means.



   (b)   Listed grease extractors should be operated and cleaned in
accordance with their listings and the manufacturer’s instructions.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-020)  (Ord. 27, passed 1-1-1973; Ord. 410, passed
11-2-2011)



§ 94.03  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPEN FIRE. Any fire upon woodland, lot, subdivision, grassland, field,
or public right-of-way within the village not wholly contained within an
authorized container such as an approved incinerator, outside fireplace,
grill, or other receptacle constructed and approved for the purpose of
burning combustibles or in a fire pit of three feet in diameter or less.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-021)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)



§ 94.04  OPEN FIRES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall start, cause, or permit to be started any open fire
within the village, except that open fires may be permitted for the following
purposes; provided, that all other requirements of this subchapter are
observed:



   (A)   Bonfires within the guidelines established by the BOCA Fire
Prevention Code in effect at the time of a permit;



   (B)   Fires necessary in the course of agricultural operations in
growing crops or raising fowl or animals; provided, that no nuisance is
created; or



   (C)   Fires set in the performance of an official duty by a public
officer for the protection of public health or safety.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-022)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.05  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN FIRES.



   (A)   No person shall start or have any open fire without first
obtaining an annual permit from the Fire Chief or his or her designated
representative, as required by the BOCA Fire Prevention Code, or such other
fire protection code, in effect at the time.



   (B)   Such permit shall state the address where such fire is to be
started, the owner of the property involved, the type of material to be
burned, the quantity of material to be burned, the length of time to burn and
the person responsible for attending such fire and the phone number of such
responsible person.



   (C)   No burning shall be allowed and no permit may be issued for
the burning of any petroleum products such as plastics, tires, roofing, and
the like, or for the burning of rubbish or garbage.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-023)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989; Ord. 410, passed
11-2-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  PROXIMITY OF FIRE TO BUILDINGS.



   No person shall start or have any open fire within 50 feet of any
structure. Authorized fire containers shall be 15 feet from any structure.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-024)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.07  FIRES IN STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES; NUISANCES.



   No person shall start or have any open fire on any sidewalk, parkway,
street, highway, alley, park, or other public way or place, except as
authorized by the Fire Chief or his or her designated representative. Any
fire creating a nuisance must be extinguished immediately.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-025)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.08  DANGER OF SPREADING.



   No person shall start or have any fire upon any woodland, lot,
subdivision, grassland, field, or public right-of-way within the village
whenever there is danger of such fire spreading beyond the control of the
person starting or having such fire so as to injure, damage, or endanger the
life, limb, or property of another.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-026)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.09  ATTENDANCE AT FIRES.



   (A)   No person who starts or has any fire upon any woodland, lot,
subdivision, grassland, field, or public right-of-way within the village
shall leave such open fire unattended by a person of mature years until such
fire has been completely extinguished.



   (B)   The person attending to such fire shall have fire
extinguishing equipment, such as shovels, garden hose, or extinguisher, and
the like, at the fire site.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-027)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.10  FIRES AT NIGHT.



   No person shall start or have any open fire upon any woodland, lot,
subdivision, grassland, field, or public right-of-way within the village
before sunrise or later than one-half hour following sunset; provided,
however, that the Fire Chief or his or her designated representative may
authorize open fires at night with special approval for the date of the fire
and for special occasions or conditions.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-028)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989; Ord. 410, passed
11-2-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.11  EMERGENCY CONDITIONS.



   The Fire Chief or his or her designated representative is hereby
authorized and directed to declare when a state of emergency exists with
respect to fires within the village. When such state of fire emergency
exists, the Fire Chief or his or her designated representative may prohibit
all out-of-doors burning of combustibles within the village during such state
of fire emergency. The state of emergency shall exist when the Fire Chief or
his or her designated representative or the Department of Natural Resources
or State Fire Marshal makes a formal declaration of the existence of such a
state of fire emergency and posts a notice to that effect in a public place
within the village office.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-029)  (Ord. 182, passed 4-11-1989)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty for fire prevention.



      (1)   Generally.



         (a)   General penalty clause. Any violation of §§
94.01 through 94.11 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and
violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



         (b)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



            1.   If the civil fine is paid at the Village
Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



               a.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



               b.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250.
(This shall be known as the third offense.



               c.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500.
(This shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be
$500.



            2.   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby
authorized to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment
at the Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-040)



      (2)   Penalty for emergency conditions. Any person or firm
found guilty of violating any of the provisions of § 94.11 shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.



(1984 Code, § 3-07-01-029)



   (B)   General penalty. Any violation of any provision of this
chapter for which no penalty is currently set out shall be subject to § 10.99



(Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 182, 4-11-1989; Ord. 300, passed 7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 95:  MARINE SAFETY



Section



   95.01   Adoption of regulations



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.



   The village adopts by reference M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 through
324.80104; M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80122 through 324.80124; M.C.L.A. § 324.80141;
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80144 through 324.80153; and M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80166
through 324.80172 of Part 801 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994 in their entirety.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of the above sections shall constitute misdemeanors
punishable by 93 days in jail, a fine of $500, or both.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS



Section




General Provisions




   96.01   Short title



   96.02   Areas covered



   96.03   Reserved park space



   96.04   Hours of use



   96.05   Vehicular traffic



   96.06   Protection of property



   96.07   Plant life and natural surroundings



   96.08   Fires



   96.09   Animals and birds



   96.10   Contraband



   96.11   Swimming, bathing, and wading



   96.12   Boat launching



   96.13   Peddling and soliciting



   96.14   Unlawful obstruction



   96.15   Hindering employees



   96.16   Impersonation of park employees



   96.17   Alcoholic beverages



   96.18   Personal conduct



   96.19   Loudspeakers



   96.20   Fireworks



   96.21   Firearms



   96.22   Littering and pollution of waters



   96.23   Public exhibition



   96.24   Special permits



   96.25   Fees and charges



   96.26   Emergency rules; temporary regulations




Trees




   96.40   Findings and purpose



   96.41   Appointment of Village Forester; duties; interference with
prohibited



   96.42   Appointment of Tree Board



   96.43   Prohibited practices



   96.44   Public improvements



   96.45   Public tree care



   96.46   Public tree removal



   96.47   Loss of public trees; value



   96.48   Trees overhanging streets or sidewalks



   96.49   Appeals



 



   96.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 96.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the “Holly
Park Regulation Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-010)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)



§ 96.02  AREAS COVERED.



   All village parks are covered by the provisions of this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-020)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)



§ 96.03  RESERVED PARK SPACE.



   Any group or gathering of persons may use certain posted areas of
village parks to the exclusion of other persons, provided, a permit has been
granted pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (A)   Application shall be made on forms provided by the village and
shall be made to the Village Manager prior to the time the portion of the
park is desired by the group.



   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a deposit of $100 to
ensure that the area for which the permit is granted shall be left in a clean
and sanitary condition, clear of all debris. Said deposit shall be returned
within 48 hours after an inspection by the Village Manager or his or her
designate discloses that the park was left in a clean condition.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-030)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 96.04  HOURS OF USE.



   In the interest of affording public use of the parks at reasonable
times and keeping in mind public safety and the necessity of policing the
parks, the following provisions concerning hours of use of the parks are
prescribed.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for
anyone to use any park during the periods designated by the Village Council.



   (B)   The Village Council may, by resolution for good cause shown,
grant special permission to use a particular park for a particular purpose
for any specified period of time. In granting such permission, due
consideration shall be given by the Council to the protection of the public.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-040)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.05  VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.



   The use of unlicensed motor-driven vehicles in any public park is
prohibited. Licensed vehicles shall not be driven in the park other than on
roadways or parking lots.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-050)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.06  PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.



   It is forbidden within any park:



   (A)   To destroy, deface, alter, change, or remove any monument,
stone marker, bench mark, stake, post, or place marking designating a
boundary line, survey line, or reference point;



   (B)   To cut, break, mark upon, or otherwise injure any building,
equipment, bridge, drain, wall, fountain, lamppost, fence, gate, bench,
table, or other structure or equipment; or



   (C)   To deface, destroy or remove any placard, notice, or sign,
whether permanent or temporary, posted or exhibited within or upon park
property.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-060)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.07  PLANT LIFE AND NATURAL SURROUNDINGS.



   It is forbidden within any park:



   (A)   To cut, remove, or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, bush
or shrub, whether alive or dead; or chip, blaze, box, or break or remove any
foliage, flower, or any tree or shrub; or pick, gather, uproot, remove, or
destroy any flower, plant, or grass; or



   (B)   To remove or cause to be removed any sod, earth, humus, peat,
boulders, gravel, or sand without written permission or authorization from
the Village Manager or his or her designate.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-070)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  FIRES.



   It is forbidden within any park:



   (A)   To willfully set or cause to be set on fire any tree,
woodland, brush land, grassland, or meadow;



   (B)   To build any fire, except within the fireplaces, receptacles,
or spaces designated for such purpose; or



   (C)   To drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigars, cigarettes, pipe tobacco, or other inflammable material.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-080)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.09  ANIMALS AND BIRDS.



   (A)   No person shall, within any park, hunt, trap, catch, wound, or
kill or treat cruelly, attempt to trap, catch, wound, or kill any bird or
animal, molest or rob any nest of any bird, or any lair, den, or burrow of
any animal; provided further, however, fishing will be permitted within any
area designated therefor in accordance with the laws of the state and the
rules promulgated pursuant to the laws of the state.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person while in a village park:



      (1)   To cause any animal or fowl to run at large;



      (2)   Bring, drive, or lead or ride any equine quadruped in
any park, except on trails or other places designated for such a purpose;



      (3)   Bring, drive, or lead any dog in any park unless the dog
is on a leash not more than six feet in length, unless the dog is in the park
in connection with field trials or an organized dog show under the authority
of the Village Council;



      (4)   Suffer or permit his or her dog or pet to enter any
public building or to be upon any bench, except a trained and working leader
dog for the blind; or



      (5)   Torture, ill-treat or neglect any animal or fowl.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-090)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.10  CONTRABAND.



   All game, animals, fowl, birds, fish, and other aquatic life hunted,
killed, taken or destroyed, bound, sold, bartered, or had in possession,
contrary to any of the provisions of this subchapter, shall be and same are
declared to be contraband, and the same shall be subject to the laws of the
state and treated in accordance therewith.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-100  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.11  SWIMMING, BATHING, AND WADING.



   No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in any park area, except in
designated areas.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-110)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.12  BOAT LAUNCHING.



   It shall be unlawful to launch a boat in any body of water, including a
lake, stream, or other watercourse in a village park unless the launching
site is designated by the village for that purpose.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-120)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.13  PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit business of
any nature whatever, or to distribute handbills or other advertising matter,
or post unauthorized signs in any park; except that the Park and Recreation
Board may provide for food services and other conveniences within the
confines of a park and the Village Council may authorize community service
projects which might otherwise be in violation.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-130)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.14  UNLAWFUL OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall, by force, threat, intimidation, unlawful fencing,
enclosing, or by other means, prevent or unlawfully obstruct any person from
entering, leaving, or making full use of any park.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-140)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.15  HINDERING EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall interfere with, or in any manner hinder, any designated
park employee in the performance of official duties.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-150)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.16  IMPERSONATION OF PARK EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall impersonate a park employee.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-160)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.17  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No person shall have in his or her possession any intoxicating beverage
in any park, unless designated by resolution of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-170)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.18  PERSONAL CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive,
loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd, wanton, obscene, or otherwise disorderly
conduct tending to create a breach of the peace or to disturb or annoy
others, while in any village park.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-180)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.19  LOUDSPEAKERS.



   It shall be unlawful to use a loudspeaker, public address system, or
amplifier, except in connection with a community project authorized by the
Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-190)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.20  FIREWORKS.



   No person shall fire, discharge, or have in his or her possession any
rocket, firecracker, torpedo, or other fireworks or any substance of an
explosive nature within any park unless this is in connection with fireworks
display duly authorized by the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-200)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



Cross-reference:



   Fireworks, see Ch. 134



§ 96.21  FIREARMS.



   No person, unless he or she is a police or peace officer on official
duty, shall bring into any park, or have in his or her possession, or
discharge or set off anywhere in any park, a revolver, pistol, shotgun,
rifle, air gun, or any gun, rifle, firearm, or bow, or any weapon that
discharges projectiles either by air, explosive substance or any other force,
subject, however, to the right of the Village Council to sanction organized
lessons.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-210)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.22  LITTERING AND POLLUTION OF WATERS.



   It shall be unlawful in any park to:



   (A)   Discard or deposit refuse of any kind or nature, except by
placing the same in a container provided for such purpose; or



   (B)   Throw, cast, lob, drop, or discharge into or leave in waters
adjacent to or part of any park any substance, matter of thing, liquid, or
solid, which may or shall result in the pollution of said waters.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-220)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.23  PUBLIC EXHIBITION.



   No person shall exhibit any machine or show, or any animal, or indulge
in any acrobatic exhibition, in any park, nor shall any person carry on any
performance or do anything whatsoever, which shall cause persons to
congregate so as to interfere with the proper use of a park by the general
public, without first having obtained approval of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-230)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.24  SPECIAL PERMITS.



   (A)   No erection, construction, or maintenance shall be made above
or below ground, in any park, without written permission of the Village
Council.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this subchapter, the
Village Council may, upon written application, grant specific use permits for
particular purposes when, in the opinion of the Village Council, such use
deserves special consideration.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-240)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.25  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any facility, land,
or area for which a fee or charge has been established by the Village Council
without payment of such fee or charge.



   (B)   The Village Council may adopt a schedule of reasonable fees
and charges for facilities, goods, wares, and merchandise, and services
inside any village park.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-250)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.26  EMERGENCY RULES; TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted:



   (A)   To prevent or prohibit or hinder duly authorized village
employees or village officials from performing their official duties;



   (B)   To prohibit the Village Council from establishing emergency
rules required to protect park property, and the power and authority to
establish such rules is hereby granted; and



   (C)   The Village Council is hereby authorized to establish
reasonable temporary regulations to meet temporary problems which may arise
in any village park.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-260)  (Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977)




TREES




§ 96.40  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   The village finds that a substantial and healthy stock of trees
maintained throughout the community enhances the beauty, livability and
health of a community and increases property values. To that end, it is the
purpose of this subchapter to provide for the protection, maintenance, and
propagation of trees in the village; to prohibit actions which are injurious
to the village’s tree stock; and provide for the maintenance of trees in a
manner designed to protect public safety.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-001)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.41  APPOINTMENT OF VILLAGE FORESTER; DUTIES; INTERFERENCE WITH
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The Director of the Village Department of Public Works shall
serve as the Village Forester.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Village Forester or employees or
persons working under his or her direction, to control, superintend,
regulate, promote, and encourage the preservation, maintenance, culture,
planting, treatment, and care of trees planted in the rights-of-way, parks,
and other public places.



   (C)   No person shall willfully interfere with, hinder or prevent
the village forester or employees or persons working under his or her
direction or control, from exercising the rights, duties, powers, and work
herein provided.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-002)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.42  APPOINTMENT OF TREE BOARD.



   The Village Park Commission shall serve as the Tree Board and develop
an annual community forestry work plan to be submitted to the Village
Forester for review, approval, and implementation.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-003)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.43  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   No person shall endanger trees in a public right-of-way, park, or other
public place by:



   (A)   Fastening any sign, card, poster, wire, rope, or other
material to, around or through any tree, except in emergencies such as storms
or accidents. Signs must be removed after abatement of emergencies by person
who placed same;



   (B)    Injuring, defacing, disfiguring, cutting, disturbing,
removing, killing, or destroying any portion of any tree;



   (C)   Permitting any fire to burn where such fire or its heat,
smoke, or fumes will injure any portion of any tree;



   (D)   Permitting any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or to be emptied
on or about any tree;



   (E)   Depositing, storing, placing, or maintaining on any street or
other public place, any brick, block, stone, concrete, or other material
which may impede free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of
any tree;



   (F)   Failing to erect a suitable protective barrier around trees
likely to be injured during any construction activity;



   (G)   Permitting any primary electrical service wire to be attached
to any tree;



   (H)   Digging a trench under or within 15 feet of any tree for the
laying of pavement, pipe, or conduit, without first cutting roots in a
skillful workman like manner, with a trenching machine. Boring under trees
for the purpose of pushing pipe or conduit is permitted with the use of an
approved boring or auguring machine. In the event of emergency repairs, the
Village Department of Public Works or its agent shall be exempt;



   (I)   Construction of new driveways or parking areas within 15 feet
of any tree in a public place, except with the permission from the Village
Forester; or



   (J)   Planting of new trees in the right-of-way within 15 feet of an
existing or proposed driveway or apron.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-004)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.44  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The provision of this subchapter shall not apply to the
removal of a tree or any part thereof when such removal is necessary for the
construction of public sidewalks, streets, alleys, sewers, or other public
improvement authorized by any public governmental agency.



   (B)   Except for emergency work on a public improvement, whenever
any person desires to remove a tree in whole, or in part, because of the
placing of a public improvement, such person shall provide the Department of
Public Works with notice of its intent to remove such a tree, or part
thereof, prior to such removal.



   (C)   The Village Forester shall determine the appropriate species
of a tree to be planted, tree size, distance from curb and sidewalk, distance
from street corners and fire hydrant, considering parkway width, location of
underground utilities, height of overhead utilities, spacing of existing
trees, and traffic visibility requirements. Guidelines are available at the
Village Hall.



   (D)   Planting of private trees in the public right-of-way is
encouraged, but no person shall plant a tree in the public right-of-way,
except by and in accordance with the written permission of the Village
Forester. Such written permission shall, upon consideration of the factors
set forth in division (C) above, specify the location and appropriate species
to be planted in the right-of-way.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-005)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.45  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   The Village Forester shall have the light to plant, prune, maintain,
and remove trees planted in rights-of-way, parks, or other public places as
may be necessary to ensure continuity of service or safety of crews when
servicing utilities, to preserve the beauty of such public places, or to
protect the public health and welfare.



   (A)   The Village Forester shall remove any tree or part thereof
which is injurious to sewer, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or
other public improvements, after all reasonable attempts to save the tree are
exhausted.



   (B)   The Village Forester shall remove any tree or part thereof
which is affected with any injurious fungus, virus, insects, or other pest,
which constitutes a potential threat to other trees.



   (C)   The Village Forester shall have the right to preserve any tree
in a public place as it deems necessary to serve the public interest.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-006)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.46  PUBLIC TREE REMOVAL.



   Before removal of any tree growing in a public place and so located as
to extend its branches over adjacent private property, the Village Forester
shall notify the owners or occupant of the adjacent property prior to acting,
except in cases where health or property are endangered.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-007)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.47  LOSS OF PUBLIC TREES; VALUE.



   Any person who removes, severs, destroys, or injures, in a manner which
will cause the immediate or future removal of a tree in a public
right-of-way, park, or other public place shall be liable to the village for
the cost of removal of the damaged tree and the value of a comparable, if
possible, or suitable, if not, tree as determined by the Village Forester
after consideration of the factors set forth in § 96.44(C), and any other
damages permitted by law, including, without limitation, treble damages under
M.C.L.A. § 600.2919.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-008)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.48  TREES OVERHANGING STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   Any tree not growing in a right-of-way, park, or public ground, but so
located as to extend its branches over a street, sidewalk, streetlight, or
other public grounds which is, or becomes, a menace or danger to the public
safety, or a traffic hazard, shall be trimmed or removed by the owner of the
property on which the tree stands and to provide a clear space of ten feet
above the surface of public sidewalks and 15 feet above the surface of the
street, so as to remove the obstruction from the street, sidewalk, or public
grounds and so as to eliminate the traffic hazard and the menace and danger
to the public. The Village Forester shall have the right to remove, or trim
any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper
spread of light, electrical utility facilities, or any traffic-control device
or sign.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-009)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.49  APPEALS.



   All appeals of penalties shall be heard by and decided upon by the
Village Council. Such appeals must be noticed before the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting after written notice has been given, pursuant to
this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-011)  (Ord. 282, passed 11-18-1997)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter
is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23 , and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



            1.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This
shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-01-270)



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§ 96.40
through 96.48 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall
be subject to the sanctions set forth in § 10.99.



(1984 Code, § 1-04-03-010)



(Ord. 58, passed 8-9-1977; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 291, passed
7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 97:  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Short title



   97.02   Purpose



   97.03   Acts declared nuisances



   97.04   Authority of village to abate



   97.05   Costs of removal; collection of costs



   97.06   Non-limitation



   97.07   Civil legal action




Groundwater Protection




   97.20   Findings of fact and purpose



   97.21   Definitions



   97.22   Scope



   97.23   General provisions



   97.24   Site plan review requirements



   97.25   Determination of applicability



   97.26   Exemptions and waivers



   97.27   Appeals



 



   97.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Public Health and Safety, see Ch. 92



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Holly
Environmental Impact Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-010)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)



§ 97.02  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to declare that any adverse or
detrimental impact on the village environment is a public nuisance.



   (B)   This section declares that any violations of state or federal
environmental protection acts or clean air and water acts, including the
Solid Waste Management Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§
324.11501 et seq., and the Hazardous Waste Management Act, Public Act 451 of
1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 et seq.,  to be nuisances and to provide
for the abatement of such nuisances and to provide for the assessment of all
costs of the abatement of such nuisances.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-020)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)



§ 97.03  ACTS DECLARED NUISANCES.



   Any violation of state or federal environmental protection acts or
clean air or water acts, including the Solid Waste Management Act Public Act
451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501 et seq., and the Hazardous Waste
Management Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 et
seq.,  and any other act or statute designed to protect the public health
and environment, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in the
manner prescribed by regulation, statute, or ordinance.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-030)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.04  AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE TO ABATE.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation, or other entity, which
creates a nuisance as stated herein shall be given a written notice to abate
the nuisance within a specific time period as established by the Village
Council.



   (B)   If, at the expiration of the time stated in such notice, the
nuisance has not been abated and the Council has not granted an extension of
time for such abatement, then the village may contract with an outside agency
or may use its own employees in order to abate the nuisance.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-040)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)



§ 97.05  COSTS OF REMOVAL; COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   (A)   If the village contracts for the abatement of the nuisance
and/or uses its employees for the abatement of the nuisance, then the entire
costs of said abatement shall be determined, and the Village Clerk-Treasurer
is hereby authorized and directed to bill the property owner and/or violator
the costs of such abatement.



   (B)   In the event of the failure of the owner and/or violator to
pay such costs, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall assess said costs, against
the property in question, and the costs shall be added to the next ad valorem
tax roll for collection and collected in the manner of ad valorem taxes.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-050)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)



§ 97.06  NON-LIMITATION.



   This chapter shall not be construed to repeal, suspend, or modify any
other provision of any other ordinance of the village.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-060)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)



§ 97.07  CIVIL LEGAL ACTION.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the village attorney
from commencing an action for any other appropriate legal and/or equitable
relief in the County Circuit Court.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-080)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987)



GROUNDWATER PROTECTION



§ 97.20  FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Findings of fact. The village hereby finds that:



      (1)   The groundwater underlying the village is the sole
source of the village drinking water.



      (2)   Groundwater aquifers are integrally connected with, and
flow into, the surface water, lakes, and streams which constitute significant
public health, recreational and economic resources of the village.



      (3)   Spills and discharges of petroleum products, sewage and
other hazardous substances threaten the quality of the groundwater supplies
and other water related resources, posing potential public health and safety
hazards and threatening economic losses.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of these sections is to:



      (1)   Preserve and maintain existing and potential groundwater
supplies, aquifers, and groundwater recharge areas of the village, and
protect them from adverse development or land use practices.



      (2)   Preserve and protect present and potential sources of
drinking water supply for public health and safety.



      (3)   Conserve the natural resources of the village.



      (4)   Protect the financial investment of the village in its
drinking water supply and to meet state requirements for wellhead protection.



      (5)   Assure that state regulations which help protect
groundwater are implemented consistently when new or expanded development
proposals are reviewed.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AQUIFER. A geologic formation, group of formations or part of a
formation capable of storing and yielding a significant amount of groundwater
to wells or springs.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Measures, either managerial or structural to
prevent or reduce pollution inputs to soil, surface water or groundwater.



   DEVELOPMENT. The carrying out of any construction, reconstruction,
alteration of surface of structure or change of land use or intensity of use.



   ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION. The release of a hazardous substance, or
the potential release of a discarded hazardous substance, in a quantity,
which is or may become injurious to the environment, or to the public health,
safety, or welfare.



   FACILITY. Any building, structure, or installation from which there may
be a discharge of pollutants.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. A chemical or other material which is or may
become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to the
environment. The term HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE includes, but is not limited to,
hazardous substances as defined in the comprehensive environmental response,
compensation, and liability act of 1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 Stat. 2767;
"hazardous waste" as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, Act No.
64 of the Public Acts of 1979, being M.C.L.A. § 299.501-299.551; "petroleum"
as defined in the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Act, Act No. 478 of the
Public Acts of 1988, being M.C.L.A. § 299.831-299.850.



   PRIMARY CONTAINMENT FACILITY. A tank, pit, container, pipe, or vessel
of first containment of a hazardous substance.



   SECONDARY CONTAINMENT FACILITY. A second tank, catchment pit, pipe or
vessel that contains liquid or chemical leaking or leaching from a primary
containment area. Containment systems shall be constructed of materials of
sufficient thickness, density and composition to prevent the discharge to
land, ground waters, or surface waters, of any pollutant which may emanate
from said storage container or containers.



   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK SYSTEM. A tank or combination of tanks,
including underground pipes connected to the tank or tanks, which is, was, or
may have been used to contain an accumulation of hazardous substances, as
defined in Part 213 of the State of Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as amended.



   USED OIL. Any oil which had been (a) refined from crude oil, (b) used,
and (c) as a result of such use contaminated by physical or chemical
impurities.



   WELL. A permanent or temporary opening in the surface of the earth for
the purpose of removing fresh water, testing water quality, measuring water
characteristics, liquid recharge, waste disposal, or dewatering purposes
during construction, as defined in the Michigan Water Well Construction and
Pump Installation Code, Part 127, Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as
amended, and rules.



   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA (WHPA). The area around and upgradient from
the public water supply wells delineated by the ten year travel time contour
capture boundary.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.22  SCOPE.



   These provisions shall apply to all businesses and facilities,
including private and public facilities, which use, store or generate
hazardous substances in quantities greater than 100 kilograms per month
(equal to about 25 gallons or 220 pounds), and which require site plan review
under the provisions of this subchapter or Chapter  157 of this code.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.23  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Groundwater protection standards.



      (1)   The project and related improvements shall be designed
to protect the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams,
wetlands, floodplains and groundwater, and to ensure the absence of an
impairment, pollution, and/or destruction of water, natural resources, and
the public trust therein.



      (2)   Storm water management and drainage facilities shall be
designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland,
water body, or watercourse, and shall not increase flooding, or the potential
for environmental contamination, on-site or off-site, and shall not result in
loss of the use of property by any third party.



      (3)   Industrial facilities with a point source discharge of
storm water shall maintain a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan in
accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.



      (4)   General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a
public sewer system, an on-site holding tank, or a system authorized through
a state surface or groundwater discharge permit. If connected to the public
sewer system then the volumes and concentrations of waste discharged to the
floor drain may require compliance with the village’s Industrial
Pretreatment Ordinance.



      (5)   Sites at which hazardous substances are stored, used, or
generated shall be designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to
air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands.



      (6)   State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill
prevention, record keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of
hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges to
groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed
without applicable permits and approvals.



      (7)   In determining conformance with the standards of this
subchapter, the village shall take into consideration all publications of the
Shiawassee River Watershed Council, and other applicable references.



      (8)   Bulk storage of pesticides shall be in accordance with
Regulation No. 640, Commercial Pesticide Bulk Storage, of Act 171 of the
Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 286.569.



   (B)   Aboveground storage and use areas for hazardous substances and
polluting material.



      (1)   Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be
product tight.



      (2)   Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the
substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the
recovery of any released substance. Products held in containers of ten
gallons or less packaged for retail use shall be exempt from this item.



      (3)   Outdoor storage of hazardous substances shall be
prohibited except in product tight containers which are protected from
weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism, including an allowance of
the expected accumulation of precipitation.



      (4)   Out buildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns which
are utilized as secondary containment shall not have floor drains which
outlet to soil, public sewer system, groundwater, or nearby drains or natural
water bodies unless a surface or groundwater discharge permit has been
obtained pursuant to applicable requirements of Act 245.



      (5)   Areas and facilities for loading and unloading of
hazardous substances as well as areas where such materials are handled and
stored, shall be designed and constructed to prevent unpermitted discharges
to floor drains, rivers, lakes, wetland, groundwater or soils.



      (6)   The location of the aboveground storage of hazardous
substances and methods of primary and secondary containment shall be clearly
illustrated on the site plan.



   (C)   Underground storage tanks.



      (1)   Existing or new underground storage tanks shall be
registered with the authorized state agency in accordance with applicable
requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.



      (2)   Installation, operation, maintenance, closure, and
removal of underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with applicable
requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. Leak
detection, corrosion protection, spill prevention and overfill protection
requirements shall be met. Records of monthly monitoring or inventory control
must be retained and available for review by the village officials for five
years.



      (3)   All underground storage tanks which have been out of
service for 12 months shall be removed from the site.



   (D)   Well abandonment. Out of service wells shall be sealed and
abandoned in accordance with applicable requirements of the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, Water Bureau, Drinking Water and
Environmental Health, Well Construction Unit.



   (E)   Sites with contaminated soils and/or groundwater.



      (1)   Site plans shall take into consideration the location
and extent of any contaminated soils and/or groundwater on the site, and the
need to protect public health and the environment.



      (2)   Development shall not be allowed on contaminated areas
of a site unless information from the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality is available indicating that cleanup will proceed in a timely fashion.



      (3)   Information must be provided regarding the type,
concentration and extent of identified contamination, land use deed
restrictions and any remedial action plans.



      (4)   Excavation, drilling, direct-push and other earth
penetration shall be sealed with grout, or with soil material exhibiting
lower hydraulic permeability than the native soil.



   (F)   Construction standards.



      (1)   The general contractor, or if none, the property owner,
shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor
evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site
conditions may pose particular problems for handling any hazardous
substances. For instance, handling hazardous substances in proximity to water
bodies or wetlands may be improper.



      (2)   Hazardous substances stored on the construction site
during the construction process, shall be stored in a location and manner
designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the
ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands. Any storage
container of over 25 gallons, or 220 pounds containing hazardous substances
shall have secondary containment.



      (3)   If the contractor will be storing or handling hazardous
substances that require a manufacturer's material safety data sheet, the
contractor shall familiarize him/herself with the sheet, and shall be
familiar with procedures required to contain and clean up any releases of the
hazardous substance.



      (4)   Upon completion of construction, all hazardous
substances and containment systems no longer used, or not needed in the
operation of the facility shall be removed from the construction site by the
responsible contractor, and shall be disposed of, recycled, or re-used in a
proper manner as prescribed by applicable State and Federal regulations.



      (5)   Excavation, drilling, direct-push and other earth
penetration shall be sealed with grout, or with soil material exhibiting
lower hydraulic permeability than the native soil.



   (G)   Maintenance. In areas where hazardous substances are handled,
structural integrity of the building must be maintained to avoid inadvertent
discharge of chemicals to soil and groundwater. Cracks and holes in floors,
foundations and walls must be repaired in areas where chemicals are handled
or stored.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.24  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   A site plan required hereunder shall specify or contain the following:



   (A)   The location and size of interior and exterior area(s) and
structure(s) to be used for on-site storage, use, load/unloading, recycling,
or disposal of hazardous materials.



   (B)   The location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks
for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, hazardous materials
storage, collection of contaminated stormwater or wash water, and all similar
uses.



   (C)   The location of existing and proposed wells.



   (D)   The location of exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins,
retention/detention areas, sumps, and other facilities designed to collect,
store or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all
drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan.



   (E)   Areas on the site that the applicant has reason to believe are
contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup, if
applicable.



   (F)   Submission of "Hazardous Materials Reporting Form for Site
Plan Review".



   (G)   Submission of "Village of Holly Environmental Permits
Checklist".



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.25  DETERMINATION OF APPLICABILITY.



   It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real property
and/or owning and operating business within the village corporate limits to
make a determination of the applicability of this subchapter as it pertains
to the property and/or business under his or her ownership or operation and
his or her failure to do so shall not excuse any violations of said
subchapter.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.26  EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS.



   The transportation of any hazardous substance shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter provided the transporting motor vehicle or rail
is in continuous transit, or that it is transporting substances to or from a
state licensed hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.27 APPEALS.



   The Village Council may grant a special permit if it finds by written
decision that the proposed use:



   (A)   Meets the intent of this section as well as its specific
criteria;



   (B)   Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse
impact on any aquifer or recharge area in the district;



   (C)   Will not adversely affect an existing or potential domestic or
municipal water supply; and is consistent with existing and probable future
development of surrounding areas.



(Ord. 446, passed 10-11-2016)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall
be known as the second offense).



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense).



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified in case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 1-06-070)  (Ord. 163, passed 7-16-1987; Ord. 292, passed
7-14-1998)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS REGISTRATIONS



      111.   LICENSES AND PERMITS



      112.   PEDDLERS



      113.   JUNK DEALERS



      114.   TAXICABS



      115.   CABLE RATES



      116.   PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS



      117.   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS REGISTRATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Registration required



   110.03   Application



   110.04   Possession of other registration; no exemptions



   110.05   Multiple businesses



   110.06   Term; renewal



   110.07   Conditions for issuance



   110.08   Where certification is required



   110.09   Fire Marshal’s certificate



   110.10   Police Chief’s certificate



   110.11   Zoning certificate



   110.12   Bonds



   110.13   Right to issuance



   110.14   Payment of fees



   110.15   Renewal



   110.16   Late renewals



   110.17   Exhibition generally



   110.18   Exhibition or display of registrations



   110.19   Transferability; misuse



   110.20   Automatic revocation for misuse



   110.21   Special permits to nonprofit enterprise



   110.22   Culmination of provisions



   110.23   Suspension or revocation




Registration




   110.35   Initial registration



   110.36   General business registration



   110.37   Exclusion



   110.38   Temporary business registration; temporary business defined



   110.39   Registration required



   110.40   Certification of Police Chief and Clerk-Treasurer required




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used
therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either
directly or indirectly, on any premises in the village, or anywhere else
within its jurisdiction.



   PERSON. Includes individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations;
or any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself,
herself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or
pursuant to law.



   PREMISES. Includes all lands, structures, places, and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used
in connection with any such business conducted on the PREMISES.



   REGISTRATION or LICENSEE. Includes, respectively, PERMIT or PERMITTEE
or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege,
wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-01)



§ 110.02  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct, or
carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege for which a
registration is required by any provision of this chapter without first
obtaining a registration from the village in the manner provided for in this
chapter.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  APPLICATION.



   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, every person required to
obtain a registration from the village to engage in the operation, conduct,
or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege, shall make
application for the registration to the Village Clerk-Treasurer upon forms
provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall state under oath or
affirmation such facts as may be required for or applicable to the granting
of the registration.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-03)



§ 110.04  POSSESSION OF OTHER REGISTRATION; NO EXEMPTIONS.



   The fact that a registration or permit has been granted to any person
by any other governmental authority or agency to engage in the operation,
conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege
shall not exempt the person from the necessity of securing a registration or
permit from the village if the registration or permit is required by this
chapter.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-04)



§ 110.05  MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.



   The granting of a registration or permit to any person operating,
conducting, or carrying on any trade, profession, business, or privilege
which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions,
businesses, or privileges which are required by this chapter to be
registered, shall not relieve the person to whom the registration or permit
is granted from the necessity of securing individual registrations or permits
for each such trade, profession, business, or privilege.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-05)



§ 110.06  TERM; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain
registrations, the registration year shall begin July 1 of each year and
shall terminate at midnight on June 30 of the following year. Initial
registrations shall be issued for the balance of the registration year at the
full registration fee except where otherwise expressly provided for certain
registrations.



   (B)   Registration applications for registration renewals shall be
accepted and registrations issued for a period of 30 days prior to the annual
expiration date.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-06)



§ 110.07  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   No registration or permit required by this chapter shall be
issued to any person who is required to have a registration or permit from
any other governmental agency until the person shall submit evidence of the
registration or permit and proof that all fees pertaining thereto have been
paid. No registration shall be issued to any applicant therefore until the
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter applicable
to the trade, profession, business, or privilege for which application for
registration is made.



   (B)   No registration or permit required under the provisions of
this chapter shall be issued to any person who is indebted or obligated to
the village for any sum of money, other than for current taxes or special
assessments.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-07)



§ 110.08  WHERE CERTIFICATION IS REQUIRED.



   No registration shall be issued where the certification of any officer
of the village is required prior to the issuance thereof until the
certification is made.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-08)



§ 110.09  FIRE MARSHAL’S CERTIFICATE.



   In all cases where the certification of the Fire Marshal is required
prior to the issuance of any registration by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, the
certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the
premises in which the person making application for the registration proposes
to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business, or privilege,
complies with all the fire regulations of the state and of the village.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-09)



§ 110.10  POLICE CHIEF’S CERTIFICATE.



   In all cases where the certification of the Chief of Police is required
prior to the issuance of any registration by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, the
certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making
application for the registration shall have conducted his or her business in
conformance with all laws of the state and the village, shall not have
conducted any illegal activities in conjunction with this business and shall
have supervised or controlled his or her business in such a manner as to
prevent illegal or unlawful activities from occurring on his or her property
or within his or her business.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-010)



§ 110.11  ZONING CERTIFICATE.



   In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business,
or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a registration
therefor shall not be issued until the Zoning Administrator shall certify
that the proposed use is not prohibited by zoning regulations of the village,
or is a legal nonconforming use as defined by Ch. 157. In cases of legal
nonconforming uses, the zoning certificate so shall indicate.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-011)



§ 110.12  BONDS.



   Where the provisions of this chapter require that the applicant for any
registration or permit furnish a bond, the bond shall be furnished in an
amount deemed adequate by the proper village officer, or, where the amount
thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in a fee
schedule set by village resolution from time to time; the form of the bond
shall be acceptable to the Village Attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant
for a registration or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in
the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such
bond; any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the
village official issuing the registration or permit and as to form by the
Village Attorney.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-012)



§ 110.13  RIGHT TO ISSUANCE.



   If the application for any registration is approved by the proper
officers of the village, as provided in this chapter, the registration shall
be issued and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for
the registration.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-013)



§ 110.14  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   The Village Council shall set by resolution a schedule of fees for each
registration or permit issued hereunder. Fees required by this subchapter for
any registration or permit shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer upon
or before the issuance of the registration or permit.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-014)



§ 110.15  RENEWAL.



   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, an application for renewal
of a registration shall be considered in the same manner as an original
application, except that the requirement for notarization of the form shall
be waived.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-015)



§ 110.16  LATE RENEWALS.



   All fees for the renewal of any registration which are not paid at the
time the fees shall be due, shall be paid as late fees with an additional 25%
of the registration fee required for the registrations for the first 15 days
that the registration fee remains unpaid and thereafter the registration fee
shall be that stipulated for the registrations plus 50% of the fee.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-016)



§ 110.17  EXHIBITION GENERALLY.



   No registration shall fail to carry any registration issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon his or her person at all
times when engaged in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any trade,
profession, business, or privilege for which the registration was issued;
except that where the trade, profession, business, or privilege is operated,
conducted, or earned on at a fixed place or establishment, the registration
shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his or her place
of business. Every registration shall produce his or her registration for
examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by
any village police officer or by any person representing the village.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-017)



§ 110.18  EXHIBITION OR DISPLAY OF REGISTRATIONS.



   Registrations issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed at the place of business.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-018)



§ 110.19  TRANSFERABILITY; MISUSE.



   No registration or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be transferable, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of
this chapter. No registration or permittee shall, unless specifically
authorized by the provisions of this chapter, transfer or attempt to transfer
his or her registration or permit to another nor shall he or she make any
improper use of the same.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-019)



§ 110.20  AUTOMATIC REVOCATION FOR MISUSE.



   In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof, any
attempt by a registered business or permittee to transfer the registration or
permit to another, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this
chapter, or to use the same improperly shall be void and result in the
automatic revocation of the registration or permit.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-020)



§ 110.21  SPECIAL PERMITS TO NONPROFIT ENTERPRISE.



   (A)   Issuance. The Village Manager may issue special permits,
without the payment of any registration fees or other charges therefor, to
any person or organization for the conduct, or operation of a nonprofit
enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he or she finds that the
applicant operates without private profit and for a public, charitable,
educational, literary, fraternal, or religious purpose.



   (B)   Application. An applicant for a special permit shall submit an
application therefor upon forms prescribed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and
shall furnish such additional information and make such affidavits as the
Clerk-Treasurer shall require.



   (C)   Special permittees must conform. A person or organization
operating under a special permit shall operate his or her nonprofit
enterprise in compliance with this chapter and all other applicable rules and
regulations except as provided herein.



   (D)   Appeal to Village Council. If an applicant for a special
permit for a nonprofit enterprise is refused his or her permit by the Village
Manager, the applicant may appeal this denial to the Village Council. The
Village Council, after hearing the facts herein, shall make a final
determination upon the issuance of this special permit.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-021)



§ 110.22  CULMINATION OF PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of this chapter conflict with any other provisions of
this code of ordinances, these provisions shall control.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-022)



§ 110.23  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   (1)   The Village Manager may suspend or revoke for cause
any registration or permit issued by the village in the manner herein
provided.



      (2)   The term CAUSE, as used in this section, shall include
omitting to perform any act required by this chapter or the doing or omitting
of any act or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade,
profession, business, or privilege, for which a registration or permit is
issued under the provisions of this chapter, or any premises or facilities
used in connection therewith, which act, omission, or condition is contrary
to the health, morals, safety, or welfare of the public, is unlawful or
fraudulent, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the registration or permit
granted, or is forbidden by the provisions of this chapter or any duly
established rule or regulation of the village applicable to the trade,
profession, business, or privilege for which the registration or permit has
been granted. The term CAUSE as used in this section shall also include the
arrest and conviction of the registered owner or permittee for any crime
involving moral turpitude.



   (B)   Where the Village Manager shall determine that in the
interests of the public health, morals, safety, or welfare an immediate
suspension is necessary, he or she shall order the same. In such cases, the
Village Manager shall forthwith send a notice to the registered owner or
permittee by registered mail to his or her last known address, which notice
shall contain a statement of the charge against the registered owner or
permittee and a definite time and place for a hearing of the charge and shall
order the registered owner or permittee to show why his or her registration
or permit should not be suspended for an additional period of time or
revoked. Hearings shall be conducted as set forth in division (C)(2) below.



   (C)   Whenever the Village Manager shall have evidence to warrant
the suspension or revocation of a registration or permit, he or she shall
send a notice to the registered owner or permittee by registered mail to his
or her last known address, which notice shall contain a statement of the
charge against the registered owner or permittee and a definite time and
place for a hearing of the charge, and shall order the registered owner or
permittee to show why his or her registration or permit should not be
suspended or revoked.



   (D)   The Village Council shall conduct a hearing not less than five
days after the mailing of the above notice, at which time and place the
registered owner or permittee shall have an opportunity to present a defense
to the charge and to cross-examine any witnesses and examine all evidence
produced against him or her. The decision of the Village Council shall be
final and conclusive.



   (E)   No fee for any registration or permit which has been suspended
or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be refunded.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-023)




REGISTRATION




§ 110.35  INITIAL REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall open any business, as defined in §
110.01, or advertise any goods or services without having obtained an initial
business registration.



      (2)   Persons conducting a business as of the effective date
of the ordinance from which this section was derived, will be required to get
an initial business registration but shall pay a reduced fee per the fee
schedule set by resolution of the Village Council.



   (B)   The application for an initial business registration shall be
made on forms supplied by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The application shall
provide sufficient information in order to determine the type of business
being conducted, the merchandise or service being offered for sale, the
location of the business, the owners or officers of the business, and such
other information as may be necessary to effectively administer this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   No registration shall be approved for an initial
registration until a certificate of approval shall have been received from
the Fire Marshal and the Police Chief, and the zoning certified as proper by
the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   The Village Manager or his or her designee may
administratively approve all initial registrations, with notice to the
Village Council, provided, the applicant demonstrates that certification or
approval has been obtained from the Fire Marshal, Police Chief, Zoning
Administrator, and any other governmental agency from whom a registration or
permit is necessary.



      (3)   No registration shall be issued until the registration
fee is paid.



      (4)   Prior to the issuance of the initial registration, the
Building Inspector shall certify that the premises meets all applicable
chapter standards.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-031)  (Ord. 424, passed 12-12-2012)



§ 110.36  GENERAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   All businesses, as defined in § 110.01, within the
village shall, on an annual basis, register the business with the village.



      (2)   Businesses operating under an initial business
registration at the date for the renewal of that registration shall not be
required to renew a business registration but shall comply with the terms of
this business registration section.



      (3)   The date for registration of the business shall be the
same as for renewal of registrations.



   (B)   All registrations shall be on forms as provided by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   No fee will be charged for the annual registration of
businesses.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-032)



§ 110.37  EXCLUSION.



   Persons required to have a specific business registration by another
provision of this chapter shall not be required to have an initial business
registration nor to register their business under this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-033)



§ 110.38  TEMPORARY BUSINESS REGISTRATION; TEMPORARY BUSINESS DEFINED.



   Every person engaged in the retail sale and delivery of goods, wares,
or merchandise shall be deemed to be engaged in carrying on a temporary
business unless his or her goods, wares, or merchandise shall have been
assessed for taxation in the village during the current year.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-040)



§ 110.39  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in a temporary business of selling goods, wares,
or merchandise at retail within the village from any lot, premises, building,
room, or structure, including railroad cars, without first obtaining a
registration therefor.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-041)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.40  CERTIFICATION OF POLICE CHIEF AND CLERK-TREASURER REQUIRED.



   No registration shall be issued for a temporary business except upon
certification of the Chief of Police and Village Clerk-Treasurer.



(1984 Code, § 8-14-042)  (Ord. 414, 4-2-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  LICENSES AND PERMITS



Section




Outdoor Gatherings




   111.001   Definitions



   111.002   Permit



   111.003   Permit application



   111.004   Review of application



   111.005   Revocation




Auctioneers




   111.020   License required



   111.021   License fee



   111.022   Waiver of fees




Soil Removal




   111.035   Title



   111.036   Purpose



   111.037   Definitions



   111.038   Permits for quarrying, removal of soil, sand, clay,
gravel, or other similar material



   111.039   Dumping of soil, clay, sand, gravel, or other materials



   111.040   Excavation of holes




Noncommercial Solicitation




   111.055   Title



   111.056   Applications



   111.057   Permit required



   111.058   Time of application



   111.059   Action of manager



   111.060   Duration of permit



   111.061   Appeal to Council



   111.062   Peddler legislation unaffected




Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way




   111.075   Purpose



   111.076   Conflict



   111.077   Definitions



   111.078   Permit required



   111.079   Issuance of permit



   111.080   Construction/engineering permit



   111.081   Conduit of utility poles



   111.082   Route maps



   111.083   Repair of damage



   111.084   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee



   111.085   Modification of existing fees



   111.086   Savings clause



   111.087   Use of funds



   111.088   Annual report



   111.089   Cable television operators



   111.090   Existing rights



   111.091   Compliance



   111.092   Reservation of police powers



   111.093   Authorized village officials




Filming Activities




   111.110   Purpose



   111.111   Application; filing



   111.112   Permit; contents



   111.113   Accompanying plans



   111.114   Investigation



   111.115   Prerequisites to issuance



   111.116   Findings



   111.117   Grounds for denial



   111.118   Contents, posting, transferability



   111.119   Revocation



   111.120   Cost of additional services



   111.121   Cleanup and restoration



   111.122   Administrative regulations



   111.123   Savings clause



   111.124   Sanctions



 



   111.999   Penalty




OUTDOOR GATHERINGS




§ 111.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY. Any event, attended by more than 20 attendees, all or
any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display,
entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including but not limited to
musical festivals, rock festivals, or similar gatherings, but does not mean:



      (1)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by a
governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property;



      (2)   Unique or infrequent gatherings of family members,
distant relatives and their friends for celebrations of personal events or
achievements, including but not limited to family reunions, wedding
receptions, graduation open houses and anniversaries;



      (3)   An event held entirely within the confines of a
permanently enclosed and covered structure;



      (4)   An agricultural-related event where the gathering is
incident to or in conjunction with the cultivation and tillage of the soil,
dairying, the production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural commodity including timber, viticulture, apiculture, or
horticulture, the raising of livestock, fur bearing animals, fish, or
poultry, and any practices performed by a farmer or on a farm as incident to
or in conjunction with those farming operations, including preparation for
market, delivery to storage or to market, or delivery to carriers for
transportation to market. An AGRICULTURE-RELATED EVENT shall include, but not
be limited to livestock shows or demonstrations, horse shows, 4-H events,
farm auctions or farm machinery demonstrations.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this
subchapter.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
organization.



   SPONSOR.  Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to be
conducted an outdoor assembly.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 111.002  PERMIT.



   No person shall sponsor, operate, maintain, or conduct an outdoor
assembly within the village unless he shall first have obtained a permit for
such assembly.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.003  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Application for a permit to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in
writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Clerk-Treasurer
of the village and shall be made at least 45 days prior to the date of the
proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
fee set from time-to-time by resolution of the Village Council.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.004  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   On receipt by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, copies of the
application shall be forwarded to the Fire Chief, Building Inspector,
Ordinance Enforcement Officer and Village Councilmembers for review.



   (B)   The Village Council may condition its approval of an
application on any of the following:



      (1)   Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at his
own expense such security personnel as are necessary to provide for adequate
protection of the maximum number of persons at the assembly and for the
preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of
the assembly.



      (2)   Restroom facilities. The permittee shall provide toilet
and drinking water facilities. Portable toilets may be used if approved by
the Village Council.



      (3)   Food service.  A permit is required from the Oakland
County Health Department if food service is made available on the premises.



      (4)   Liquid waste disposal.  The permittee shall provide for
liquid waste disposal in accordance with regulations established by the
Oakland County Health Department.



      (5)   Solid waste disposal. The permittee shall provide for
solid waste storage on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be in
approved, covered, fly tight and rodent proof containers, provided in
sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of persons attending the event.



      (6)   Access and traffic control. The permittee shall provide
for ingress and egress for the premises so as to insure the orderly flow of
traffic onto and off of the premises. Traffic lanes and other space shall be
provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment
and other emergency response vehicles.



      (7)   Parking. The permittee shall provide a parking area
sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles.



      (8)   Illumination. The permittee shall provide illumination
of all areas to be utilized after daylight hours sufficient to insure the
safety and comfort of all persons attending the event.



      (9)   Insurance. Before the issuance of a permit, the
permittee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less
than $1,000,000 and property damage insurance of not less than $300,000 from
a company or companies approved by the Commissioner of Insurance of the State
of Michigan. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the
effect that the insurance company shall notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer in
writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of the
insurance policy.



      (10)   Bonding. Before the issuance of a permit the permittee
shall obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in
Michigan, a corporate surety bond in the amount of $10,000, conditioned upon
the permittee's faithful compliance with all of the provisions of this
subchapter and any conditions imposed hereunder, and all applicable
provisions of state and local law. This bond shall indemnify the village,
including its agents, officers, and employees, against any loss or damage
arising out of the assembly and shall indemnify the owners of property near
the assembly site for any costs of property damage or trash removal resulting
from the assembly.



      (11)   Sound and noise protection. Sound producing equipment,
including but not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs,
musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the
premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as
to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens
of the village.



      (12)   Hours of operation. An outdoor assembly is permitted
within the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.;



   (B)   Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Village
Council may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the
health, safety, welfare and property of village citizens or persons attending
the event.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 111.005  REVOCATION.



   The Village Council may revoke a permit whenever the permittee or its
employees or agents fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any
conditions to the permit.



(Ord. passed - -)




AUCTIONEERS




§ 111.020  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person or persons shall sell any property by public auction or
outcry from any store, doors of stores, or windows of stores, or in any
street, alley, or lane of the village, without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Village Clerk-Treasurer. This section shall not
apply to any person selling secondhand farm implements, farm produce, or upon
mortgage sales or any other legal process.



(1984 Code, § 8-03-010)  (Ord. 6, passed 3-15-1966)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.021  LICENSE FEE.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to issue a license to any
person or persons to sell goods, wares, and merchandise, as aforesaid, at
public auction or venue, within the village, upon said person or persons
paying to him or her the sum of $25 for each and every day, or parts of days,
such person or persons sell as aforesaid; and when such license is granted
the same shall not be transferred to any other person.



(1984 Code, § 8-03-020)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 6, passed
3-15-1966) Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.022  WAIVER OF FEES.



   (A)   (1)   No person or persons shall exercise the business or
trade of an auctioneer or sell property at public auction or outcry within
the limits of the village without a license from the Village Clerk-Treasurer
or by special permission of the Council.



      (2)   This division (A) shall apply to any person selling
property by virtue of a legal process.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Village Manager or his or her
designate to enforce the provisions of this section.



(1984 Code, § 8-03-040)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 6, passed
3-15-1966)  Penalty, see § 111.999




SOIL REMOVAL




§ 111.035  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited by the short title of
“Holly Soil Removal Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-010)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973)



§ 111.036  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the public
health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the village and to preserve
the natural resources and to prevent the creation of nuisances and hazards to
the public health, welfare, and safety.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-020)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973)



§ 111.037  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   QUARRY. Any tract or parcel of land or part thereof used for the
purpose of searching for or the extraction of stone, gravel, marl, sand,
peat, topsoil, or similar materials including striping and pit-type
operations.



   SOIL. Soil, topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, land, earth, or any other
material proposed to be moved from or onto the land.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-030)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973)



§ 111.038  PERMITS FOR QUARRYING, REMOVAL OF SOIL, SAND, CLAY, GRAVEL, OR
OTHER SIMILAR MATERIAL.



   (A)   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate a quarry as hereinbefore defined or
ship any topsoil, sand, clay, gravel, or similar material without a permit
from the Village Council. Such permit shall be required for quarries now in
existence and operating as well as new ventures or a reopening of an old
quarry.



   (B)   No permit will be required where the moving, grading, or
leveling of the aforesaid materials is earned on for the immediate use or
development of the land upon which these substances are found or pursuant to
a building permit issued by the village.



      (1)   Application.



         (a)   Before granting a permit, the Village Council
shall conduct a public hearing concerning such application. A separate permit
shall be required for each separate site.



         (b)   Each application for a permit five copies to be
submitted) shall be made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall contain the
following information as a condition precedent to the obligation to consider
such request:



            1.   Names and addresses of all parties of
interest in said premises, setting forth their legal interest in said
premises;



            2.   Full legal description of the premises
wherein operations are proposed;



            3.   Detailed statement as to method of operation,
such as wet or dry method, what type of machinery or equipment will be used,
and estimated period of time that such operation will cover;



            4.   Detailed statement as to exactly what type of
deposit is proposed to be extracted;



            5.   Proposed method of drilling excavation where
quarrying results in extensive undersurface excavation;



            6.   Topographical survey map; and



            7.   Such other information as may be reasonably
required by the Village Council to base an opinion as to whether a permit
should be issued or not.



      (2)   Permit fees. The sum of $100 shall accompany the
application for quarrying permit. This sum is to be used to defray the costs
of engineering services, investigation, publication charges, and other
miscellaneous administrative expenses occasioned by processing such
application. Permits issued by the Village Council shall be for a period of
one year expiring on March 31 of each year, and such permits may be renewed
by the payment of an annual $50 inspection fee. Such permits shall be renewed
as herein provided for so long as the permittee complies with all the
provisions of this subchapter or other conditions of this permit.



      (3)   Permits. After reviewing all of the information
submitted by the applicant and such other information as may be in the hands
of the Village Council, said Council shall at a regular or special meeting
determine whether or not a permit will be issued. The permit shall be issued
in the event the Village Council shall determine that the issuance of the
permit would not detrimentally effect the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the village.



      (4)   Mandatory requirements. The following requirements shall
be mandatory.



         (a)   Pit operations.



            1.   Where in excavation in excess of five feet
will result from such operations, the applicant shall erect a fence
completely surrounding the portion of the site where the excavation extends,
said fence to be not less than five feet in height, complete with gates,
which gates shall be kept locked when operations are not being carried on.



            2.   Any roads used for the purpose of ingress and
egress to said excavation site which are located within 300 feet of occupied
residences shall be kept free by hard-topping with cement, bituminous
substance, or chemical treatment.



            3.   The slopes of the banks of the excavation
shall in no event exceed a minimum of seven feet to one foot (seven feet
horizontal to one foot vertical) and where a body of water results from the
operation, this slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a
depth of five feet.



            4.   Where quarrying operations result in a body
of water, the owner or operator shall place appropriate “Keep Out-Danger”
signs around said premises not more than 200 feet apart. In order to protect
water wells and water supply of the village, the pumping or draining of water
from such quarrying operations is absolutely prohibited. A drag line or other
method of quarrying approved by the Village Council shall be followed.



            5.   No cut or excavation shall be made closer
than 50 feet from the nearest street or highway right-of-way line, nor nearer
than 20 feet to the nearest property line; provided, however, that the
Village Council may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give
sub-lateral support to the surrounding property where soil or geographic
conditions warrant it.



            6.    The Village Council shall require such other
performance standards where because of peculiar conditions they deem it
necessary for the protection of health, safety, morals, and well-being of the
citizens of the village.



         (b)   Regulations for shipping operations.



            1.   a.   No soil, sand, gravel, clay, or
similar materials shall be removed in such a manner as to cause a danger to
an existing or proposed street or road which has been approved by the village.



               b.   To this end, within a distance of 150
feet from the centerline of such street or road, no soil, sand, gravel, clay,
or similar materials shall be removed below a point six inches above the mean
elevation of such street or road.



            2.   No soil, sand, clay, gravel, or similar
materials shall be removed in such manner as to cause water to collect or to
result in a place of danger or a menace to the public health. The premises
shall at all times be graded so that surface water drainage is not interfered
with.



            3.   a.   Where possible, sufficient topsoil
shall be stockpiled on said site so that the entire site, when stripping
operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of four inches of
topsoil and the replacement of such topsoil shall be made immediately
following the termination of the stripping operations.



               b.   In the event, however, that such
stripping operations continue over a period of time greater than 30 days, the
operator shall replace the stored topsoil over the stripped areas as he or
she progresses.



            4.   a.   The Village Council shall, to ensure
strict compliance with any regulations contained herein or required as a
condition of the issuance of a permit either for quarrying or topsoil
stripping, require the permittee to furnish a surety bond executed by a
reputable surety company authorized to do business in the state in an amount
determined by the Village Council to be reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance hereunder.



               b.   In fixing the amount of such surety
bond, the Village Council shall take into account the size and scope of the
proposed quany, probable cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of
the operator, estimated expenses to compel operator to comply by court
decree, and such other factors and conditions as might be relevant in
determining the sum reasonable in the light of all facts and circumstances
surrounding each application.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-040)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.039  DUMPING OF SOIL, CLAY, SAND, GRAVEL, OR OTHER MATERIALS.



   (A)   (1)   The dumping of any soil, sand, clay, or gravel on any
parcel of land within the limits of the village is hereby prohibited, except
where, within six months following such dumping, such parcel of land is
graded in such manner as to prevent the collection of water, to provide
proper drainage and to leave the ground surface fit for the growing of turf
and other land uses permitted in the district; provided, however, that no
soil, sand, clay, gravel, trash, rubbish, or materials shall be dumped on the
spillways or flood plains of any natural or artificial streams or watercourse
or any area between the upper and lower banks of such streams or water
courses, except on the approval of the Village Council after a public hearing
by the Village Council and on a satisfactory showing that such dumping will
not result in damage to other property within the limits of the village and
will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.



      (2)   Waste and rubbish dumping shall meet the requirements of
this subchapter and the laws and ordinances of the village



   (B)   A surety bond shall be required by the Village Council to
ensure adherence to the herein specified provisions. Such bond shall be in an
amount as specifically required in this subchapter or, if not otherwise
specified, equal to the estimated cost of restoring the site to a safe,
healthy, and sightly condition.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-050)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973)



§ 111.040  EXCAVATION OF HOLES.



   (A)   The existence within the limits of the village of any
unprotected, unbarricaded, open, or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or
wells, or of any excavations, holes, pits, or wells which constitute or are
reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the public health,
safety, or welfare are hereby prohibited and declared a public nuisance;
provided, however, that this subchapter shall not prevent the construction of
excavations under a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter or the Village Building Code where such excavations are properly
protected and warning signs and lights located in such manner as may be
approved by the Village Council, and provided farther, that this section
shall not apply to drains created or existing by authority of the state,
county, village, or other governmental agency.



   (B)   Where the Building Inspector shall determine a nuisance to
exist as herein defined, he or she shall notify the owner as shown on the
latest tax rolls in writing of such finding and require the owner to abate
such nuisance within a reasonable time, in no event less than 30 days nor
more than 90 days, in the event the property owner fails to abate or cause to
be abated such nuisance, then the Building Inspector may abate or cause to be
abated such nuisance and the cost or reasonable value of such work shall be
placed as an assessment against said property on the next assessment roll.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-060)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973)




NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION




§ 111.055  TITLE.



   This subchapter may be known as and referred to as “The Village of
Holly Solicitation Ordinance.”



(1984 Code, § 8-07-010)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979)



§ 111.056  APPLICATIONS.



   The Village Manager is hereby charged with processing applications for
solicitation of funds or the sale of goods or newspapers to raise funds on
the streets or in public places in the village by charitable organizations,
service organizations, or other noncommercial groups.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-020)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 111.057  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   In the interest of public safety, no one shall solicit funds or sell
goods to raise funds for noncommercial purposes in the village unless a
permit has been obtained to do so.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-030)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979)



§ 111.058  TIME OF APPLICATION.



   Applications for permission to solicit funds or to sell goods or
newspapers to raise funds for noncommercial purposes in the village shall be
made to the Village Manager in writing not less than ten days nor more than
30 days prior to the date or dates of solicitation.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-040)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 111.059  ACTION OF MANAGER.



   The Village Manager or his or her designate shall act promptly to
approve or disapprove requests.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-050)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 111.060  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   Any group shall be restricted to solicitation for any three-day period
in one six-month period.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-060)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979



§ 111.061  APPEAL TO COUNCIL.



    Any group which feels aggrieved by the restriction of this subchapter
or by the action of the Village Manager or his or her designate may appeal to
the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-070)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 111.062  PEDDLER LEGISLATION UNAFFECTED.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as changing in any
manner the licensing of hawkers or peddlers regulated by Ch. 112 or the
prohibition of peddling and soliciting pursuant to § 96.13.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-080)  (Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)




TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY




§ 111.075  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this subchapter are to regulate access to and ongoing
use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of- way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002) (“Act”), Public Act 48 of 2002,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq., and other applicable law, and to ensure
that the village qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the
fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-010)



§ 111.076  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed in such a manner as to
conflict with the Act or other applicable law.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-020)



§ 111.077  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Generally. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), as amended from time to time.



      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and
this subchapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public
rights-of-way in the village for its telecommunications facilities.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Holly.



      VILLAGE COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Holly or
its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the VILLAGE COUNCIL.



      VILLAGE MANAGER. The Village Manager or his or her or her
designee.



   (B)   Definitions as provided in the Act. All other terms used in
this subchapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the
Act, including without limitation the following.



      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3103.



      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term
“Commission” in the Act.



      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.



      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive,
transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
licensed commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of pt. I of Title
III of the Communications Act of 1934, Ch. 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. §
332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. §
20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES.



         (a)   Those terms as defined in § 102 of the State
Telecommunications Act, Public Act 1991 of 179, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102.



         (b)   Telecommunication provider does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of pt. I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Ch. 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further
defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, or service
provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.



         (c)   For the purpose of the Act and this subchapter
only, a PROVIDER also includes all of the following:



            1.   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service;



            2.   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a
person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public
right-of-way; and



            3.   A person providing broadband internet
transport access service.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-030)



§ 111.078  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in
the village for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain
a permit pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a
permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Public
Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(1). A telecommunications provider
shall file one copy of the application with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, one
copy with the Village Manager, and one copy with the Village Attorney.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the
Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the
provider’s existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Public Act
48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(5).



   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider
claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its
application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information,
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(5), the telecommunications provider shall
prominently so indicate on the face of each map.



   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.



   (E)   Additional information. The Village Manager may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the Village Manager
deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all
such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional
information established by the Village Manager. If the village and the
applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested
by the village, the village or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as
provided in Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(2).



   (F)   Previously-issued permits. Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits
previously issued by the village under § 251 of the State Telecommunications
Act, Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq., and
authorizations or permits issued by the village to telecommunications
providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the State
Telecommunications Act, but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements
of this subchapter.



   (G)   Existing providers.



      (1)   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3105(3), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the
Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public
right-of-way in the village as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under § 251 of the State Telecommunications Act,
Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, shall submit to the
village an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of
this subchapter. Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3105(3), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under
this division (G) is not required to pay the $500 application fee required
under division (D) above.



      (2)   A provider under this division (G) shall be given up to
an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the
Authority, as provided in Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(4)



(1984 Code, § 8-11-040)



§ 111.079  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Approval or denial.



      (1)   The authority to approve or deny an application for a
permit is hereby delegated to the Village Manager. Pursuant to Public Act 48
of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3), the Village Manager shall approve or
deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under §
111.078(B) for access to a public right-of-way within the village.



      (2)   (a)   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(6), the Village Manager shall notify the MPSC when the
Village Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information
regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which
permit was granted or denied.



         (b)   The Village Manager shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.



   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the
Village Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with
or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Public
Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3106(1), 484.3106(2), and 484.3115.



   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A.
§ 484.3115(4), the Village Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of
a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications
providers access and usage of the public right-of-way.



   (D)   Bond requirement.



      (1)   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3115(3), and without limitation on division (C) above, the Village
Manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider
as a condition of the permit.



      (2)   If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the
reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunications provider’s
access and use.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-050)



§ 111.080  CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.



   (A)   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction
upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the village without
first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under Chs.
50 through 53, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way.



   (B)   No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering
permit.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-060)



§ 111.081  CONDUIT OF UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3104(3),
obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this
subchapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit
or utility poles.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-070)



§ 111.082  ROUTE MAPS.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(7), a
telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial
completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the
village, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications
facilities to both the MPSC and to the village. The route maps should be in
paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance
with Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(8).



(1984 Code, § 8-11-080)



§ 111.083  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(5), a
telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or
installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the village, as authorized
by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and
all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and
shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-090)



§ 111.084  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the village
set forth in § 111.078(D), a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the village’s public rights-of-way shall
pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Public Act 48 of
2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-100)



§ 111.085  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   (A)   In compliance with the requirements of Public Act 48 of 2002,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(1), the village hereby modifies, to the extent
necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1,
2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the
public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and
charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority, the
compliance with the requirements of Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3113(4), the village also hereby approves modification of the fees of
providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within
the village’s boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees
required under Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108.



   (B)   (1)   The village shall provide each telecommunications
provider affected by the fee with a copy of this subchapter, in compliance
with the requirement of Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(4).



      (2)   To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications
providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are
otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be
contrary to the village’s policy and intent, and upon application by a
provider or discovery by the village, shall be promptly refunded as having
been charged in error.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-110)



§ 111.086  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(5), if
Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108. is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 111.085 shall be void
from the date the modification was made.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-120)



§ 111.087  USE OF FUNDS.



   (A)   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3110(4), all amounts received by the village from the Authority shall be
used by the village solely for rights-of-way related purposes.



   (B)   In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by
the village from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund
and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the village under Public Act 51 of
1951, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 et seq.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-130)



§ 111.088  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(5), the
Village Manager shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and
disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-140)



§ 111.089  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(6), the
village shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any
remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after
November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar
fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator
received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet
transport access services.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-150)



§ 111.090  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3104(2),
except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this subchapter
shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or
the village may have under a permit issued by the village or under a contract
between the village and a telecommunications provider related to the use of
the public rights-of-way.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-160)



§ 111.091  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The village hereby declares that its policy and intent in
adopting this subchapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act,
and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve
that purpose.



   (B)   The village shall comply in all respects with the requirements
of the Act, including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of
Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to
15.246, as provided in § 111.078(C); and



      (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy
the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with § 111.083(F).



   (C)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit
an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with § 111.078(G);



   (D)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45
days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a
permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the village,
in accordance with § 111.079(A);



   (E)   Notifying the MPSC when the village has granted or denied a
permit, in accordance with § 111.079(A);



   (F)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with § 111.079(A);



   (G) Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 111.079(B);



   (H)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to
the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with § 111.079(C);



   (I)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which
exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication
provider’s access and use, in accordance with § 111.079(D);



   (J)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional
fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 111.080;



   (K)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the
village’s right-of-way fees with a copy of this subchapter, in accordance
with § 111.085;



   (L)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance
with § 111.088; and



   (M)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a
failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 111.089.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-170)



§ 111.092  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(2), this
subchapter shall not limit the village’s right to review and approve a
telecommunication provider’s access to and ongoing use of a public
right-of-way or limit the village’s authority to ensure and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-180)



§ 111.093  AUTHORIZED VILLAGE OFFICIALS.



   The Village Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appeal in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
Municipal Chapter Violations Bureau) for violations under this subchapter as
provided by this code of ordinances



(1984 Code, § 8-11-200)




FILMING ACTIVITIES




§ 111.110  PURPOSE.



   (A)   No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public or
private property, facility, or residence for the purpose of producing,
broadcasting, taking, or making any commercial motion picture, television,
radio, or photographic production, unless he or she shall have first made
application for and obtained, as prescribed in this subchapter, a permit for
each instance.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the
following:



      (1)   Current news productions, which includes reporters,
photographers, or camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news
service, broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting
of news events;



      (2)   Productions which are conducted by the village’s
public, education, and government access organizations, or by or at the
direction of the village;



      (3)   Productions which are conducted within legally
established commercial motion picture/television/radio/photography studios;



      (4)   Video or multimedia broadcast or transmission of a live
performance within a live entertainment venue on large-screen monitors (i.e.,
jumbotrons);



      (5)   Video or multimedia broadcast on the Internet; and



      (6)   Private events filmed or photographed for noncommercial
purposes, such as private parties or weddings.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-010)



§ 111.111  APPLICATION; FILING.



   Any person desiring a permit to conduct motion picture, television,
radio, and/or photographic production activities under the provisions of this
subchapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the
Village Manager or his or her designee, or by furnishing the required
information in person or by first-class mail, facsimile, or the internet to
the Village Manager or his or her designee. The form must be signed and
accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreements, and
insurance certificates required by this subchapter before it will be
processed. If the application satisfies the criteria of this subchapter, the
permit shall be issued within four working days of submittal, or within five
working days of submittal if the activity requires traffic control in excess
of three minutes, or within seven working days of submittal if activities
require road closures, or include stunts or special effects.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-020)



§ 111.112  PERMIT; CONTENTS.



   The applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall supply the
following information on the application:



   (A)   The name, mailing, address, and phone number of the person
making the application, along with the name and contact information for the
location manager. Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation, or other association, this information shall be provided for all
partners, officers, and directors or members;



   (B)   The address, legal description, and proof of ownership of the
site at which the proposed activity is to be conducted or, if the site is not
owned by the permittee, written proof that the permittee is authorized by the
owner and the person entitled to possession of the site to use the site for
the proposed activity;



   (C)   A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed
motion picture, television, radio, and photographic production;



   (D)   The dates and hours during which the proposed motion picture,
television, radio, and photographic production is to be conducted;



   (E)   An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at
the motion picture, television, radio, and photographic production for each
day it is conducted; and



   (F)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, as follows:



      (1)   (a)   A processing fee in an amount established by
resolution of the Village Council to reimburse the village for the staff time
required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval.



         (b)   The processing fee shall be waived for charitable
and nonprofit organizations which qualify under I.R.C. § 501(c)(3).



         (c)   The processing fee is non-refundable.



      (2)   A daily property use fee in an amount established by
resolution of the Village Council to compensate the village for the use of
public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes
resulting from the filming activity;



      (3)   A monitoring fee to reimburse the village for staff time
required to monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable costs for other
village services or equipment approved for use during such activities, in an
amount as determined at the time of the village’s review of permit
applications; and



      (4)   The processing fee and the property use fee shall be
waived for the following:



         (a)   Productions conducted by a cable television
company operating under a franchise granted by the village which are not
conducted on public property, do not interfere with public right-of-ways, and
which involved fewer than two motor vehicles;



         (b)   Productions for wholly charitable or educational
purposes conducted by or for the benefit of charitable and nonprofit
organizations which qualify under I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) and from which no
profit is derived, either directly or indirectly; and



         (c)   Student filming - productions directed or produced
by a person currently enrolled in courses related to the production at a
state licensed educational institution.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-030)



§ 111.113  ACCOMPANYING PLANS.



   (A)   Each application for a permit required by this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and
diagrams where applicable, of the prospective permittee’s proposed
activities.



   (B)   Such submission shall provide the following:



      (1)   The size or area of the property to be used, including a
sketch of the filming site showing placement of work trucks, location of
production vehicles;



      (2)   Sketch of the “base camp” if any, showing any
off-street locations for crew parking, septage facilities, equipment storage,
catering, and non-essential production vehicles;



      (3)   Traffic control plan of the exact filing location,
listing roads or lanes to be closed, if any;



      (4)   Description of the duration of the proposed activity and
daily hours of operation;



      (5)   Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal;



      (6)   Letters of notification to, and signatures acknowledging
receipt of notification from, businesses, and residences impacted by the
filming as may be required by the Village Manager or his or her designee; and



      (7)   Insurance and bonding arrangements.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-040)



§ 111.114  INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receipt by the Village Manager or his or her designee, copies of
the application for a permit required by this subchapter shall be forwarded
to the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Community Development Department, and to
such other appropriate public officials as the Village Manager or his or her
designee deems necessary. Such officers, departments, and officials shall
review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within four
days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to
the Village Manager or his or her designee.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-050)



§ 111.115  PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE.



   In processing an application for a filming permit required by this
subchapter the village shall, at a minimum, require the following.



   (A)   Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at his or her
own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to
provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of
attendants at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation
of order and protection of property in and around the site of the filming
activity. No permit shall be issued unless the Police Chief or his or her
designee is satisfied that sufficient security personnel as he or she shall
reasonably deem necessary will be provided by the permittee for the duration
of the production activity.



   (B)   Notification. The permittee or his, her, or its designee shall
notify affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of filming,
and as instructed by the Village Manager or his or her designee, of the
duration and location of filming activities, including information about
planned special effects, road and lane closures, “no parking” requests,
sidewalk usage, and the time that any barricades will be placed on the street.



   (C)   Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access
drives, fire hydrants, or be parked in fire lanes, and must allow a minimum
of 20 feet of clearance between vehicles parked on either side of the road
for emergency response vehicles to pass.



   (D)   Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street.
Only the necessary production vehicles may be parked on a public street, if
necessary, at the filming location. Crew parking, catering, and other
non-essential production vehicles shall be at a predetermined location.



   (E)   Insurance.



      (1)   As a condition of issuing such a filming permit, the
permittee shall furnish insurance in an amount to be determined by the
Village Manager, but in no event in an amount less than $1,000,000 to protect
the village against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful
death, and property damage and to indemnify the village for damage to the
village property arising out of the permittee’s activities.



      (2)   An additional minimum of $5,000,000 of such general
liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event motor vehicles,
aircraft, helicopters, explosives, or pyrotechnics are used in the activity.
Such insurance shall list the village, its officers, and employees as an
additional insured party and shall provide that such policy will not be
cancelled for any reason, including nonpayment of premium, without providing
the village ten days’ written notice of same. If said insurance policy is
on a “claims made” basis, it shall include a rider providing for extended
coverage for three years following the termination of production activities
in the village.



      (3)   The applicant shall also submit verification that it has
in effect adequate worker’s compensation insurance coverage as required by
state law.



   (F)   Bonding.



      (1)   Before the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall
deposit a sum of money in cash, in an amount of $500 or in any higher amount
determined by the Village Manager or his or her designee to be reasonably
required under the circumstances.



      (2)   The bond shall be in a form approved by the Village
Attorney, conditioned upon the permittee’s faithful compliance with all of
the terms and provisions of this subchapter and all applicable provisions of
state or local law, and which shall indemnify the village, its agents,
officers, and employees and the Village Council against any and all loss,
injury, or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the
filming activity and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining
the filming site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing
debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the filming activity.



   (G)   Fire protection. In the conduct of its production activities,
the permittee shall, at his, her, or its own expense, take such actions as
determined necessary by determined by the Fire Chief to ensure fire
protection.



   (H)   Hold harmless agreement. The permittee shall execute a hold
harmless agreement as provided by the village prior to the issuance of any
permit.



   (I)   Other conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the
Village Manager may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to
ensure compliance with the requirements of this section and to protect the
health, safety, welfare, and property of attendants or of citizens of the
village, including a limitation on the duration of the permit and the
location of activities thereunder.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-060)



§ 111.116  FINDINGS.



   In processing an application for a permit required by this subchapter,
the Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall issue a permit as provided
for in this subchapter when, from a consideration of the application and from
such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he or she finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with
the use and enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with
traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets
will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time.
Adequate advance notice of any street closure shall be given in accordance
with the provisions, if any, of the village ordinances, village rules, or
policies;



   (B)   The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with
normal governmental or village operations, threaten to result in damage or
detriment to public property, or result in the village incurring costs or
expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the
applicant;



   (C)   The activity does not propose to include obscene matter or an
obscene performance and will not involve conduct in violation of state,
local, or federal laws, rules or regulations, including Public Act 343 of
1984, being M.C.L.A. §§ 752.361 to 752.374;



   (D)   At the determination of the Village Manager or his or her
designee as well as the Village Police Chief, Fire Chief, and/or Code
Enforcement Officer, that the condition of such activity will not constitute
a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all properly safety precautions
will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or
their designees; and



   (E)   (1)   The permit shall not authorize the production of a
film that in any manner requires the use of property owned by or under the
control of the village in violation of Public Act 84 of 2008, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 123.1191 et seq., prohibiting the production of a film that includes
obscene matter or an obscene performance or that requires that individually
identifiable records be created and maintained for every performer provided
in 18 U.S.C. § 2557.



      (2)   The decision of the Village Manager or his or her
designee to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final
unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by
requesting a hearing before the next available meeting. Where conditions are
imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a permit and where a permit is
denied, notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail
within five days of such action. In the case of a permit denial, the reasons
therefore shall be stated in the notice.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-070)



§ 111.117  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   A filming permit, required by this subchapter, may be denied if:



   (A)   The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of
§ 111.115 or with any or all other conditions imposed pursuant to this
subchapter, or with any other applicable provision of local, state, or
federal law, rule, or regulation; or



   (B)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-080)



§ 111.118  CONTENTS, POSTING, TRANSFERABILITY.



   A permit required by this subchapter shall specify the name and address
of the permittee, the kind and location of the filming activity, the maximum
number of attendants permissible, the duration of the permit and any other
conditions imposed pursuant to this subchapter. It shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises of the filming activity, and shall not be
transferred to any other person or location.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-090)



§ 111.119  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Village Manager or his or her designee may revoke a permit
issued pursuant to this subchapter whenever the permittee, his or her
employee, or agent fails, neglects, or refuses to fully comply with any and
all provisions and requirements set forth in this subchapter, including the
conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit, or with any and all
provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other law incorporated by
reference in this subchapter.



   (B)   (1)   A permit shall automatically be revoked if riotous,
disorderly, obscene, or otherwise unlawful conduct occurs at a filming
location or if an assemblage exceeds 125% of the estimated attendance, as
indicated on the application for a permit.



      (2)   In such instances, the premises may be closed by the
Police Department and the assembly dispersed.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-100)



§ 111.120  COST OF ADDITIONAL SERVICES.



   (A)   If deemed necessary by the Village Manager or his or her
designee, additional police, code enforcement, fire, and other village
services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting, and
regulation the proposed activity.



   (B)   The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid
in advance to the village by the applicant. Any additional village services
will be provided/coordinated through the Village Manager or his or her
designee.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-110)



§ 111.121  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   The applicant shall conduct operations in an
orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in
use, maintenance of the area, and the cleanup of trash and debris.



         (b)   The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris
within two hours of the completion of the activity or within such other time
established in the permit to the village’s satisfaction.



      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible for restoring any
area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site.



   (B)   (1)   If the site is not repaired or restored to the
village’s satisfaction, the Village Manager or his or her designee shall
have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the applicant
shall reimburse the village for such work within ten days of completing
filming.



      (2)   In the event the applicant fails to so reimburse the
village, the village may secure its reimbursement from either a cash or
surety bond which shall be posted with the village to ensure faithful
performance of such restoration.



   (C)   (1)   Such faithful performance bond shall be filed at the
time of the application in the amount and in the manner provided for in §
111.115(F).



      (2)   The amount of the bond shall in no way limit the
applicant’s liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or
restoration in the event those costs exceed the bond amount.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-120)



§ 111.122  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.



   The Village Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to
promulgate and enforce administrative regulations in the implementation and
enforcement of this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-130)



§ 111.123  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   The amendment of the code of ordinances set forth in this subchapter
does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed, or right accruing,
accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment pending
or incurred prior to the amendment of this code of ordinances set forth in
this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 8-13-140)



§ 111.124  SANCTIONS.



   Any person or firm who violates any provision of this subchapter shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the
sanctions provided for in Ch. 32.



(1984 Code, § 8-13)  (Ord. 403, passed 7-19-2009)



§ 111.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Penalty for outdoor gatherings. Any violation of §§ 111.001
through 111.005 is designated as a misdemeanor punishable by 93 days in jail,
a fine of $500, or both. Any violation of §§ 111.001 through 111.005 shall
also constitute a nuisance per se subject to abatement in circuit court.



   (C)   Penalty for auctioneers.



      (1)   Generally.



         (a)   General penalty clause. Any violation of §§
111.020 through 111.022 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction
and violators shall be subject to civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



         (b)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



            1.   If the civil fine is paid at the Village
Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



               a.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



               b.   In the case of another offense within
one year- of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250.
(This shall be known as the third offense.)



               c.   In the case of another offense within
one year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500.
(This shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be
$500.



            2.   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby
authorized to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment
at the Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 8-03-030)



      (2)   Penalty for waiver of fees. Any violations of the
provisions of § 111.022 shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for any period of time not exceeding three
months, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court,
plus the costs and expenses of prosecution.



(1984 Code, § 8-03-040)



   (D)   Penalty for soil removal.



      (1)   General penalty clause. Any violations of §§ 111.035
through 111.040 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and
violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



            1.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This
shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 8-06-070)



   (E)   Penalty for noncommercial solicitation.



      (1)   General penalty clause. Any violation of §§ 111.055
through 111.062 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and
violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and
procedures as set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



            1.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be known as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This
shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified, in case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 8-07-090)



   (F)   Penalty for telecommunications rights-of-way. A person who
violates any provision of §§ 111.075 through 111.093  or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to §§ 32.20 through 32.23. Nothing in this division (F) shall be
construed to limit the remedies available to the village the event of a
violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.



(1984 Code, § 8-11-210)



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 28, passed 1-30-1973; Ord. 87, passed 12-11-1979; Ord.
143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 310, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 312, passed
7-14-1998; Ord. 313, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 6, passed 3-15-1966; Ord. 353,
passed 11-10-2002)



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS



Section



   112.01   License required



   112.02   License fees



   112.03   Applicability of provisions



   112.04   Payment of fees prerequisite to issuance of license



   112.05   Fees not refundable



 



   112.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Licenses and Permits, see Ch. 111



§ 112.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in or follow
the business of hawking, pack or other peddling, from door to door or
otherwise, or in selling any article of commerce whatsoever from a stand,
stall, cart, wagon, pack, basket, or in any manner on any of the public
streets, parks, grounds, alleys, lanes, or places within the corporate limits
of the village, without first having obtained a license therefor.



(1984 Code, § 8-02-010)  (Ord. 31, passed 6-8-1973)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Fee schedule.



      (1)   The village shall, by resolution, adopt, and from time
to time may amend, a schedule of fees to be collected.



      (2)   Upon application, therefor, the Village Clerk-Treasurer
is hereby authorized to issue a license to engage in any business or
occupation specified in § 112.01 upon payment by the licensee.



   (B)   Violations. Any person or firm convicted of violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §
112.99.



(1984 Code, § 8-02-020)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 192, passed
9-26-1989; Ord. 393, passed 7-13-2008; Ord. 31, passed 6-8-1973)



§ 112.03  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any gardener or
farmer, or market gardener selling or offering for sale the produce of his or
her farm or garden.



(1984 Code, § 8-02-030)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 31, passed
6-8-1973)



§ 112.04  PAYMENT OF FEES PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No license shall be issued until the fee therefor shall have
been fully paid as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   No person(s) shall engage in any peddling, vending, or
solicitation between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., local time of any day.



   (C)   No person(s) shall ring the bell or knock on the door or
otherwise attempt to gain admittance for the purpose of soliciting at a
residence, dwelling, or apartment at which a sign bearing the words “No
Solicitors”, “No Trespassers”, or words of similar import indicating
that such persons are not wanted on the premises, is painted, affixed, or
otherwise exposed to public view; provided, that this division (C) shall not
apply to any solicitor who gains admittance to such residence at the
invitation or with the consent of the occupant thereof.



(1984 Code, § 8-02-040)  (Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 31, passed
6-8-1973; Ord. 429, passed 2-16-2014)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  FEES NOT REFUNDABLE.



   No fee paid for license as herein provided shall be refunded by reason
of the licensee thereunder abandoning his or her license.



(1984 Code, § 8-02-050)  (Ord. 31, passed 6-8-1973)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter is hereby designated as a municipal civil
infraction and violators shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions,
remedies, and procedures as set forth in §§ 32.20 through 32.23, 10.99, and
state law.



(1984 Code, § 8-02-060)



CHAPTER 113:  JUNK DEALERS



Section



   113.01   Definition



   113.02   Application of license, contents



   113.03   Removal of refuse material, disposition



   113.04   License; fence requirement



   113.05   License fee



   113.06   Prohibited acts



   113.07   Revocation of license



   113.08   Records required



   113.09   Police inspection



   113.10   Violation deemed nuisance



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK. Any personal property which is or may be salvaged for reuse,
resale, reduction, or similar disposition, or which is possessed,
transported, owned, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted for any
of the aforesaid purposes. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or
association of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, shall
directly or indirectly, himself or herself or by his or her agent or
employee, engage in the business of a junk dealer or junk gatherer within the
corporate limits of the village without having first obtained a license
therefor from the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-010)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 113.02  APPLICATION OF LICENSE, CONTENTS.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Village
Council and filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. It shall give all such
information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, including the name and address of the applicant,
the business or trade name under which the applicant is to operate, previous
experience in the business, the names and addresses of all persons interested
in the issuing of the license, and the place or places of residence and
occupation of the applicant and of all persons interested in said business
for the two years preceding the date of said application, and if the
applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses and such previous places
of residence and occupation of officers, and a correct description of the
land upon which the applicant proposes to locate said business. It shall
contain an agreement upon the part of the applicant that he or she will
accept the license, if granted to him or her, upon the condition that it may
be suspended or revoked at the will of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-020)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937)



§ 113.03  REMOVAL OF REFUSE MATERIAL, DISPOSITION.



   Said licensee shall, at least once each month, remove all refuse
material not suitable for sale, and the same shall be disposed of in
accordance with the direction of the Village Council and in a manner



satisfactory to it.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-030)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937)



§ 113.04  LICENSE; FENCE REQUIREMENT.



   If the village is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to
engage in the business of a junk dealer or junk gatherer, it shall giant a
license; provided, that if the business of a junk dealer is to be conducted
on a vacant lot or in a partially enclosed structure, no license shall be
granted until the applicant thereof shall have enclosed such property with a
fence erected in such a manner as to obliterate the premises from the view in
accordance with Council requirements, which fence shall at all times be
properly maintained by the licensee.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-040)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 113.05  LICENSE FEE.



   When a license has been granted, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue the same upon payment of a license fee of $50 per year. The license
shall expire on December 31 of each year.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-050)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 113.06  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer:



   (A)   To maintain a junkyard or store junk in any part of the
village, except his or her duly licensed yard;



   (B)   To receive or purchase from or sell to any minor under the age
of 16 years any article without the written consent of the parent of the
minor; or



   (C)   To make use of any part of the streets, sidewalks, or highways
of the village for the storage of junk or secondhand material or to build or
maintain any open fires on any street, highway, or sidewalk of the village or
within 30 feet of any building, fence, or structure.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-060)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revocable
by the Village Council at any time for a violation of any law of the state,
or any ordinance of the village.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-070)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 113.08  RECORDS REQUIRED.



    Each licensee shall keep a book in which shall be written in ink and
in (the) English language the day, hour, name, age, and address of each
person buying, selling, or leaving any article, including a complete
description of all articles received and/or disposed of that can be readily
identified by a trade name or by a number. No entry in such book shall be
erased, obliterated, altered, or defaced.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-080)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937)



§ 113.09  POLICE INSPECTION.



   The Village Chief of Police or other police officers shall at all times
have free access to all parts of the premises for which a license has been
granted as provided in this chapter, and refusal to give such access by any
person on such premises shall be a sufficient cause to work a forfeiture of
the license.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-090)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 113.10  VIOLATION DEEMED NUISANCE.



   The conduct of any junkyard in the village, contrary to the terms of
this chapter, shall constitute a nuisance and the remedy for abatement
thereof shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties herein
provided.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-110)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937)  Penalty, see §
113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall
be known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the fourth offense. All subsequent offenses shall be $500.)



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 8-04-120)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-12-1937; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 311, passed 7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS



Section



   114.01   License required



   114.02   Definition



   114.03   Application for license, contents



   114.04   Licenses; expiration date, renewal applications



   114.05   Applications; Council action; time



   114.06   License fee



   114.07   Change in information, notification to Clerk-Treasurer



   114.08   Licenses not transferable



   114.09   Taxi stands



   114.10   Inspection of taxicabs



   114.11   Drivers; qualifications



   114.12   Liability insurance required



 



   114.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Licenses and Permits, see Ch. 111



§ 114.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab
in the village without first having secured a license therefor.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-010)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB. Includes any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire, but
not operating on a fixed route.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-020)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)



§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, CONTENTS.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Village
Manager or his or her designate, shall be filed at the village offices, and
shall contain the following information:



   (A)   The full name and address of the applicant. If the applicant
is a corporation, state of incorporation, and the full names and addresses of
all officers of the corporation and the resident agent;



   (B)   The address of the principal office of such business in the
village;



   (C)   The schedule of fees to be charged for such taxi service
within the corporate limits of the village;



   (D)   The hours of each day and the days of each week on which such
taxi service shall be available;



   (E)   The make, year, and model of each vehicle to be operated by
the applicant in such taxi service business; and



   (F)   The full name and address of the owner of each vehicle.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-030)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 114.04  LICENSES; EXPIRATION DATE, RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.



   All such licenses regardless of when first issued, shall expire on
March 15 of each year, applications for a renewal of such license shall be
made in the same manner as applications for original licenses; provided,
however, that renewal applications cannot be filed prior to February 1 in any
year.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-040)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)



§ 114.05  APPLICATIONS; COUNCIL ACTION; TIME.



   Applications for license to operate to taxicab business within the
corporate limits of the village shall be acted upon by the Village Manager or
his or her designate within 15 days after the filing of such application; and
if the application is approved by the Village Manager or his or her
designate, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant
upon the payment of the required license fee as hereinafter specified.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-050)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 114.06  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee, payable in advance, for taxicab business licenses shall
be $50, plus $25 for each taxicab operated. Whenever the number of taxicabs
so operated shall be increased during the license year, the licensee shall
immediately notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer and pay to him or her the
additional fee.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-060)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 114.07  CHANGE IN INFORMATION, NOTIFICATION TO CLERK-TREASURER.



   It shall be the duty of the licensee to see that the information
contained in his or her said application is current and correct and the
licensee shall immediately notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer of any changes
to be made in his or her said application.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-070)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)



§ 114.08  LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   The said license to operate a taxicab business is a personal license
and as such is nontransferable by any means.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-080)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)



§ 114.09  TAXI STANDS.



   The Village Council may establish a stand or stands as taxi stands and
if it shall do so the stands shall be appropriately marked and taxicab
drivers shall park their taxicabs in such spaces, while on duty and waiting
for employment and such drivers shall not so park or wait in any other space
unless directed to do so by proper authority.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-090)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)



§ 114.10  INSPECTION OF TAXICABS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain a constant
vigilance over all taxicabs to see that they are kept in condition of
continued fitness for public use, and to this end the licensee shall cause to
be inspected all taxicabs at least twice annually by a certified mechanic.



   (B)   Such inspections shall take place sometime during the first
week of January of each year and sometime during the first week of July of
each year.



   (C)   In addition, said taxicabs shall be subject to police
inspection from time to time and as often as may be necessary to ensure
public safety.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-100)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 114.11  DRIVERS; QUALIFICATIONS.



   Each person driving a taxicab shall meet the following qualifications.



   (A)   The driver shall be in good physical and mental health, be
able-bodied, free from communicable disease, and strong enough physically to
handle the taxicab with ease.



   (B)   As evidence of his or her physical fitness and mental
alertness, the driver shall in February of each year, submit to a physical
examination by a reputable physician designated by the Village Council, and
the driver shall immediately present the physician’s statement to the
Village Council for approval.



   (C)   A record of each taxicab driver together with the
physician’s certificate shall be maintained in the Village Hall.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-110)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962)



§ 114.12  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before the issuance of a license to operate a taxicab business
within the corporate limits of the village, the licensee-applicant shall file
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a certificate, signed by a duly authorized
officer of a company licensed to engage in the insurance business in the
state, to the effect that a policy of insurance has been issued and is in
full force and effect, issued to the licensee-applicant, and that the premium
has been fully paid, together with a true copy of the policy contract or
certificate of insurance.



   (B)   (1)   Said policy shall be the usual form automobile
liability policy and in the amount of $50,000, $100,000 for personal injury,
and $25,000 for property damage.



      (2)   The insurer shall immediately give notice to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer in the event of the cancellation of such insurance.



      (3)   Every license issued under this chapter shall be
suspended at all times when the licensee shall not have in full force and
effect the insurance herein requested.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-120)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall
be known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
blown as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 2-05-130)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-18-1962; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 293, passed 7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 115:  CABLE RATES



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Purpose and interpretation



   115.03   Filing; additional information; burden of proof



   115.04   Proprietary information



   115.05   Public notice; initial review of rates



   115.06   Tolling order



   115.07   Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates
following tolling of 30-day deadline



   115.08   Village Manager’s report; written response



   115.09   Rate decision and order



   115.10   Refunds; notice



   115.11   Written decision; public notice



   115.12   Rules and regulations



   115.13   Failure to give notice



   115.14   Additional hearings



   115.15   Additional powers



   115.16   Failure to comply; remedy



   115.17   Conflicting provisions



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Generally. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. All equipment and services subject to
regulation pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.923.



      BASIC CABLE SERVICE or BASIC TIER CABLE SERVICE. A separately
available tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier
of service and shall, at a minimum, consist of those signals and programming
required by the Cable Act and the FCC Rules.



      CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Pub. Law
No. 98-549), as amended by Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (Pub. Law No. 102-385, 47 U.S.C. §§  551 et seq.).



      CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons:



         (a)   Who provides, within the corporate limits of the
Village of Holly, cable service, over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or



         (b)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for,
through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.



      CABLE SERVICE.



         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service; and



         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission created by 47 U.S.C.
§ 151.



      FCC RULES. The rules and regulations promulgated from time to
time by the FCC for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
the provisions of the Cable Act.



      FRANCHISE. The initial authorization or renewal thereof issued by
the Village of Holly which authorizes the construction or operation of a
cable system within the Village of Holly.



      FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. The agreement or ordinance setting forth the
length, terms, and conditions of a cable operator’s franchise granted by
the Village of Holly.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Holly.



   (B)   Conflict. In the event of any inconsistency between the
definitions set forth in this chapter and the definitions of the same terms
set forth in the Cable Act and/or the FCC Rules, the definition of such term
in the Cable Act or the FCC Rules shall prevail. All other words and phrases
used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as in the Cable Act and the
FCC Rules.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-010)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.02  PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.



   The purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Provide regulations and procedures governing basic tier cable
service consistent with the Cable Act and the FCC Rules; and



   (B)   Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for
consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic
tier cable service rate regulation by the village.   



(1984 Code, § 8-10-020)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.03  FILING; ADDITIONAL INFORMATION; BURDEN OF PROOF.



   (A)   (1)   A cable operator shall file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer ten copies of its schedule of rates for basic tier cable
service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in
accordance with the time, format, and other requirements of the Cable Act and
the FCC Rules.



      (2)   The cable operator shall include as part of its
submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of
rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Cable Act and the
FCC Rules. For purpose of this chapter, such filing shall be deemed to have
been made once all ten copies have been received by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   The Village Council may, by resolution or otherwise,
promulgate rules and regulations prescribing the information, data, and
calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator’s filing
of the schedule of rates or proposed increase.



   (C)   A cable operator shall also provide all information requested
by the Village Manager in connection with the village’s review and
regulation of existing rates for basic tier cable service and associated
equipment or a proposed increase in said rates. The Village Manager may
establish deadlines for the submission of the requested information and the
cable operator shall comply with such deadlines.



   (D)   The cable operator shall at all times have the burden of
proving that its rates comply with the Cable Act and the FCC Rules.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-030)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.04  PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.



   (A)   (1)   If this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted
by the village pursuant to § 115.03 requires the production of proprietary
information, the cable operator shall produce the information; however, at
the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator
may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as
confidential and withheld from public disclosure.



      (2)   (a)   The request must state the reason why the
information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those
reasons.



         (b)   The request for confidentiality will be granted if
the village determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that
nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA), being 5 U.S.C. 552.



      (3)   The village shall place in a public file for inspection
any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable
operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied:



         (a)   Where the cable operator is proposing a rate
increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly
proprietary information will be returned to it; or



         (b)   The cable operator may seek review within five
working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the
information will be stayed pending review.



   (B)   (1)   Any interested party may file a request to inspect
material withheld as proprietary with the village. The village shall weigh
the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited
for permitted inspection in light of the facts of the particular case.



      (2)   It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and
the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of
the request. It may grant, deny, or condition a request. The requesting party
or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filling an appeal
with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of
any appeal.



   (C)   The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as
analogous to and consistent with the rates of the FCC regarding requests for
confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 C.F.R. § 0.459.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-040)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.05  PUBLIC NOTICE; INITIAL REVIEW OF RATES.



   (A)   (1)   Within 15 days after receiving a proposed schedule of
rates or rate increase from a cable operator pursuant to § 115.03, the
village shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, a
public notice of the filing of said proposed schedule of rates or rate
increase and the day, time, and place when and where the proposed schedule of
rates or rate increase will be first considered by the Village Council.



      (2)   The published notice shall state that:



         (a)   The filing (except those parts which may be
withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection at the office of
the Village Clerk-Treasurer; and



         (b)   The interested parties are encouraged to submit
written comments on the filing to the Village Clerk-Treasurer not later than
seven days after the public notice is published.



   (B)   Written notification of the day, time, and place when and
where the proposed schedule of rates or rate increase will be so considered
shall be sent to the cable operator.   



(1984 Code, § 8-10-050)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.06  TOLLING ORDER.



   After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a
proposed increase in rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in
effect or the proposed schedule of rates or rate increase shall become
effective 30 days after filing with the Village Clerk-Treasurer as provided
in § 115.03, unless tolled by a tolling order issued by the Village Council
pursuant to the FCC Rules. The Village Council may toll the 30-day deadline
for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of- service showings
and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
 



(1984 Code, § 8-10-060)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.07  PUBLIC NOTICE; HEARING ON BASIC CABLE SERVICE RATES FOLLOWING
TOLLING OF 30-DAY DEADLINE.



   (A)   If a tolling order has been issued pursuant to § 115.06, the
cable operator shall submit to the village any additional information
required or requested pursuant to § 115.04. In addition, the Village Council
shall hold public hearing on the proposed schedule of rates or rate increase.
Such hearing shall be held within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as
the case may be. Notice of such healing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the village at least 15 days before
the hearing.



   (B)   The published notice shall state that:



      (1)   The date, time, and place at which the healing shall be
held;



      (2)   The interested parties may appear in person, by agent,
or by letter at such healing to submit comments on or objections to the
existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and



      (3)   The copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed
increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be
withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the
office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   Written notice of such public healing shall be given to the
cable operator by first-class mail at least 15 days before the hearing.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-070)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.08  VILLAGE MANAGER’S REPORT; WRITTEN RESPONSE.



   Following the public hearing held pursuant to § 115.07, the Village
Manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared a written report and
recommendation for the Village Council’s decision pursuant to § 115.09.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall send a copy of such written report to the
cable operator at the business address set forth in its filing under §
115.03 at least 20 days before the Village Council acts under § 115.09. The
cable operator shall have ten days from the mailing of said written report to
file ten copies of a written response to the report with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. If at least ten copies of a written response are filed by
the cable operator within such ten-day period, the Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall forward the response to the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-080)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.09  RATE DECISION AND ORDER.



   The Village Council shall issue a written order, by resolution or
otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic
tier cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such
rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate
reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or
proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other
appropriate relief, in accordance with the Cable Act and the FCC Rules. If
the Village Council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed
increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the
cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933. The
order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling
order under § 115.06 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing.
The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under §
115.06 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing.   



(1984 Code, § 8-10-090)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.10  REFUNDS; NOTICE.



   (A)   The Village Council may order a refund to subscribers as
provided in 47 C.F.R. § 76.942. Before the Village Council orders any refund
to subscribers, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give at least seven-days’
written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time,
and place at which the Village Council shall consider issuing a refund order
and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment.



   (B)   The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by
letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the Village
Council.     



(1984 Code, § 8-10-100)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.11  WRITTEN DECISION; PUBLIC NOTICE.



   (A)   Any order issued by the Village Council pursuant to §§
115.09 or 115.10 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption, and
shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption.



   (B)   Notice of the rate order shall be published by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer in a newspaper of general circulation within the village and
state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for
inspection or copying at the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, in
addition, a copy of the written decision shall be mailed by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer to the cable operator at the business address set forth in
the filing under § 115.03, by first-class mail.   



(1984 Code, § 8-10-110)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.12  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   In addition to rules promulgated under § 115.03, the Village Council
may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of basic tier
cable service rate regulation proceedings consistent with the Cable Act and
the FCC Rules.     



(1984 Code, § 8-10-120)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.13  FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE.



   The failure to the village, or any of its officers, employees, or
agents, to give any notice or mail a copy of any report required to be given
or mailed by the Cable Act, by the FCC rules, or by this chapter shall not
invalidate any of the proceedings held or decisions made pursuant to this
chapter.     



(1984 Code, § 8-10-130)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.14  ADDITIONAL HEARINGS.



   Whenever the Village Council, in its sole discretion, believes that it
is necessary or desirable in the best interest of the public to hold any
additional hearings other than those specifically provided for in this
chapter, in the Cable Act or in the FCC Rules, it may do so upon providing
reasonable notice thereof to the cable operator and to the public.     



(1984 Code, § 8-10-140)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.15  ADDITIONAL POWERS.



   The powers provided for in this chapter or exercised pursuant hereto
are in addition to those powers conferred upon the village by law or
otherwise.     



(1984 Code, § 8-10-150)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.16  FAILURE TO COMPLY; REMEDY.



   If the cable operator shall fail to comply with any provision of the
Cable Act, the FCC Rules, any rates, orders, or determinations, any
requirements of this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated under
this chapter, in order to enforce compliance therewith, the village may
pursue any legal or equitable remedy available under the Cable Act, the FCC
Rules, this chapter, or any other law.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-160)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



§ 115.17  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any other
provision of this code, any ordinance or the franchise agreement, this
chapter shall control.



(1984 Code, § 8-10-180)  (Ord. 240, passed 10-19-1993)



CHAPTER 116:  PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS



Section



   116.01   Registration certificate required



   116.02   Application



   116.03   Issuance of certificate



   116.04   Fee



   116.05   Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration



   116.06   Revocation of certificate of registration



   116.07   Additional retention period



   116.08   Purchase of coins



§ 116.01  REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in a business of a precious metal or gem dealer
as defined in Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1981 (M.C.L.A.
§§ 445.481 et seq.), as amended, without having first obtained a
certificate of registration from the village.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.02  APPLICATION.



   Any person applying for a certificate to conduct a business of a
precious metal or gem dealer shall apply to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for
such certificate. Such application shall include the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and thumbprint of the applicant who shall be
the dealer.



   (B)   The name under which and address at which the applicant does
or plans to do business.



   (C)   The name, address and thumbprint of all agents or employees of
the applicant.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 116.03  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.



   Upon receipt of the application, the application shall be forwarded to
the Chief of Police and, after review and approval by the Chief of Police,
the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the certificate.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 116.04  FEE.



   A fee shall be paid at the time the certificate is issued as
established by resolution of the Village Council from time to time and on
file in the village offices.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 116.05 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   All certificates of registration shall expire on December 31 of the
year immediately following their issuance. Unrevoked certificates of
registration may be renewed by payment to the village of the annual renewal
fee before the expiration date.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 116.06  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who is convicted
of a misdemeanor under Public Act 95 of 1981, or under section 535 of the
Michigan Penal Code, 1931 Public Act 328, shall not be permitted to operate
as a dealer for a period of one year after the conviction.



   (B)   A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who is convicted
of a felony under Public Act 95 of 1981, or under section 535 of the Michigan
Penal Code, 1931 Public Act 328, shall not be permitted to operate as a
dealer for a period of five years after the conviction.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 116.07  ADDITIONAL RETENTION PERIOD.



   Upon receipt of written notification within the retention period of
seven calendar days provided in § 5 of Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1981 (M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq.), as amended, any precious
metal or gem dealer shall retain a precious item purchased or received for an
additional seven calendar days without any form of alteration other than that
required to make an accurate appraisal of its value.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 116.08  PURCHASE OF COINS.



   In addition to those items for which records and notification to the
police are required by Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1981
(M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq.), as amended, any precious metal and gem
dealer within the village who purchases coins of any kind, whether issued by
the United States government or any foreign government, shall comply with the
record and notification requirements as provided in the applicable state
statutes and the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 440, passed 3-8-2016)



CHAPTER 117:  MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   117.01   Prohibition of marijuana establishments



§ 117.01  PROHIBITION OF MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.



   No marijuana establishments, as defined by the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marijuana Act, Section 6.1, are permitted within the boundaries
of the village.



(Ord. 456, passed 2-12-2019)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   MINORS



      131.   MISDEMEANORS



      132.   OBSTRUCTING PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC



      133.   FALSE ALARMS



      134.   FIREWORKS



CHAPTER 130:  MINORS



Section



   130.01   Curfew



   130.02   Alcoholic beverages



   130.03   Contributing to neglect or delinquency of minor



   130.04   Tobacco products



   130.05   Parental responsibilities



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  CURFEW.



   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
“Holly Custodial and Minor Curfew Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-01-010)



   (B)   Curfew for minors 13 and under.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any minor 13 years of age or
younger to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public
streets, highways, alleys, roads, parks, playgrounds, or other public
grounds, public places, or public buildings, places of amusement or
entertainment, vacant lots, or any other unsupervised place between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless said minor is accompanied by a parent or
guardian or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany said
minor.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any minor who has reached the
age of 14 or who is any age between 14 years of age and 17 years of age to
loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets,
highways, alleys, roads, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public
buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, vacant lots, or any other
unsupervised place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except
where said minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult
delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany said minor, or where the
minor is on an emergency errand of other legitimate business directed by his
or her parent or guardian.



      (3)   A citation for violation of divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2)
above may be issued by a police officer only if the officer reasonably
believes that a violation has occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in
this division (B)(3) apply. It is a defense to a violation under this section
that the person engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in the interstate
travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency;



         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official, school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



         (i)   Married or has been married or had disabilities of
minority in accordance with state law.



      (4)   Each violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-01-020)



   (C)   Parental, custodial responsibility.



      (1)   (a)   Any parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian,
or other person having the responsibility or care or custody of any minor
child under the age of 17 years of age who shall assist, aid, abet, allow,
permit, or encourage said minor to violate the provisions of division (B)
above, either by overt act, by failing to act, or by lack of supervision and
control over said minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



         (b)   The fact that a minor under 13 years of age or
under 17 years of age is apprehended while on the public street, highway,
alley, park, school, or other place normally open to the public during the
hours defined in division (B) above shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section on the part of the parent, legal guardian or
custodian, or other person having the care or custody of said minor.



      (2)   Each violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-01-030)



   (D)   Violations. Any minor violating the provisions of division (B)
above shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile division of the
Probate Court as defined by M.C.L.A. § 712A.2 and the statutes in such case
made and provided.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-01-040)



(Ord. 6, passed 3-15-1966; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 168, passed
2-9-1988; Ord. 215, passed 8-27-1991)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented
liquor, liquids, or compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary,
patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of 1% or more of
alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage consumption. The term
includes by way of example, and not by way of limitation, beer, wine,
spirits, alcohol, sacramental wine, brandy, mixed wine drink and mixed spirit
drink.



      ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it
by M.C.L.A. 436.1703.



      DILIGENT INQUIRY. A diligent good faith effort to determine the
age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official state
operator's or chauffer's license, an official state personal identification
card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the
identity and age of the person.



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Shall have the meaning
ascribed to it by M.C.L.A. 436.1703.



      HEALTH FACILITY OR AGENCY. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it
by M.C.L.A. 436.1703.



      PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership,
association, limited liability company, or corporation.



      PRIOR JUDGMENT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by M.C.L.A.
436.1703.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-02-005)



   (B)   Selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to minors.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly sell or
furnish alcoholic liquor to a minor, or to fail to make diligent inquiry as
to whether the person is a minor, or to fail to make diligent inquiry as to
whether the person is a minor, except if the violation is the result of an
undercover operation in which the minor received alcoholic liquor under the
direction of the State Police, the State Liquor Control Commission, or the
Village Police Department as part of an enforcement action.



      (2)   (a)   For violations that occur in an establishment
that is licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission for consumption of
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a licensee or the clerk, agent, or
employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of the section,
unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or
should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person
less than 21 years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the
licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the
licensee failed to take immediate corrective action.



         (b)   A licensee shall not be charged with a violation
of this division (B)(2), unless all of the following occur:



            1.   Enforcement action is taken against the minor
who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or
possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor;



            2.   Enforcement action is taken under this
section against the person 21 years of age or older who is not the retail
licensee or the retail licensee’s clerk, agent, or employee who sold or
furnished the alcoholic liquor to the minor; and



            3.   Enforcement action under this section is
taken against the clerk, agent, or employee who directly sold or furnished
alcoholic liquor to the minor.



         (c)   Proof that the defendant or the defendant’s
agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor
to a minor, a motor vehicle operator’s or chauffeur’s license or a
registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other
bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall
be a defense to an action brought under this section.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-02-010)



   (C)   Conduct of minors



      (1)   A minor, being a person under the age of 21, shall not
purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to
consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or
have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided herein.



      (2)   This chapter does not apply to:



         (a)   A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor during
regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed
by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act, by the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal
consumption;



         (b)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who
voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of
Sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, M.C.L.A.
750.520b to 750.520g, committed against the minor.



         (c)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets
both of the following criteria:



            1.   Has consumed alcoholic liquor; and



            2.   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a
health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not
limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from
a violation of Sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328,
M.C.L.A. 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.



         (d)   A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer
or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical
assistance for a legitimate health care concern.



         (e)   A minor who consumes alcoholic liquor while
enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational
institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision
of a faculty member, if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational
and is a requirement of the course.



         (f)   A minor who consumes sacramental wine in
connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple.



         (g)   A minor who participates in an undercover
operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the
direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local
prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement
action.



         (h)   A minor who participates in an undercover
operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the
direction of the state police, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or a
local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or
contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not
under the direction of the state police, the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover
operation.



         (i)   A minor having any bodily alcohol content as a
result of consuming alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that
consumption is legal.



      (3)    A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a
minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may
request that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable
blood alcohol test are admissible in a state civil infraction proceeding or
criminal prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-02-020)



(Ord. 124, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 241, passed 12-7-1993; Ord. 378, passed
1-19-2006; Am. Ord. 451, passed 2-13-18)



§ 130.03  CONTRIBUTING TO NEGLECT OR DELINQUENCY OF MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person by any act or word to encourage,
contribute toward, cause, or tend to cause any minor child under the age of
17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come
under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the Probate Court, as
defined in Public Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. § 712A.2, as added by
Public Act 54 of the First Extra Session of 1944, and any amendments thereto,
whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the Probate
Court.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-03-010)  (Ord. 412, passed 1-18-2012)



§ 130.04  TOBACCO PRODUCTS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MINOR.  An individual under 18 years of age.



      PERSON WHO SELLS TOBACCO PRODUCTS AT RETAIL.  A person whose
ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale
of tobacco products subject to state sales tax.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  A public street, sidewalk, or park or any area
open to the general public in a publicly owned or operated building or public
place of business.



      SCHOOL DISTRICT.  A school district, local act school district,
or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the School
Code of 1976, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
380.1 to 380.1852 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; a joint high school district
formed under part 3a of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§  380.171 to 380.187 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or a
consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these.



      SCHOOL PROPERTY.  A building, facility, or structure and other
real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district.



      TOBACCO PRODUCT.  A product that contains tobacco and is
intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
noncigarette smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are
defined in § 2 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act, 1993 Public Act 327,
M.C.L.A. § 205.422, and cigars.



      USE A TOBACCO PRODUCT.  To smoke, chew, suck, inhale, or
otherwise consume a tobacco product.



   (B)   Use or possession by minors.



      (1)   Subject to division (B)(2), a minor shall not do any of
the following:



         (a)   Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product.



         (b)   Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product.



         (c)   Use a tobacco product in a public place.



         (d)   Present or offer to an individual a purported
proof of age that is



false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the
purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or attempting to
possess a tobacco product.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) does not apply to a minor participating
in any of the following:



         (a)   An undercover operation in which the minor
purchases or receives a tobacco product under the direction of the minor's
employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part
of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.



         (b)   An undercover operation in which the minor
purchases or receives a tobacco product under the direction of the state
police or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action, unless the
initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of the tobacco product by the
minor was not under the direction of the state police or the local police
agency and was not part of the undercover operation.



         (c)   Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to
purchase tobacco products for the purpose of satisfying federal substance
abuse block grant youth tobacco access requirements, if the compliance checks
are conducted under the direction of a substance abuse coordinating agency as
defined in §  6103 of the public health code, 1978 Public Act 368, M.C.L.A.
§ 333.6103, and with the prior approval of the state police or a local
police agency.



      (3)   Division (B)(1) does not apply to the handling or
transportation of a tobacco product by a minor under the terms of that
minor's employment.



   (C)   Selling, giving or furnishing tobacco to minors.



      (1)   A person shall not sell, give, or furnish a tobacco
product to a minor.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(C)(1) that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to
have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of tobacco products to
persons under 18 years of age and that the defendant enforced and continues
to enforce the policy. A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the
affirmative defense described in this division shall file and serve notice of
the defense, in writing, upon the court and the prosecuting attorney. The
notice shall be served not less than 14 days before the date set for trial.



      (3)   A prosecuting attorney who proposes to offer testimony
to rebut the affirmative defense described in division (C)(2) shall file and
serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and the defendant. The
notice shall be served not less than seven days before the date set for trial
and shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness.



      (4)   Division (C)(1) does not apply to the handling or
transportation of a tobacco product by a minor under the terms of that
minor's employment.



   (D)   Tobacco products on school property.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2), a
person shall not use a tobacco product on school property.



      (2)   Division (D)(1) does not apply to that part of school
property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an
open-air stadium, during either of the following time periods:



         (a)   Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there
are no regularly scheduled school hours.



         (b)   After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are
regularly scheduled school hours.



(Ord. 418, passed 10-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DELINQUENT ACTS. Those acts which violate the laws of the United
States, or the statutes of this state or the ordinances of the village or
those acts which would cause, or tend to cause, a juvenile to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the Probate Court as defined by
Public Act 288 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. § 712A.2, but does not include
traffic violations classified as civil infractions.



      ILLEGAL DRUGS.Any controlled substance, as defined by the State
Public Health Code, obtained without a legal prescription.



      JUVENILE DELINQUENT. Those juveniles who engage in any delinquent
act, whose behavior interferes with the rights of others, or whose behavior
menaces the health or welfare of the community.



      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years residing with a
parent.



      PARENT. Mother, father, legal guardian, or any other person
having the care, or custody of a minor, or any person acting in the
parent’s stead who has the care, custody, or control of the minor.



(Prior1984 Code, § 4-01-05-010)



   (B)   Parental duties.



      (1)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to
exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act.



      (2)   Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of
reasonable parental control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act are the following parental duties, which require each parent,
independently, to take all reasonable steps:



         (a)   To knowingly keep illegal drugs or illegal
firearms out of the home;



         (b)   To keep legal firearms locked in places that are
inaccessible to those minors who are not of suitable age, discretion, or
maturity to handle firearms;



         (c)   To arrange proper supervision for those minors who
are not of suitable age, discretion, or maturity to remain unsupervised, when
the parent must be absent;



         (d)   To take reasonably necessary precautions to
prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully destroying real, personal, or
mixed property which belongs to the village, or is located in the village;



         (e)   To take reasonable precautions to prevent the
minor from keeping stolen property; and



         (f)   To seek help from appropriate governmental
authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when
necessary.



(Prior1984 Code, § 4-01-05-020)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty for curfew violations. Any parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the care or custody of a minor violating § 130.01(C),
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, if found guilty, shall be subject to a
fine of not less than 25 and not more than $500 or confined in jail for not
more than 90 days, or punishment by both said fine and imprisonment for each
offense and shall be responsible for all costs of prosecution.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-01-040)



   (B)   Alcoholic beverages.



      (1)   Penalty for selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to
minors. violations A retail licensee or a retail licensee’s clerk, agent,
or employee who violates § 130.02(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days (six months) or
a fine of $500, or both. A person who is not a retail licensee or a retail
licensee’s clerk, agent, or employee and who violates § 130.02(B) is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and
imprisonment for not more than 60 days for a first offense, a fine of not
more than $2,500 and imprisonment for not more than 90 day for a second or
subsequent offense, and may be ordered to perform community service.



      (2)   Penalty for violations of conduct of minors under the
alcohol control laws. A person who violates § 130.02(C) shall be subject to
the following penalties:



         (a)   For the first violation, the minor is responsible
for a state civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.



         (b)   If a violation of this ordinance occurs after one
prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment of not more than 30 days if the court finds that the minor
violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any
treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of
not more than $200, or both.



         (c)   If a violation of this ordinance occurs after two
or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment of not more than 60 days if the court finds that the minor
violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any
treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both, as applicable.



         (d)   In addition to any other penalty specified herein,
a court may order an individual found responsible for or convicted of
violating divisions (a) through (c), above to undergo screening and
assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated
community mental health entity as defined in Section 100a of the Mental
Health Code, 1974 PA 258, M.C.L.A. 330.1100a, to determine whether the
individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including
alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may
order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile
adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of this
ordinance to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath
analysis.



      (3)   Conduct of minors. Pursuant to § 130.02(C)(3), a minor
who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis is
responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of
not more than $100.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-02-020)



      (4)   Fraudulent age identification.



         (a)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification
to a person less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by 93 days in jail and/or fine of $500.



         (b)   A person under the age of 21 years who uses any
false information or makes any false representation as to his or her age to
purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by 93 days in jail and/or fine of $500.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-02-030)



   (C)   Penalty for contributing to neglect or delinquency of minor.
Any person violating § 130.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject
to a penalty or a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment of 90 days, or both.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-03-020)  (Ord. 451, passed 2-13-2018)



   (D) Penalty for violations of tobacco products.



      (1)   A person who violates a provision of § 130.04 is guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for each
violation.



      (2)   Pursuant to a probation order, the court may also
require an individual who violates division § 130.04(B) to participate in a
health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. An
individual who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk
reduction assessment program under this subsection is responsible for the
costs of participating in the program. In addition, an individual who
violates division (D)(1) of this section is subject to the following:



         (a)   For the first violation, the court may order the
individual to do one of the following:



            1.   Perform not more than 16 hours of community
service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.



            2.   Participate in a health promotion and risk
reduction program, as described in this division.



         (b)   For a second violation, in addition to
participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may
order the individual to perform not more than 32 hours of community service
in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.



         (c)   For a third or subsequent violation, in addition
to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court
may order the individual to perform not more than 48 hours of community
service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.



   (E)   Penalty for violations of parental duties.



      (1)   No parent of any minor under the age of 18 years shall
fail to exercise reasonable parental control over such minor.



      (2)   In addition to any other provision of § 130.05, any
parent who has violated any provision of  § 130.05 shall be civilly
responsible for all the damages and costs caused by commission of any
delinquent act by a minor for whom the parent has the care, custody or
control.



      (3)   A parent violating any provision of § 130.05, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
a fine of $500, or both.



(1984 Code, § 4-01-05-030)



(Ord. 6, passed 3-15-1966; Ord. 124, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 168, passed 2-9-1988; Ord. 241, passed 12-7-1993; Ord. 378,
passed 1-19-2006; Ord. 412, passed 1-18-2012; Ord. 420, passed 10-31-2012;
Ord. 433, passed 3-18-2015)




CHAPTER 131:  MISDEMEANORS



Section




General Provisions




   131.01   Garage sales



   131.02   Issuance of checks



   131.03   Marijuana



   131.04   False complaints or statements



   131.05   Firearms



   131.06   Larceny and theft




Offenses




   131.20   Short title



   131.21   Definitions   



   131.22   Athletic contest or exhibition; invading playing area



   131.23   Throwing of bottles and the like prohibited



   131.24   Dangerous substances; unsolicited delivery



   131.25   Disorderly conduct and disorderly persons



   131.26   Domestic violence; domestic assault



   131.27   Entrance upon land or premises of another without lawful
authority or contrary to expressed wish of owner, and the like; failure to
leave upon request



   131.28   Actions blocking or obstructing vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on public streets or in public places restricted; exceptions



   131.29   Assault; assault and battery



   131.30   Intoxicated condition



   131.31   Excavations on private property; filing, draining, or
barricading



   131.32   False reports to police



   131.33   Resisting, obstructing, or interfering



   131.34   Fortune-telling



   131.35   Glue, mucilage, and the like



   131.36   Air riles, BB guns, and bow and arrows



   131.37   Obscene language, pictures, and the like



   131.38   Air-tight containers, abandonment



   131.39   Impersonation of village employees



   131.40   Indecent exposure



   131.41   Destruction of property generally



   131.42   Destruction of public property



   131.43   Destruction of school property



   131.44   Disturbing schools



   131.45   Profane language, indecent conduct, and the like on school
premises



   131.46   Schools; persons creating disturbances to leave premises
upon request



   131.47   Unauthorized persons not to enter or remain in school
building



   131.48   Public restrooms



   131.49   Spitting



   131.50   Harassing telephone calls



   131.51   Telephone; use of indecent, insulting language



   131.52   Drug paraphernalia



 



   131.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 131.01  GARAGE SALES.



   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
“Village Garage Sale Ordinance”



(1984 Code, § 4-02-01-010)



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GARAGE SALE SHALL. An offering for sale of tangible personal
property or goods at a place of residence or in a residentially zoned area of
the village and shall include items, such as YARD SALE, PORCH SALE, BASEMENT
SALE, RUMMAGE SALE,ESTATE SALE, or similar terms having the same purpose and
effect.



      PERSONS. Includes individuals, groups, organizations,
partnerships, voluntary organizations, and corporations.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-01-010)



   (C)   Regulations.



      (1)   No such sale shall be conducted for more than three
consecutive days, nor more often than four times in any one-year period.



      (2)   No items offered for sale shall be displayed within the
village street or sidewalk right-of-way or in such a manner as to obstruct
the normal flow of vehicles or pedestrian traffic.



      (3)   All signs pertaining to garage sales must comply with §
154.03(B)(11).



(1984 Code, § 4-02-01-020)



   (D)   Permit required.



      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
tenant or lessee of a residence to conduct, advertise or promote a garage
sale without first obtaining from the Village Police Department a permit to
do so.



         (b)   The request for application for a permit shall
include the following information:



            1.   The names and address of the persons
conducting the sale and the residence where the sale will take place, if
different;



            2.   The date the sale will commence and end and
the date of any prior sale at the same residence;



            3.   A general description of the items to be
offered for sale; and



            4.   An affirmation that the items to be sold are
the sole property of the applicant and were not purchased for the purpose of
resale.



      (2)   There shall be no charge for the sale permit; however,
no more than one permit shall be issued for any one residence within any
calendar quarter.



      (3)   The permit or permit number shall be displayed in a
front window at the sale location.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-01-030)



   (E)   Exemptions.



      (1)   This section shall not apply to legitimate moving or
estate sales conducted in accordance with the sale of a residence or a
judicially sanctioned estate or probate sale.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to sales by persons selling
three items or less of tangible personal property or goods, which they own
and which is not displayed for sale.



      (3)   This section shall not prohibit sales authorized by
other ordinances of the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-01-040)



(Ord. 150, passed 11-12-1985; Ord. 421, passed 10-31-2012)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.02  ISSUANCE OF CHECKS.



   (A)   Checks without sufficient funds. Any person who, with intent
to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft, or order
for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or
other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering, or
delivering, that the maker, or drawer, has not sufficient funds in or credit
with such bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft, or
order, in full upon its presentation, or any person who with the intent to
defraud, shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft, or order for
the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other
depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for same
when presentation for payment is made to the drawee, except where such lack
of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause, and
such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered, or delivered
the instrument at the time of so doing, shall, if the amount payable in the
check does not exceed $50, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-03-010)



   (B)   Prima facie evidence. As against the maker or drawee thereof,
the making, drawing, uttering. or delivering of a check, draft, or order,
payment of which is refused by the drawee when presented in the usual course
of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of
knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository, provided, such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee
thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees,
within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft, or other has
not been paid by the drawee.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-03-020)



   (C)   Prohibited acts. A person shall not transport or possess any
beer, wine, or alcoholic spirits in a container which is open, uncapped, or
upon which the seal is broken, within the passenger compartment of a vehicle
on the streets and highways of the village. If the vehicle does not have a
trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a container
which is open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken shall be encased or
enclosed.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-03-040)



   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained
by distillation, mixed with potable water, and other substances in solution,
and includes, among other things, wine containing an alcoholic content of
over 16% by volume.



      BEER. Any beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation or an
infusion or decoction of bailey, malt, hops, and/or other cereal in potable
water.



      WINE. The product made by the normal alcoholic fermentation of
the juice of sound, ripe grapes, or other fruit with the usual cellar
treatment, containing not more than 16% of alcohol by volume. The term WINE
shall include fermented fruit juices other than grapes.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-03-050)



   (E)   Exception. This section shall not apply to any chartered
passenger vehicle licensed by the State Public Service Commission.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-03-060)



(Ord. 43, passed 4-16-1974; Ord. 53, passed 2-17-1976)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.03  MARIJUANA.



   (A)   Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person within the
village to knowingly or intentionally possess marijuana.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-04-010)



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from
the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted
therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
incapable of germination.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-04-020)  (Ord. 71, passed 7-25-1978; Ord. 105, passed
12-9-1980)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  FALSE COMPLAINTS OR STATEMENTS.



   (A)   False complaints to Council. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, or corporation to file or cause to be filed a complaint with
the Village Council when such person, firm, or corporation knows said
complaint or the alleged facts on which it is based are untrue.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-05-010)



   (B)   False statements to official. It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly give or cause to be given under oath a false statement or
statements knowing that the said statement or statements are untrue to any
official of the village while the said official is in the performance of
official duties.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-05-020)



(Ord. 77, passed 1-21-1979)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  FIREARMS.



   (A)   Title. this section may be known and referred to by its short
title, namely, “The Village of Holly Firearms Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-06-010)



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIREARM. Includes any weapon from which a dangerous projectile
may be propelled by using explosives, gas, or air as a means of propulsion,
except any rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for
propelling BB’s not exceeding .177 calibre by means of spring, gas, or air.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-06-020)



   (C)   Discharge prohibited. No person shall discharge any firearm,
air rifle, air pistol, or bow and arrow in the village, except when lawfully
acting in the defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law or at
a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by
Council.  (Public Act 328 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §  750.234)



(1984 Code, § 4-02-06-030) (Ord. 109, passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.06  LARCENY AND THEFT.



   (A)   Larceny prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit the offense of larceny by taking any property not his or her own and
to which he or she has no claim or right, with the intent of permanently
depriving the owner of lawful possession, or to receive or possess any such
property knowing the same to be stolen.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-07-010)



   (B)   Included provisions.



      (1)   This section shall include instances where goods are
taken from a business enterprise and are not properly paid for, including
obtaining gasoline and driving away without paying for same.



      (2)   This section shall include a person knowingly taking
possession of and riding or taking away any bicycle without the express or
implied permission of the owner.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-07-020)



(Ord. 122, passed 11-24-1981)  Penalty, see § 131.99




OFFENSES




§ 131.20  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “Offenses
Ordinance of the Village of Holly”.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-010)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)



§ 131.21  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



      SHALL. The term SHALL is always mandatory and not merely
directory.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Holly, Oakland County, Michigan.



   (B)   Tense; singular and plural. Words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number;
and words in the singular number include the plural number.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-020)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)



§ 131.22  ATHLETIC CONTEST OR EXHIBITION; INVADING PLAYING AREA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to invade the playing area of any
athletic contest or exhibition while such contest or exhibition is in
progress; provided, that this section shall not apply to the participants or
officials of such contest or exhibition.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-030)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.23  THROWING OF BOTTLES AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, hurl, or fling any
bottle, can, receptacle, or any other object which may cause injury or damage
in the spectator area where any athletic contest or exhibition is conducted
or into or on the are used for the conduct of such contest or exhibition
while the same is in progress and during intermissions and delays of such
contest or exhibition.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-040)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.24  DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES; UNSOLICITED DELIVERY.



   No person shall deliver, leave, or place upon the steps, porch,
doorway, or premises of any dwelling place within the village any goods,
wares, merchandise, liquid, mixture, or any product whatsoever which contains
substances or ingredients which are or may become inherently or potentially
dangerous, deleterious, poisonous, or noxious to human being or animals, or
which may be inflammable or dangerously volatile, unless or until the owner,
lessee, tenant, or person residing within such dwelling or his or her agent
shall have authorized such delivery or personally accepts the same.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-060)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.25  DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND DISORDERLY PERSONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:



   (A)   Commit an assault, or an assault on any person;



   (B)   Engage in any fight in a public place, except when doing so in
self-defense;



   (C)   Remain in any public place after being told to leave by one
authorized to give such an order;



   (D)   Conduct himself or herself in any public place, or join with
one or more other persons in a public place, if he or she knows or should
know that singly or together with others with whom he or she has joined, he
or she is unreasonably obstructing the free and uninterrupted passage of the
public along any street or sidewalk; provided, that this division (D) is not
to be interpreted to conflict with the regulations of the National Labor
Relations Board regarding picketing and labor disputes;



   (E)   Persistent disturbing the public peace and quiet by loud or
aggressive conduct, having once been clearly informed by persons affected
that he or she is, in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance;
provided, however, that notice need not be given when such persons affected
reasonably believe that to do so would constitute a risk to their personal
safety;



   (F)   Persistent disturbing the peace and orderly conduct of any
meeting or any public body, or any meeting open to the general public, by any
conduct or communication which by its very existence inflicts injury or tends
to incite an immediate breach of peace or which prevents the peaceful and
orderly conduct of such meeting after having been clearly informed that he or
she is, in fact, unreasonably causing such disturbance;



   (G)   Knowingly transport any person, for consideration, or the
offer of consideration, to a place where the business of prostitution,
gambling, or illegal sale of liquor is carried on for the purpose of enabling
such person to be a customer of any such business;



   (H)   Knowingly harass any other person. HARASS is defined as any
repeated, nonverbal conduct which is specifically intended to frighten,
embarrass, or anger the person or persons who are the object of such conduct,
or which the person accused has reason to know is likely to produce such
reactions or any repeated verbal communication which by its very utterance
inflicts injury or incites an immediate breach of the peace;



   (I)   Urinate or defecate on any public street or sidewalk, or on
the floor of that part of any building open to the public, or any other place
in view of the public not specifically designed for that purpose;



   (J)   Throw any object from any moving vehicle, or toward any person
or moving vehicle, if he or she knows or should know that damage to personal
property, or alarm which may forcibly produce damage to a person or property,
is likely to result;



   (K)   Knowingly destroy, damage, or deface, or remove any public
property or any property that is not his or her own;



   (L)   Summon without good reason therefor by telephone or otherwise,
the Police or Fire Department, any private or public ambulance, or any other
service of any kind, to go to any address where the service call is not
needed; or



   (M)   For the purpose of this section PUBLIC PLACE means any street,
alley, park, government- owned or government-controlled building, common
hallway, or public room, or any other place to which the public has lawful
access, as well as any motor vehicle used to provide public transportation.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-070)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 121, passed
11-24-1981; Ord. 218, passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 320, passed 12-24-1998; Ord.
326, passed 9-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.26  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE; DOMESTIC ASSAULT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or assault and
battery upon a spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has
or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a
child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household. As
used in this section, DATING RELATIONSHIP means frequent, intimate
associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional
involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary
fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context. This
section shall be enforced in accordance with Public Act 175 of 1927, being
M.C.L.A. § 764.15(a).



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-071)  (Ord. 326, passed 9-2-1999; Ord. 411, passed
1-18-2012)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.27  ENTRANCE UPON LAND OR PREMISES OF ANOTHER WITHOUT LAWFUL
AUTHORITY OR CONTRARY TO EXPRESSED WISH OF OWNER, AND THE LIKE; FAILURE TO
LEAVE UPON REQUEST.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the lands
or premises of another without lawful authority or if contrary to the
expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent, or person in control or
in charge of the building or premises of another to, upon being notified to
depart therefrom by the owner or tenant or the agent or servant of either,
neglect, or refuse to depart therefrom.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-080)  (Ord. 181, passed 3-28-1989)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.28  ACTIONS BLOCKING OR OBSTRUCTING VEHICULAR OR PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC
ON PUBLIC STREETS OR IN PUBLIC PLACES RESTRICTED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person, without authority, shall loiter, linger, stay,
saunter, delay, or stand around, or do any other act so as to block,
obstruct, impede, or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic upon any public street or highway, sidewalk, or any other
public place or public building, by means of a barricade, object, or device,
or with his or her person, all or any of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress therein, thereon, or thereto.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons maintaining,
rearranging, or constructing public utility facilities in or adjacent to a
street or sidewalk, nor shall it apply to persons peacefully picketing upon
places other than a public street or highway.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-081)  (Ord. 181, passed 3-28-1989)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.29  ASSAULT; ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   No person shall commit an assault or an assault and battery upon
another person within the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-100)  (Ord. 13-A, passed 10-13-1970;  Ord. 13,
passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.30  INTOXICATED CONDITION.



   No person shall appear in a public place within the village who is
intoxicated and who is either endangering directly the safety of another
person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public
disturbance.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-110)  (Ord. 13-A, passed 10-13-1970; Ord. 13, passed
10-19-1970; Ord. 65, passed 1-10-1978)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.31  EXCAVATIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; FILING, DRAINING, OR BARRICADING.



   Every person having control or management of land on which there is an
excavation, other than for construction purposes under a building permit,
shall cause the same to be filled with earth, clay, and/or other solid
filler, even with the grade of land before any excavation was made, or cause
any water therein to be drained therefrom, and shall thereafter prevent water
from accumulating or standing therein. Substantial barricades at least four
feet in height shall be provided and maintained around all such excavations.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-130)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.32  FALSE REPORTS TO POLICE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to report or cause to be
reported any felony or misdemeanor or give any information relating to any
such felony or misdemeanor to the Police Department or to any member of the
Police Department by telephone, in writing, or by any other means of
communication, knowing that no such felony or misdemeanor has in fact been
committed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any information or
report to the Police Department or to any member of the Police Department
relating to any felony or misdemeanor, which intonation or report is false
and which intonation or report such person knows to be false.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-140)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.33  RESISTING, OBSTRUCTING, OR INTERFERING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who, while in the vicinity
of any fire or emergency response, willfully disobeys a reasonable order or
rule of an officer, firefighter, or emergency medical and/or rescue personnel
who is present in response to the event.



   (B)    It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, batter,
wound, resist, obstruct, oppose, endanger, or interfere with a peace officer
or other person authorized by law to maintain and preserve the peace in their
lawful acts, attempts and efforts to maintain, preserve, and keep the peace.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, OBSTRUCT includes the use or
threatened use of physical interference or force or a knowing failure to
comply with a lawful command.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE means the
providing, sending, and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency
medical, and/or rescue services by the village or by a public or private
individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the
village to an incident requiring police, fire, medical, and/or rescue
services.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-141)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-6-2009)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.34  FORTUNE-TELLING.



   No person shall pretend, for money or gain to predict future events by
cards, tokens, trances, or by the inspection of the band of any person, or by
mind reading, so-called, nor shall any person pretend, for money or gain, to
tell fortunes or foretell future events by other means than those aforesaid.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-150)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.35  GLUE, MUCILAGE, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   As used in this section, the term MODEL GLUE shall mean any
glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent, or other adhesive of
the type commonly used in the construction of model airplanes, automobiles,
boats, and other unassembled model kits, containing tolume, acetone, xylene,
butyl alcohol, hexana, tricresyl, phosphate, or other toxic ingredient.



   (B)   No person shall inhale, drink, eat, or otherwise introduce
into his or her respiratory or circulatory system any compound, liquid,
chemical, or any substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope,
plastic solvent, or any other material or substance or combination thereof
with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed,
irrational, or in any manner changing, distorting the eyesight, drinking
process, judgment, balance, or coordination of such intoxicated condition.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet, or
encourage any minor to violate any provisions of this section.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any person
who inhales, drinks, eats, or otherwise introduces into his or her
circulatory or respiratory system such material or substance pursuant to the
direction or prescription of any doctor, dentist, or other person authorized
to so direct or prescribe.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-160)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.36  AIR RILES, BB GUNS, AND BOW AND ARROWS.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall:



      (1)   Use or possess any air gun, BB rifle, pellet gun, or
similar pistol or gun or any slingshot or bow and arrow in the village
outside his or her residence or dwelling house, unless he or she is
accompanied by a parent or adult guardian; or



      (2)   Carry a dagger, dirk, stiletto, razor, or double-edged
non-folding stabbing instrument having a sharpened edge of more than three
inches, or any other dangerous weapons, except a hunting knife adapted and
carried as such, concealed on or about his or her person, or whether
concealed or otherwise in any vehicle operated and occupied by the person,
except in his or her dwelling house, place of business, or on other land
possessed by the person.



   (B)   Any police officer of the village is authorized to confiscate
any items described above that are used, possessed, or earned in
contravention of this section.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-170)  (Ord. 154, passed 9-9-1986; Ord. 397, passed
12-21-2008)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.37  OBSCENE LANGUAGE, PICTURES, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall show, exhibit, sell, offer for sale, distribute,
circulate, give away, or cause to be shown, exhibited, sold, offered for
sale, circulated, distributed, or given away, any paper, handbill, cards,
book, pamphlet, picture, drawing, engraving, sign, or any other matter or
thing containing indecent or obscene pictures, language, or matter.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-180)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.38  AIR-TIGHT CONTAINERS, ABANDONMENT.



   It shall be unlawful in the village for any person to leave outside of
any building, structure, or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other
container of any kind which has an air-tight, snap-lock, or other locking
device thereon, without first removing such snap lock or other locking device
or door from such icebox, refrigerator or container.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-190)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.39  IMPERSONATION OF VILLAGE EMPLOYEES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend or assume to be
a police officer, a firefighter, the Building Inspector, the Village Manager,
the Village Health Officer, a Health Inspector or a public health nurse, a
supervisor or investigator of the Department of Public Welfare, an Assessor
or his or her agent or employee, an inspector or meter reader from the
Village Water Department, or any other person employed by the village or any
other governmental agency for the protection of peace, health, and safety of
the village, or to take upon himself or herself to act as such or to require
any person to aid and assist him or her in any agency for the protection of
the peace, health, and safety of the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-200)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.40  INDECENT EXPOSURE.



   No person shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person in the
streets, lanes, alleys, market, or public places of the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-210)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.41  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and
maliciously destroy, injure, or deface the personal or real property of
another, including property of the village, by any means.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy,
mutilate, deface, injure, or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other
structure or tiling placed or designed for a memorial of the dead, or any
fence, railing, curb, or other thing intended for the protection or for the
ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure before
mentioned, or of any enclosure for the burial of the dead, or to willfully
destroy mutilate, remove, cut, break, or injure any tree, shrub, or plant,
placed or being within any such enclosure.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-240)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 44, passed
7-11-1974; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.42  DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall destroy, injure, or in any manner deface the Village
Hall, water pipes, water screws, hydrants, public school buildings, fire
engine houses, fire apparatus, street lamps, lampposts, or any public
building or property whatsoever in the village, or the appurtenances, fences,
trees, or fixtures belonging or appertaining thereto, nor shall any person
tamper with or in any way interfere with or hinder the use of any public
property whatsoever.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-250)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.43  DESTRUCTION OF SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   No person shall damage, destroy, or deface any public, private, or
parochial school building, or any building occupied by any public, private,
or parochial school, or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees, or other
appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-260)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.44  DISTURBING SCHOOLS.



   No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any
noise, disturbance, or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude, or
good order of any public, private, or parochial school is disturbed.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-270)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.45  PROFANE LANGUAGE, INDECENT CONDUCT, AND THE LIKE ON SCHOOL
PREMISES.



   No person shall use profane, indecent, or immoral language or indulge
in any indecent or immoral conduct in any building or on any property
adjacent to any building in the village occupied as a public, private, or
parochial school.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-280) (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.46  SCHOOLS; PERSONS CREATING DISTURBANCES TO LEAVE PREMISES UPON
REQUEST.



   Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public,
or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds shall leave
immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person
designated by the principal.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-290)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.47  UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS NOT TO ENTER OR REMAIN IN SCHOOL BUILDING.



   No person who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher, parent, or
other employee shall enter and remain in any school building, whether public,
private, or parochial, in the village for any reason whatever, unless such
person has received written permission from the principal or other person
designated by the principal to be in any such public, private, or parochial
school building.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-300)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.48  PUBLIC RESTROOMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go into a public restroom,
unless that person is of the sex designated for admittance therein; provided,
that this section shall not apply to personnel employed for the express
purpose of maintenance or cleaning.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-310)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.49  SPITTING.



   Spitting upon floors of public buildings or buildings used for public
assembly, upon the floors or platforms or any part of any public conveyance,
or upon any public sidewalk is prohibited. Expectoration may be made into
gutters or receptacles prepared for the same.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-320)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.50  HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to telephone any other person
repeatedly or cause any person to be telephoned repeatedly for the sole
purpose of harassing or molesting the person or his or her family, whether or
not conversation ensues, except for telephone calls made for legitimate
business purposes.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-330)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.51  TELEPHONE; USE OF INDECENT, INSULTING LANGUAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any threatening, vulgar,
indecent, obscene, or immoral or insulting language over any telephone.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-340)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.52  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  Any equipment, product, material, or
combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically
designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting;
manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing;
testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing;
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance; including,  but not limited to, all of the following:



         (a)   An isomerization device specifically designed for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a
controlled substance.



         (b)   Testing equipment specifically designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a
controlled substance.



         (c)   A weight scale or balance specifically designed
for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance.



         (d)   A diluent or adulterant, including, but not
limited to, quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose,
specifically designed for use with a controlled substance.



         (e)   A separation gin or sifter specifically designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or
refining, marihuana.



         (f)   An object specifically designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body.



         (g)   A kit specifically designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.



         (h)   A kit specifically designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.



         (i)   A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is
specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of
at least a razor blade and a mirror.



         (j)   A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is
specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances
to the user.



         (k)   A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is
specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the
user's nose.



         (1)   A device, commonly known as an automotive safe,
that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in
an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid,
oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and
concealing controlled substances.



         (m)   A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that
has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the
human body.



   (B)   Prohibited conduct. Subject to division (C), a person shall
not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing that the drug
paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance.



   (C)   Notice. Before a person is arrested for a violation of this
subsection, the Village Attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less
than two business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person
is in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined by
the Village Attorney to be drug paraphernalia. The notice also shall request
that the person refrain from selling or offering for sale the material and
shall state that if the person complies with the notice, no arrest will be
made for a violation of this division. If a person complies with such a
notice, the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a
prosecution under this division as long  as the compliance continues.



   (D)   Exemptions. The above provisions do not apply to any of the
following:



      (1)   An object sold or offered for sale to a person licensed
under state law or any intern, trainee, apprentice, or assistant in a
profession licensed under state law for use in that profession.



      (2)   An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital,
sanitarium, clinical laboratory, or other health care institution including a
penal, correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that
institution.



      (3)   An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in
medical, dental, surgical, or pharmaceutical supplies.



      (4)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not
specifically designed for a use described above.



      (5)   A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale
for the purpose of  injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other
animals.



      (6)   An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a
state or local governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by
a state or local governmental agency to prevent the transmission of
infectious agents.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-350)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970 2-17-1970; Ord.
417, passed 10-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Penalty for garages sales.



      (1)   General penalty clause. Any violation of § 131.01 is
hereby designated as a municipal civil inflection and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in sections §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



         (a)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



            1.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100.
(This shall be blown as the second offense.)



            2.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the second offense, the civil fines shall be $250. (This
shall be known as the third offense.)



            3.   In the case of another offense within one
year of the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This
shall be known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



         (b)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized
to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-01-050)



   (C)   Penalty for violations of marijuana. Any violation of this §
131.03 shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, a person shall be
subject to imprisonment of not to exceed 90 days, or a fine of not to exceed
$500, plus the costs of prosecution, or both such fine and imprisonment in
the discretion of the court.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-04-030)



   (D)   Penalty for false complaints or statements. Any person
violating the terms and conditions § 131.04, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not to exceed $500 or imprisonment of not to exceed 90
days, plus costs of prosecution, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-05-030)



   (F)   Penalty for firearm violations. Any person violating the
provisions of § 131.05 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not to exceed $500 or 90 days in th County Jail, plus costs of
prosecution, or both such fine and imprisonment.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-06-040)



   (G)   Penalty for violation of larceny and theft. Every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of § 131.06, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $500 and cost of prosecution and restitution, or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-07-030)



   (H)   Penalty for violations of offenses generally. Every person
convicted of a violation of any provisions of §§ 131.20 through 131.52
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and cost of prosecution and
restitution, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which
any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-350)



   (I)   Penalty for violation of blocking traffic on public streets.
Every person or firm convicted of a violation of the provisions § 131.28
shall be punished by fine or imprisonment as provided for in division (G)
above.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-081)



   (J)   Penalty for violations of drug paraphernalia. Every person
convicted of a violation of any provisions of § 131.52 shall be fined of not
more than $500 and cost of prosecution and restitution, or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of
violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense.



(1984 Code, § 4-02-02-350)



(Ord. 13, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 43, passed 4-16-1974; Ord. 44, passed
7-11-1974; Ord. 71, passed 7-25-1978; Ord. 77, passed 1-21-1979; Ord. 105,
passed 12-9-1980; Ord.121, passed 11-24-1981; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984;
Ord. 150, passed 11-12-1985; Ord. 181, passed 3-28-1989; Ord. 304, passed
7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 132:  OBSTRUCTING PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC



Section



   132.01   Blocking sidewalks



   132.02   Blocking store, business establishment entrance or exit



   132.03   Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  BLOCKING SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to block a sidewalk or to assist or
aid and abet in the blocking of a sidewalk in the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-03-010)  (Ord. 24, passed 4-25-1972)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.02  BLOCKING STORE, BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT ENTRANCE OR EXIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to block the entrance or exit of a
store or other business establishment in the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-03-020)  (Ord. 24, passed 4-25-1972)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.03  OBSTRUCTING PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or assist in
obstructing pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks or pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in any street or alley in the village.



(1984 Code, § 4-03-030)  (Ord. 24, passed 4-25-1972)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violations of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall be
known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250.



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 4-03-040)



(Ord. 24, passed 4-25-1972; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 308, passed
7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 133:  FALSE ALARMS



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Registration



   133.03   Requirements



   133.04   False alarm fees



   133.05   Notification; appeals



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device,
arranged to signal the presence of a hazard, or situation requiring urgent
attention, and to which the Police or Fire Department is expected to respond.



   ALARM SYSTEM AGENT. A person employed by an alarm system contractor
whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving,
repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, or causing others to
respond to an alarm system.



   ALARM SYSTEM CONTRACTOR. An individual, firm, company, partnership, or
corporation engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration, or
servicing of alarm systems or who responds to an alarm system. ALARM SYSTEM
CONTRACTOR shall not include an individual or a business which only sells or
manufactures alarm systems, unless the individual or business services alarm
systems, installs alarm systems, or monitors or responds to alarm systems at
the protected premises.



   ALARM USER. Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
within the village, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however,
an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a
premises, the person using such system is an ALARM USER. Also excluded from
this definition and from the coverage of this chapter are persons who use
alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the
alarm system is located of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or other
illegal act. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting
outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm
system and shall be subject to this chapter and the person who owns or leases
it shall be an ALARM USER.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Village Chief of Police.



   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence, or the intentional
activation of the alarm system without reasonable and legitimate need by the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or his or her employee or agent. FALSE
ALARM shall not include an alarm caused by a hurricane, tornado, earthquake,
downed telephone lines, or any other violent conditions beyond the control of
the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of their employee or agent.



   SUBSCRIBER. Includes, but is not limited to, any public service
utility, Fire Department, or police agency.



(1984 Code, § 4-04-010)



§ 133.02  REGISTRATION



   (A)   All persons owning and/or leasing or occupying residential
premises upon which an alarm system has been installed and maintained shall
register each alarm system within ten days of installation on a form provided
by the village.



   (B)   All persons owning and/or leasing or occupying commercial
premises upon which an alarm system has been installed and maintained shall
register each alarm system within ten days of installation on a form provided
by the village, and shall update the registration on an annual basis.



(1984 Code, § 4-04-020)



§ 133.03  REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall use, install, or direct to be installed any audio alarm
system which emits a sound and/or visual signal for a period longer than 15
minutes from the time of the initial signaling of the device. This section
shall not apply to fire alarm systems.



(1984 Code, § 4-04-030)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.04  FALSE ALARM FEES



   (A)   The alarm user shall be required to pay to the village the sum
of $75 for a second false alarm and $150 for each additional false alarm in
any given calendar year. No alarm user shall be required to pay said fee on
the first occurrence of a false alarm during any one calendar year as long as
the alarm holder has registered and/or updated their alarm registration
information within that year. All alarm users shall be advised in writing of
this false alarm chapter and of the changes enumerated herein.



   (B)   Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating
circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall
be charged by the village:



      (1)   Storm or severe weather conditions;



      (2)   Alarms being activated by persons working on the alarm
system with prior notification to the Village Police Department; and



      (3)   Alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of
telephone or other communication system.



(1984 Code, § 4-04-040)



§ 133.05  NOTIFICATION; APPEALS.



   (A)   In the event a representative of the village responds to an
alarm originated by an alarm system, and that representative believes the
alarm to be a false alarm, the village shall review the incident and make an
initial classification of this alarm under this chapter. In the event the
alarm is determined to be chargeable, notification of this fact and of any
fine due will be sent to the alarm user. In the first instance of a
chargeable alarm to a system in any calendar year, the village will provide
the alarm user with a copy of this chapter.



   (B)   In the event the alarm users believes the alarm should be
classified as a non-chargeable alarm, the alarm user must appeal to the
village within ten days of the date of the notice, stating the grounds for
the appeal. The village shall provide a final response to the alarm user
within ten days of receiving the appeal.



(1984 Code, § 4-04-050-01)



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as follows: false alarm
fees that remain unpaid for12 months or more shall be assessed against the
property on which the alarm system is located in the form of a lien
enforceable as real property taxes and/or special assessments.



(1984 Code, § 4-04-050)  (Ord. 401, passed 5-31-2009; Ord. 432, passed
2-15-2015)



CHAPTER 134:  FIREWORKS



Section



   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Regulations



 



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



      (1)   Fireworks devices designed to produce visible effects by
combustion, that are required to comply with U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission requirements, and are listed in American Pyrotechnics Association
Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5.



      (2)   Examples include firecrackers, sky lanterns, bottle
rockets, roman candles, and certain aerial shells not exceeding one and
three-quarter inches in diameter.



   LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground hand-held sparkling devices as that phrase
is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.



   PERSON. Any person, group of persons, association, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity.



(1984 Code, § 4-05-010)



§ 134.02  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks on public property, church property, school property, or another
person’s property without that organization’s or person’s written
permission.



   (B)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks within 100 feet of any residential or commercial structure.



   (C)   A person shall not sell or offer to sell consumer fireworks to
an individual less than 18 years of age.



   (D)   A person shall not use consumer or low-impact fireworks while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a
combination of both.



   (E)   A person shall not sell or offer to sell consumer fireworks
within the village without obtaining a certificate from the State Department
of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs.



   (F)   A person shall not self or offer to sell low-impact fireworks
within the village without first registering online with the State Department
of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs Low-Impact Fireworks Registry.



   (G)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks, except on the day before, the day of, or the day after the
following national holidays:



      (1)   New Year’s Day, January 1;



      (2)   Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in
January;



      (3)   President’s Day, the third Monday in February;



      (4)   Memorial Day, the last Monday in May;



      (5)   Independence Day, July 4;



      (6)   Labor Day, the first Monday in September;



      (7)   Columbus Day, the second Monday in October;



      (8)   Veterans Day, November 11;



      (9)   Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; and



      (10)   Christmas Day, December 25.



   (H)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. with the exception of
New Year’s Eve, December 31, where the hours will be extended until 12:30
a.m.



(1984 Code, § 4-05-020)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by 90 days in jail and/or a fine of $500.



   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall also be deemed a public
nuisance subject to abatement by the Circuit Court.



   (C)   The village may confiscate and dispose of any fireworks
possessed or used in violation of any provision of this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 4-05-030)  (Ord. 422, passed 1-13-2013)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   RENTAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



      152.   PLANNING



      153.   SUBDIVISIONS



      154.   SIGNS



      155.   HISTORIC DISTRICTS



      156.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



      157.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




Building Code




   150.01   Acknowledgment of State Building Code; designation of
enforcing agency



   150.02   Conflict of Building Code with the village code



   150.03   Violations and sanctions




Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code




   150.15   International Property Maintenance Code



   150.16   Local revisions to the International Property Maintenance
Code



   150.17   Conflict of Property Maintenance Code with the village code




Unsafe Buildings




   150.30   Public nuisances designated



   150.31   Action in Circuit Court



 



   150.99   Penalty




BUILDING CODE




§ 150.01  ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF STATE BUILDING CODE; DESIGNATION OF ENFORCING
AGENCY.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in
accordance with Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6), as
amended, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through
125.1531, the Village Building Official is hereby designated as the enforcing
agency to discharge the responsibility of the village under Public Act 230 of
1972, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531. The village
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout its corporate limits.



   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of the Stille-Derossett-HaleSingle
State Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1501 et seq., in accordance with Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A.
§ 125.1508b(6), as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531,
Appendix G of the State Building Code, shall be enforced by the enforcing
agency within the village.



   (C)   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance
study (FIS), entitled “Oakland County Michigan and Incorporated Areas”,
and dated September 29, 2006 and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMs),
panel number(s) of 2612 C0134F, 0142F, 0153F and 0161F and dated September
29, 2006 are adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein and declared to be a part
of § 1612.3 of the State Building Code.



(1984 Code, § 5-01-010)  (Ord. 113, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 344, passed
9-2-2001; Ord. 381, passed 8-27-2006)



§ 150.02  CONFLICT OF BUILDING CODE WITH THE VILLAGE CODE.



   Where a provision of the State Building Code is in conflict with a
provision of any provision of the code of ordinances currently existing or
hereafter enacted, to the extent permitted by law, the provision which
establishes the highest standard for the promotion and protection of the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the village shall prevail.



(1984 Code, § 5-01-020)  (Ord. 113, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 344, passed
9-2-2001)



§ 150.03  VIOLATIONS AND SANCTIONS.



   (A)   A person or corporation, including an officer, director, or
employee of a corporation, or a governmental official or agent charged with
the responsibility of issuing permits or inspecting buildings or structures,
who does any of the following is guilty of a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as
set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23,  and state law:



      (1)   Knowingly violates this act, code, or a rule for the
enforcement of this code;



      (2)   Knowingly constructs or builds a structure or building
in violation of a condition of a building permit;



      (3)   Knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by an
enforcing agency or a construction board of appeals;



      (4)   Knowingly makes a false or misleading written statement,
or knowingly omits required information or a statement in an inspection
report, application, petition, request for approval, or appeal to an
enforcing agency or construction board of appeals;



      (5)   Knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector
lawfully authorized to inspect any premises, building, or structure pursuant
to this Act;



      (6)   Unreasonably interferes with an authorized inspection;



      (7)   Knowingly issues, fails to issue, causes to be issued,
or assists in the issuance of a certificate, permit, or license in violation
of this code or a rule promulgated under this code or other applicable laws;
and



      (8)   Having a duty to report violations of this code or a
rule promulgated under this code or other applicable laws, knowingly conceals
a violation.



   (B)   (1)   (a)   With respect to division (A)(3) above, a
person is guilty of a separate offense for each day that the person fails to
comply with a stop construction order validly issued by an enforcing agency
and for each week that the person fails to comply with any other order
validly issued by an enforcing agency.



         (b)   With respect to divisions (A)(1) or (A)(4) above,
a person is guilty of a separate offense for each knowing violation of this
code or a rule promulgated under this code and for each false or misleading
written statement or omission of required information or statement knowingly
made in an application, petition, request for approval, or appeal to an
enforcing agency or a construction board of appeals.



      (2)   With respect to division (A)(2) above, a person is
guilty of a separate offense for each knowing violation of a condition of a
building permit.



(1984 Code, § 5-01-030)  (Ord. 113, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 165, passed 8-25-1987; Ord. 204, passed 10-9-1990; Ord. 288,
passed 4-28-1998; Ord. 344, passed 9-2-2001) Penalty, see § 150.99




ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE




§ 150.15  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   The village hereby adopts the “International Property
Maintenance Code, 2012 (Second Printing)”, and as amended, as the Property
Maintenance Code of the village for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided.



   (B)   Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of the Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Holly.



   (C)   The person designated as the Village Building Official by the
Village Manager is the officer responsible for administering and enforcing
this section.



(1984 Code, § 5-04-010)  (Ord. 385, passed 3-18-2007)



§ 150.16  LOCAL REVISIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code
are hereby revised as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Holly;



   (B)   Section 103.5. This section is amended to read as follows: The
fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out
its responsibilities under this code shall be those fees as shall be
established by ordinance of the Village Council from time to time;



   (C)   Section 106.3. Deleted;



   (D)   Section 304.14. Insert; April 1 to November 1;



   (E)   Section 602.3. Insert: September 1 to June 1; and



   (F)   Section 602.4. Insert: September 1 to June 1.



(1984 Code, § 5-04-02)



§ 150.17  CONFLICT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE WITH THE VILLAGE CODE.



   (A)   When a provision of the International Property Maintenance
Code is in conflict with any provision of the code of ordinances of the
village currently existing or hereafter enacted, to the extent permitted by
law, the provision which establishes the highest standard for the promotion
and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
village shall prevail.



   (B)   In case of any conflict between this chapter and any other
provision of this code of ordinances, that provision which imposes the more
stringent requirement shall take precedence.



(1984 Code, § 5-04-03)




UNSAFE BUILDINGS




§ 150.30  PUBLIC NUISANCES DESIGNATED.



    Broken windows must be repaired or replaced with like glazing
materials within 14 days. Boarding up of open or broken windows in any
occupied structure is prohibited except as a temporary measure not to exceed
14 days. Boarding up of windows in any vacant or unoccupied structure is
prohibited except as a temporary measure not to exceed 90 days.



(1984 Code, § 5-03-010) (Ord. 54, passed 9-28-1976; Ord. 190, passed
8-22-1989; Ord. 449, passed 7-25- 2017) Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.31  ACTION IN CIRCUIT COURT.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the village from
taking appropriate action in Circuit Court to abate nuisances.



(1984 Code, § 5-03-020)  (Ord. 54, passed 9-28-1976)  Penalty, see §
150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Penalty for violations of the Building Code.



      (1)   Fines paid at Municipal Violations Bureau.



         (a)   Pursuant to § 150.03, if the civil fine is paid
at the Village Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



         (b)   The Village Municipal Violations Bureau is hereby
authorized to accept civil fines in the amounts specified herein. In the case
of payment at the Municipal Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or
collected.



      (2)   Second offense. In the case of a second occurrence of
the same offense within one year of the date of the initial infraction, the
civil fine shall be $100.



      (3)   Third offense. In the case of a third occurrence of the
same offense within one year of the date of the initial infraction, the civil
fine shall be $250.



      (4)   Fourth and subsequent offenses. In the case of a fourth
or subsequent occurrence of the same offense within one year of the date of
the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $500.



(1984 Code, § 5-01-030)



   (C)   Penalty for violations of the International Property
Maintenance Code. A person of a corporation, including an officer, director,
or employee of a corporation who violations any of the terms of §§ 150.15
through 150.17 shall be responsible for a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, imposition of fine not exceeding
$500, or both.



(1984 Code, § 5-04-04)



   (D)   Penalty for violations of unsafe buildings.



      (1)   General penalty clause. Any violation of §§ 150.30 or
150.31 is hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators
shall be subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as
set forth in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



      (2)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau. If the civil fine is
paid at the Village Municipal Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be
$50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall
be known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the fourth offense). All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (3)   Collection. The Village Violations Bureau is hereby
authorized to accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment
at the Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, § 5-03-030)



(Ord. 54, passed 9-28-1976; Ord. 113, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 165, passed 8-25-1987; Ord. 204, passed 10-9-1990; Ord. 288,
passed 4-28-1998; Ord. 303, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 344, passed 9-2-2001; Ord.
375, passed 8-4-2005; Ord. 385, passed 3-18-2007)



CHAPTER 151:  RENTAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Registration



   151.04   Registration fee



   151.05   Inspections



   151.06   Issuance of certificate of compliance



   151.07   Procedure when inspection discloses violation



   151.08   Inspection fees



   151.09   Failure to have residential dwelling unit inspected



   151.10   Effective date



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve, and promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of residents of the village, and
occupants of rental dwelling units; and to encourage the maintenance of
rental dwelling units by requiring the registration and inspection of same to
ensure compliance of said rental dwelling units with any property maintenance
or existing structures code in effect and adopted by the state and/or the
village at the time of said inspection.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-01)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CODE OFFICIAL. The inspector charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, including the issuance of municipal civil
infraction violation notices and citations.



   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete and independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. A DWELLING UNIT for the
purpose of this chapter, shall also include the individual sleeping rooms or
group of rooms of an apartment building to be occupied by a person or family.
Each room or group of rooms so occupied or to be occupied shall constitute a
separate DWELLING UNIT.



   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of
the property, including the guardian/conservator of the estate of any person,
or the personal representatives of the estate of a deceased individual.



   PARCEL. A separately described piece of land or a lot to which a
property tax number applies.



   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. The International Property Maintenance Code
developed and promulgated by the International Code Council (ICC) and the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), most
recent edition.



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. All dwellings, dwelling units, or mobile homes
which are leased or otherwise made available for rental purposes, except:



      (1)   Dwelling units required to be occupied by an employee or
agent of an owner as the condition of employment (i.e., parsonages);



      (2)   Any dwellings or dwelling units over which the state has
exclusive authority under state law to inspect and regulate; or



      (3)   The principal residence of the owner which is occupied
by persons other than the owner where no rent is paid.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-02)



§ 151.03  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   All owners thereof shall register all residential rental
dwelling units on forms provided by the village, which registration shall
include the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, phone number, and any other means of
personal contact of the property owner;



      (2)   Name, address, phone number, and any other means of
personal contact of the designated local property manager if applicable;



      (3)   The street address of the rental property;



      (4)   The number and types of units within the rental property
(dwelling units or sleeping rooms);



      (5)   The maximum number of occupants permitted for each
dwelling unit or sleeping room; and/or



      (6)   The name, address, and phone number of the person
authorized to make or order made repairs or services for the property, if the
person is different than the owner or local manager.



   (B)   (1)   All existing residential rental dwelling units shall
be registered as provided herein on or before December 1, 2005.



      (2)   Structures subsequently becoming a residential dwelling
unit shall be registered within 30 days after any part of the premises is
offered for occupancy and will be assessed a registration fee.



   (C)   Once a residential rental dwelling unit has been registered
with the village and continues to be used for such purpose, no further
registration of said residential rental dwelling unit shall be required;
provided, however, that in the event a transfer of ownership occurs or sale
of said residential rental dwelling unit, or in the event that the number of
rental units located on a parcel shall be increased or decreased, the new
owner or present owner, respectively, shall be required to re-register with
the village within 30 days after the date of said transfer, sale, or change
in the number of residential rental dwelling units.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-03)



§ 151.04  REGISTRATION FEE.



   (A)   At the time of registration, the owner of a residential rental
dwelling unit shall pay a registration fee in such amount as shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Village Council.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail, refuse, or neglect
to register a residential rental dwelling unit within the time for doing so
as required in this chapter or to fail, refuse, or neglect to pay any
registration fee imposed by the village pursuant to this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-04)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Residential rental dwelling units shall be inspected
to ensure compliance of said rental dwelling units with the Property
Maintenance Code. Where six or fewer residential rental dwelling units exist
upon any given parcel, the same shall be inspected by the Code Official every
two years.



      (2)   Where more than six residential rental dwelling units
exist upon any given parcel a minimum of seven dwelling units, plus no less
than 10% of the dwelling units over six, they shall be inspected by the Code
Official every two years and/or with a change in tenant.



      (3)   For regular scheduled inspections as herein before
provided, the Code Official shall give written notice of the date and time of
said inspection to the owner or local agent, mailed by first-class mail, on
or before ten days prior to said inspection date.



   (B)   In addition, said Code Official shall inspect residential
rental dwelling units, upon reasonable notice as required in the Property
Maintenance Code, under any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon receipt of an oral or written complaint based upon
the personal knowledge of an owner, occupant, or other individual, that the
premises are in violation of this chapter;



      (2)   Upon receipt of an oral or written complaint, or a
referral from the Police Department, or other public agencies or departments,
indicating that the premises are in violation of this chapter; or



      (3)   Upon receipt of information by the Code Official that a
residential rental dwelling unit is not registered with the village as
required by this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-05)  (Ord. 406, passed 2-28-2010)



§ 151.06  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   After each initial inspection, if the rental dwelling unit is found to
be in compliance with the rules, regulations, laws, codes, and village
ordinances, the Code Official shall issue a certificate of compliance in the
name of the owner.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-06)



§ 151.07  PROCEDURE WHEN INSPECTION DISCLOSES VIOLATION.



   (A)   Where an inspection by the Code Official discloses a violation
of the Property Maintenance Code, the Code Official shall issue all necessary
notices as provided in said code(s) to ensure compliance with said code’s
requirements.



   (B)   A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued when any
violation does not constitute an immediate hazard to the health or safety of
those who may occupy the premises. Said temporary certificate of compliance
may be revoked by the Code Official if the owner or his or her agent fails to
correct the noted violation(s) within the time allowed by the Code Official.



   (C)   No residential rental dwelling unit shall be occupied, unless
a certificate of compliance has been issued by the Code Official.



   (D)   In the event the owner or his or her agent is in the process
of evicting an occupant and/or tenant from a residential rental dwelling unit
which is in violation of the aforesaid ordinance and laws, then and in such
an event, the owner thereof shall have a reasonable time to correct said
violation after the eviction is completed, and said owner or his or her agent
shall promptly notify the Code Official of the completion of said conviction.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-07)



§ 151.08  INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   The owner of a property subject to this chapter shall pay an
inspection fee for any inspection made under this chapter. The inspection
fees shall be in such amount as shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Council and shall be paid at the time of such
inspection.



   (B)   Where an inspection discloses a violation of the Property
Maintenance Code, and re-inspection is necessary to ensure compliance with
the Property Maintenance Code, the owner shall pay a re-inspection fee in
such amount as shall be established from time to time by the Village Council.



      (1)   (a)   In the event that an occupant of a rental
dwelling unit or a private individual shall make a written complaint
concerning a violation at a residential rental dwelling unit, the village, in
its discretion, may require an inspection deposit in the amount of the
anticipated inspection fee from said occupant or individual.



         (b)   If the inspection, which was made as a result of
said complaint, discloses no legitimate violation, then and in such an event
the individual making such complaint shall be liable to the village for the
aforesaid inspection fee, and said deposit shall be applied thereto,
otherwise said deposit shall be refunded.



      (2)   When the person making a complaint under this chapter
requests confidentiality, the village will not release any information
regarding the name, address, or telephone number of any person who makes a
written complaint concerning a violation at a residential rental dwelling
unit, except when required to do so:



         (a)   Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act; or



         (b)   By court order.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-08)



§ 151.09  FAILURE TO HAVE RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT INSPECTED.



   Should the owner of any residential rental dwelling unit fail to make
said dwelling unit available for any scheduled inspection, or fail to notify
the village of the necessity to reschedule an inspection, at least 24 hours
prior to a scheduled inspection, additional fees may apply in such amounts as
shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Village Council.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-09)



§ 151.10  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter became effective the September 1, 2005.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-12)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



    A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal
civil infraction and any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity
responsible for the violation shall be subject to the fines set by resolution
of the Council.



(1984 Code, § 5-02-11)  (Ord. 455, passed 10-23-2018)



CHAPTER 152:  PLANNING



Section



   152.01   Scope, purpose and intent



   152.02   Establishment



   152.03   Appointments and terms



   152.04   Removal



   152.05   Conflict of interest



   152.06   Compensation



   152.07   Officers and committees



   152.08   Bylaws, meetings and records



   152.09   Annual report



   152.10   Authority to make master plan



   152.11   Zoning powers



   152.12   Capital improvements program



   152.13   Subdivision and land division recommendations



   152.14   Approval, ratification and reconfirmation



§ 152.01 SCOPE, PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the
Village Council under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of
2008, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq., and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006, M.C.L.A. §§  125.3101 et seq., to establish a
planning commission with the powers, duties and limitations provided by those
Acts and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and any future
amendments to this chapter.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide that the Village
Council shall hereby confirm the establishment under the Michigan Planning
Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq., of the
Village Planning Commission, to establish the appointments, terms, and
membership of the Planning Commission; to identify the officers and the
minimum number of meetings per year of the Planning Ccommission; and to
prescribe the authority, powers and duties of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.02  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Village Council hereby confirms the establishment under the
Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801
et seq. of the Village of Holly Planning Commission. The Village of Holly
Planning Commission shall have nine members. Members of the Village Planning
Commission as of the effective date of this chapter shall, except for an ex
officio member whose remaining term on the planning commission shall be
limited to his or her term on the Village Council, continue to serve for the
remainder of their existing terms so long as they continue to meet all of the
eligibility requirements for planning commission membership set forth within
the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, M.C.L.A. §§
125.3801 et seq.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.03  APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS.



   (A)   The Village President, with the approval of the Village
Council by a majority vote of the members elected and serving, shall appoint
all planning commission members, including the ex officio member.



   (B)   The Planning Commission members, other than an ex officio
member, shall serve for terms of three years each.



   (C)   A Planning Commission member shall hold office until his or
her successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as the original appointment.



   (D)   Planning Commission members shall be qualified electors of the
village, except that one Planning Commission member may be an individual who
is not a qualified elector of the village. The membership of the Planning
Commission shall be representative of important segments of the community,
such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of
the village, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the
village, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education,
public health, government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The
membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the
village to the extent practicable.



   (E)   One member of the Village Council shall be appointed to the
Planning Commission as an ex officio member.



   (F)   An ex officio member has full voting rights. An ex officio
member's term on the planning commission shall expire with his or her term on
the Village Council.



   (G)   No other elected officer or employee of the village is
eligible to be a member of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.04  REMOVAL.



   The Village Council may remove a member of the Planning Commission for
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and
after a public hearing.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.05  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   Before casting a vote on a matter on which a Planning
Commission member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of
interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the
Planning Commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of
interest as required by this chapter constitutes malfeasance in office.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, CONFLICT OF INTEREST is
defined as, and a Planning Commission member shall declare a conflict of
interest and abstain from participating in Planning Commission deliberations
and voting on a request, when:



      (1)   An immediate family member is involved in any request
for which the Planning Commission is asked to make a decision. IMMEDIATE
FAMILY MEMBER is defined as: An individual's father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, sister, and spouse and a relative of any degree residing in the same
household as that individual;



      (2)   The Planning Commission member has a business or
financial interest in the property involved in the request or has a business
or financial interest in the applicant's company, agency or association;



      (3)   The Planning Commission member owns or has a financial
interest in neighboring property; for the purposes of this section, a
neighboring property shall include any property immediately adjoining the
property involved in the request.



      (4)   There is a reasonable appearance of a conflict of
interest, as determined by a majority vote of the remaining members of the
Planning Commission.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.06 COMPENSATION.



   The Planning Commission members may be compensated for their services
as provided by Village Council resolution. The Planning Commission in the
performance of activities authorized by the Village Council, including, but
not limited to, attendance at conferences, workshops, educational and
training programs and meetings.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.07  OFFICERS AND COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall elect a chairperson and a
secretary from its members, and may create and fill other offices as it
considers advisable. An ex officio member of the Planning Commission is not
eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of each office shall be one year,
with opportunity for reelection as specified in the Planning Commission
bylaws.



   (B)   The Planning Commission may also appoint advisory committees
whose members are not members of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.08 BYLAWS, MEETINGS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction
of business.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least four regular
meetings each year, and shall by resolution determine the time and place of
the meetings. Unless otherwise provided in the Planning Commission's bylaws,
a special meeting of the Planning Commission may be called by the chairperson
or by two other members, upon written request to the secretary. Unless the
bylaws otherwise provide, the secretary shall send written notice of a
special meeting to Planning Commission members at least 48 hours before the
meeting.



   (C)   The business that the planning commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act,
Public Act 267 of 1976, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq.



   (D)   The Planning Commission shall keep a public record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. A writing prepared,
owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a Planning Commission in
the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public
in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976,
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.09 ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Planning Commission shall make an annual written report to the
Village Council concerning its operations and the status of the planning
activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the Village
Council related to planning and development.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.10 AUTHORITY TO MAKE MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   Under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Public Act 33 of 2008, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq., and other applicable
planning statutes, the planning commission shall make a master plan as a
guide for development within the Village's planning jurisdiction.



   (B)   Final authority to approve a master plan or any amendments
thereto shall rest with the Planning Commission unless the Village Council
passes a resolution asserting the right to approve or reject the master plan.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.11  ZONING POWERS.



   (A)   The Village Council hereby confirms the transfer of all
powers, duties, and responsibilities provided for zoning boards or zoning
commissions by the former Village Zoning Act, Public Act 184 of 1943,
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.271 et seq.; the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act
110 of 2006, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq.; or other applicable zoning
statutes to the Village Planning Commission established hereunder.



   (B)   Any existing zoning ordinance shall remain in full force and
effect except as otherwise amended or repealed by the Village Council.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.12 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.



   To further the desirable future development of the Village under the
master plan, the Village Planning Commission, after the master plan is
adopted, shall prepare or cause to be prepared a capital improvements program
of public structures and improvements, showing those structures and
improvements in general order of their priority, for the following six-year
period. The proposed capital improvements program shall be subject to final
approval by the Village Council.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DIVISION RECOMMENDATIONS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission may recommend to the Village Council
provisions of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land. Before
recommending such an ordinance or rule, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed ordinance or rule. The Planning Commission
shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than
15 days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall review and make recommendations
on a proposed plat before action thereon by the Village Council under the
Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.
Before making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed plat. A plat submitted to the Planning Commission
shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or other person to whom
notice of a hearing shall be sent. Not less than 15 days before the date of
the hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be sent
to that person at that address by mail and shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the village. Similar notice shall be mailed to the
owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 152.14  APPROVAL, RATIFICATION, AND RECONFIRMATION.



   All official actions taken by or for the Village preceding the
Commission created by this chapter are hereby approved, ratified and
reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective
date of this chapter shall continue with the Commission created by this
chapter, subject to the requirements of this chapter, and shall be deemed a
continuation of any previous Planning Commission established for the village.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption
and publication.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Authority



   153.03   Interpretation



   153.04   Scope



   153.05   Definitions



   153.06   Fee schedule



   153.07   Partitioning or division of lots, outlots, or other parcels
of land in a recorded plat




Subdivision Plat Submittal Procedures




   153.20   Review and approval



   153.21   Preliminary plat review



   153.22   Preliminary plat application, review, and tentative approval



   153.23   Final approval of preliminary plat



   153.24   Final plat approval




Design Principles and Standards




   153.35   Generally



   153.36   Street location and arrangement



   153.37   Street design



   153.38   Block design



   153.39   Lot planning



   153.40   Easement planning




Street and Utility Improvement Requirements




   153.55   Purpose



   153.56   Engineering plans



   153.57   Requirements



   153.58   Guarantee of completion




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the municipality and
of ensuring the orderly growth and harmonious development of the municipality
by requiring:



   (A)   Proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or
planned streets or to the Master Plan;



   (B)   Adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities,
access of firefighting equipment, recreation, light, air, privacy, and safety
from fire hazards; and



   (C)   Establishment of standards for the design and construction of
any and all improvements as herein required.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-01-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is made, interpreted, and enforced by the governing body
and Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, under
authority of Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through
560.293 and Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 as amended,
or any future amendments thereof.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-01-020)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.03  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be the
minimum requirements necessary for the preservation of public health, safety,
and welfare within the municipality. This chapter is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or supersede any existing regulations of the municipality, or to
conflict with any statutes, laws, or regulations of the state or the county,
except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations
impose a lawful restriction or requirement more severe than existing
statutes, laws, or regulations.



   (B)   (1)   This chapter is intended, among other things, to
discourage: wasteful utilization of land; patterns of development that are
financially burdensome to municipalities and public bodies in terms of
servicing and maintenance; and to encourage: conservation of natural
resources such as floodplains, woods, and natural watercourses.



      (2)   It is intended that this chapter be closely related to
Ch. 157 and the Master Plan of the municipality if one exists, and that basic
policy on which general areas are suitable for subdivision development at
various lot sizes and densities shall be established by zoning, it being
recognized that not all land is suitable for subdivision development, but
that certain lands should, by zoning, be preserved for agriculture or other
low-density uses, industry, commerce, or other uses, or may become suitable
for subdivision development after public utilities and/or facilities are
reasonably available to the location.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-01-030)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.04  SCOPE.



   Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, no plat within the
municipality shall be approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, unless it conforms to this chapter.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-01-040)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property



and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   BUILDING LINE. A line established in a plat or by recorded restrictive
covenants for the purpose of prohibiting construction of any portion of a
building or structure between such line and any easement, right-of-way, or
other public area.



   CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the municipality.



   COLLECTOR ROAD. A street or highway intended primarily for mutual
access between major and minor streets, for entrance to residential areas and
for circulation within such areas.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor street with only one end open to vehicular
traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicle
turnaround.



   DEAD-END STREET. A street with only one end open to vehicular traffic
and not provided with a vehicle turnaround at the other end.



   EASEMENT. An irrevocable grant by the proprietor of the use of a parcel
of land by the public or public utility, a corporation, or private person or
persons for a specific purpose or purposes.



   FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and
certified as to its accuracy by a land surveyor. Such maps must meet the
requirements of this chapter and Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 through 560.293.



   GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the municipality.



   HALF-STREET. One half of the total right-of-way planned for a street
located on the periphery of a subdivision and adjacent to unplatted land.



   IMPROVEMENTS. Any additions to or changes in the natural state of the
land which increases its value, utility, or habitability. IMPROVEMENTS
include street pavements, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, grading, water
systems and mains, storm and sanitary sewers, street trees, and other
appropriate and similar items.



   LOCAL or MINOR STREET. A street intended primarily to provide access to
abutting property.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended to be
a unit of transfer of ownership or for development; also as defined in Public
Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.



   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A main traffic artery designated on the Master Plan
as a major thoroughfare.



   MASTER PLAN. A sketch plan showing the lot, street, open space, and
utility arrangements for the overall development of a tract of land, with
part of the development not proposed in the present subdivision application.



   MASTER PLAN. The Master Plan for the municipality, as adopted by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,  in accordance
with Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq., as amended.
The MASTER PLAN is also referred to as the GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. In the case of rectangular lots, or lots on the
outside of the curve of a street: The distance between side lot lines
measured at the minimum building setback line on a line parallel to the
street or street chord; in the case of lots on the inside of the curve of the
street, the distance between side lot lines measured at the rear line of the
dwelling, or 30 feet behind the front setback line, parallel to the street or
street chord.



   MUNICIPAL ENGINEER. A person or firm of consulting engineers so
designated by the governing body to carry out the functions and duties of the
Municipal Engineer as specified herein.



   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Holly, Michigan.



   OUTLOT. A parcel of land lying within the boundaries of a platted
subdivision, but not included as a numbered lot; also as defined in Public
Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.



   PARCEL. A unit of land under one ownership.



   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security, including performance bonds,
escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements which
may be accepted by the governing body as a guarantee that required
subdivision improvements will be made by the proprietor.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the municipality.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and to
meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter.



   PRE-PRELIMINARY PLAT. A sketch map of a proposed subdivision of
sufficient accuracy and scale to serve the purposes of this chapter.



   PROPRIETOR. A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership
interest in land whether recorded or not.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. A set of standards approved by the
governing body establishing the design and material specification to be used
in all public improvements installed pursuant to these regulations. Such
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS shall be based on and reflect the general
policies set forth in the schedule of improvement requirements in §
153.57(B)(1).



   PUBLIC RESERVATION. A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for
public use or made available for public use or made available for public
acquisition.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. A firm, corporation, or municipal authority providing
gas, electricity, telephone, sewer, water, or other services of a similar
nature.



   PUBLIC WALKWAY. A public right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of
pedestrian access, and located so as to connect to two or more streets, or a
street and public land parcel.



   RESERVE STRIP. A strip of land in a subdivision which extends across
the end of a street proposed to be extended by future platting, or a strip
which extends along the length of a partial width street proposed to be
widened by future platting to the minimum permissible width.



   STREET. A right-of-way dedicated and/or deeded for public use, other
than an alley, which provides for public travel.



   SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or
tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose
of sale or lease of more than one year or of building development, where the
act of division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten
acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten
acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of
ten years.



   USABLE LOT AREA. The portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the
normal uses made of a residential property, excluding any areas which may be
swampy, excessively steep, covered by water or included in a public easement
for surface drainage or a private easement for a high voltage per
transmission line.



   ZONING ORDINANCE. The zoning ordinance of the municipality, as adopted
and amended. See Ch. 157.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-02-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.06  FEE SCHEDULE.



   As set by resolution of the governing body from time to time based on
prevailing costs, the fee schedule for proceeding under this chapter shall
follow this format.



 


Function Performed

 

Fee





Extension of period of tentative approval of preliminary plat

 


(a)   Where no modification, changes or deviations from original
preliminary plat


 


(b)   Where there are modifications, changes, or deviations from original
preliminary plat

 
$

 

 

_________% of original fee

 

 

_________% of original fee


Fees for engineering, review, and inspection of construction:

 


a.   Engineering review fees: for administrative and engineering expenses
of processing and reviewing improvement plans required under § 153.56(C)
shall be accompanied with payment by the proprietor of a fee in accordance
with the following schedule as applicable:


 


(i)   Street and lot drainage and sidewalk plans:


 


      (A)   Checking street plans, including checking grades,
protection of slopes and street drainage and prevent ponding areas


 


      (B)   Checking lot drainage plans. Includes checking of lot
grading plans to provide adequate drainage and prevent ponding areas


 


   (ii)   Storm sewer plans. Checking plant, examination, and approval
of design plans to assure adequate storm drainage facility and checking
surrounding areas and drainage districts to prevent flooding on to or from
adjoining areas


 


   (iii)   Water system plans, checking plans. Examination and approval
of design plans, including checking of proper gate valve controls and hydrant
coverage


 


   (iv)   Street Paving: To be paid by contractor to Municipal Engineer
at rate of $_______ per inspector per crew day, with the street paving
contract, including an estimated amount for such purpose, subject to
adjustment based on actual requirements

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

$_______ lot

 

 

 

 

 

$_______ lot

 

 

 

$_______ lot

 

 

 

 

$_______ lot




   (ii)   Storm sewer inspection of installation. This item shall
include checking of grades, sewer construction, and appurtenances


 

   Estimated Construction Cost:

 

   $0 to $5,000

   $5,000 to $50,000

   $50,000 to $100,000

   Over $100,000

 


   (iii)   Sanitary sewers: inspection of installation of sanitary
sewers. This item to include checking of grades, sewer construction, and
appurtenances:


 

   $0 to $5,000

   $5,000 to $50,000

   $50,000 to $100,000

   Over $100,000

 


b.   Construction inspection fees. For inspecting construction
improvements. Inspection of construction of utilities, drainage facilities,
and pavement will be performed by the Municipal Engineer and paid for by the
proprietor. The estimated cost of improvements shall be furnished by the
proprietor, including a tabulation of quantities and unit prices. This
estimate is subject to approval of the Municipal Engineer. Five days prior to
commencing construction, the proprietor shall deposit with the
Clerk-Treasurer the estimated inspection fee, based on the following schedule:


 


   (i)   Inspection of subdivision grading. Check subdivision grading
to determine general conformance to plan and prevention of ponding,
immediately after road subgrade approval


 


   (ii)   Storm sewer inspection of installation. This item shall
include checking of grades, sewer construction, and appurtenances


 

   Estimated Construction Cost:

 

   $0 to $5,000

   $5,000 to $50,000

   $50,000 to $100,000

   Over $100,000

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

$_______ lot

 

 

 

 

 

$

 

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

 

 

$

 

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

 

 



   (iii)   Sanitary sewers: inspection of installation of sanitary
sewers. This item to include checking of grades, sewer construction, and
appurtenances:


 

   $0 to $5,000

   $5,000 to $50,000

   $50,000 to $100,000

   Over $100,000
 

 

 

 

$

 

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

 

 

 

 

$

 

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $

___% but not less than $


Filing and recording fee required by statute
 
$__________


Final approval of preliminary plat
 
$______ per lot, with $_______ minimum


Final plat approval (see also “fees for engineering” above)
 
$______ per lot, with $_______ minimum


Partitioning or division of lots, pursuant to § 153.07
 
$_____ per new lot or
$____ per ______ acre, whichever is greater


Pre-preliminary plan review
 
$______per lot, with $_______ minimum


Tentative approval of preliminary plat
 
$ ______ per lot, with $_______ minimum




 



(1984 Code, § 6-02-06-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.07  PARTITIONING OR DIVISION OF LOTS, OUTLOTS, OR OTHER PARCELS OF
LAND IN A RECORDED PLAT.



   (A)   Upon the filing of a petition by the owner or owners of all
interest therein with the governing body, platted lots, outlots, or parcels
of land in existing recorded plats may be partitioned or divided upon
resolution of the governing body into not more than four parts each, each of
which shall, in regard to width, depth, and area, conform to the terms and
provisions of Ch. 157, as amended; provided, however, that lots, outlots, or
parcels of land in the existing recorded plats, not served by public sewer
and public water systems, shall not be further partitioned or divided if the
resulting lots, outlots, or parcels are less than the minimum width and area
provided under Public Acts 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.;
further providing, however, that nothing herein shall prevent the governing
body from approving the division of any such lot, outlot, or parcel of land
in case where the owner of such divided parcel owns land immediately adjacent
thereto, or in a case where there is presented to the governing body an
executed agreement to sell and convey such divided parcel to the adjoining
owner, and where the newly combined parcel shall become recorded as a single
ownership, and where the combined width and area of the divided parcel and
the adjacent parcel shall, as a single parcel, conform to the terms and
provisions of this section and Ch. 157.



   (B)   The filed petition shall include a legal description of the
proposed partition or division and newly formed lots, and a map prepared and
certified by a surveyor, meeting the requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.143, except § 560.143(d) regarding monuments, and
Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.144.



   (C)   The municipality may require as conditions for approval, the
designation of reservation of easements, including non-access easements along
roads, highways, and thoroughfares; the dedication of street right-of-way or
portions thereof; the installation or guarantee of installation of public
improvements; the recordation of protective covenants; and such other actions
as would reasonably be required under the provision and scope of this section
if the land were being initially platted.



   (D)   The filed petition shall be accompanied with the fees required
under § 153.06, the fee schedule on “partitioning or division of lots”,
if improvements are involved.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-07-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)




SUBDIVISION PLAT SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES




§ 153.20  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



    The review and approval of subdivision development plats shall follow
the provisions listed in this subchapter.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-03-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.21  PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW.



   (A)   Where a master subdivision plan is required by the below
provisions, the pre-preliminary plat review is mandatory.



   (B)   In other cases, this review is optional at the discretion of
the proprietor.



      (1)   Proprietor’s responsibility.



         (a)   The proprietor shall provide sketch plans for lot
and street arrangements. He or she shall also indicate his or her intentions
as to water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage, and other proposals as
appropriate.



         (b)   A master plan shall be prepared and submitted by
the proprietor whenever:



            1.   The tract proposed is only a portion of a
larger land holding; or



            2.   The tract is part of a larger land area which
would pose problems of complicated development due to unusual topographic
conditions, land use, land owners, or other conditions; and/or



         3.   Such master subdivision plan shall be considered a
pre-preliminary plat for the area then proposed for platting.



      (2)   Municipality’s responsibility. The Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required,  through it appropriate officials and
agents, shall inspect the site, noting the following:



         (a)   Major thoroughfares in the area;



         (b)   Utility systems available to service the platted
area;



         (c)   Adjacent land uses;



         (d)   Unusual development problems;



         (e)   Topography;



         (f)   Drainage;



         (g)   Existing zoning;



         (h)   Adequacy of existing schools and public open
space; or



         (i)   Availability and feasibility of providing
municipal services.



      (3)   Deposit. At the time that a proprietor requests a
pre-preliminary review, he or she shall deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer the
fee as provided for below.



      (4)   Findings. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, shall, within 90 days of filing, furnish its
findings to the proprietor. Such findings shall not commit the municipality
to any subsequent actions, but shall be construed as informational findings
to facilitate subsequent states of subdivision design.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-03-020)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.22  PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND TENTATIVE APPROVAL.



   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be designed and drawn in accordance
with Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293. At
least 30 days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required,  the proprietor shall submit ten copies of a
letter of intent and the preliminary plat which shall contain and clearly
indicate the following information in sufficient detail to enable a
determination of whether the subdivision meets or will meet, when finally
approved, the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Dimensional information in this stage may be approximated and
scaled.



      (1)   Key map showing integration of proposed subdivision with
surrounding area;



      (2)   Owners of adjacent property;



      (3)   Adjacent development names;



      (4)   Tract boundary;



      (5)   Title of subdivision;



      (6)   North arrow and date of preparation;



      (7)   (a)   Site date; total acreage:



            1.   Gross;



            2.   Net (residential use only); and



            3.   Any other use, i.e., golf course, marina, and
the like.



         (b)   Number of lots and outlots indicating type of use
in each outlot; and



         (c)   Typical building sizes, placement, and
arrangement. Setback lines must be shown on all corner lots, cul-de-sac lots,
and other lots having unusual shape or configuration.



      (8)   Streets.



         (a)   Right-of-way widths;



         (b)   Pavement lines where necessary to illustrate
design (e.g., intersections, cul-de-sacs, and the like);



         (c)   Names; and



         (d)   Identification of any streets or roads in or
abutting the plat under jurisdiction of the County Road Commission.



      (9)   Lot lines and numbers;



      (10)   Easement lines, use of easement;



      (11)   Prominent natural and human-made features (identify any
county drains in or serving the plat);



      (12)   Notation of reserved and dedicated parcels, specifying
intended use and deed conveyances, if any;



      (13)   Proposed development drawn over a two-foot contour
interval map;



      (14)   Letter of intent, containing proposed types and extent
of improvements for: streets; curbs and gutters; sidewalks; water supply and
distribution; sanitary sewers; storm sewers; street trees; common open spaces
and recreational facilities; any other improvements pertinent to the purposes
of this chapter;



      (15)   Draft outline of restrictive covenants and other
proposals referred to in Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. § 560.258;
and



      (16)   The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100
feet to one inch.



         (a)   Fees. The proprietor shall deposit with the
Clerk-Treasurer all fees as provided in § 153.06.



         (b)   Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, action. Upon completion of its review and within 45 days of
submittal by the proprietor, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, will:



            1.   Recommended complete denial by the governing
body for specific reasons;



            2.   Recommended approval by the governing body of
the preliminary plat as submitted; or



            3.   Recommended approval by the governing body
after receipt of plans containing specified revisions.



         (c)   Governing body review. Upon notification by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,  the
Clerk-Treasurer then places the review of the preliminary plat on the agenda
of the governing body.



         (d)   Governing body action. Upon review of the Planning
Commission’s and/or Zoning Commission’s, as required, recommendation, the
governing body shall, within 90 days from date of submittal by proprietor,
grant tentative approval or reject, for specific reasons, the preliminary
plat.



         (e)   Approval period.



            1.   Tentative approval of a preliminary plat
shall become void after the expiration of one year from the date of such
approval, unless the proprietor shall have submitted a preliminary plat for
final approval or unless the governing body, in its discretion, grants an
extension to the said one-year period upon the written application of the
proprietor.



            2.   Said tentative approval shall confer only the
rights afforded to the proprietor under the provision of Public Act 288 of
1967, being M.C.L.A. § 560.112(4).



(1984 Code, § 6-02-03-030)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.23  FINAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   After the proprietor has obtained the tentative approval of
the governing body for the preliminary plat, the proprietor shall submit his
or her preliminary plat to all authorities as required by Public Act 288 of
1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.112 through 560.118.



   (B)   A proprietor desiring final approval of a preliminary plat
shall submit the following items to the Clerk-Treasurer:



      (1)   A list of all authorities required by law to process
and/or to approve the preliminary plat, citing the date and action by each
such authority; said list shall be certified as correct by the proprietor
before a notary public;



      (2)   Copies of the preliminary plat as approved by all
authorities as required by Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.112 through 560.118;



      (3)   The payment of fees required to that stage, as provided
for below; and



      (4)   The preliminary plat may be in blueprint form and shall
display in approximate form the dimensional information required to be on the
final plat.



   (C)   Within 20 days of the submission of the foregoing, the
governing body shall grant final approval of the preliminary plat if the
proprietor has met all conditions laid down for approval of said plat, or
reject said plat and advise the proprietor of the reason(s) for said
rejection. Approval is subject to the limitations of Public Act 288 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.120(a), and is for a two-year period so specified in
that section of that Act.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-03-040)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.24  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   Contents. The final plat shall substantially conform to the
approved preliminary plat, shall constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the
time, and shall conform in all respects to the requirements of Public Act 288
of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.



   (B)   Submittal.



      (1)   The proprietor submits five copies of the final plat,
five copies of construction plans for improvements in the subdivision, and
all restrictive covenants for the subdivision, together with copies of the
design engineer’s detailed estimate of construction costs to the
Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   The proprietor shall pay all fees for final plat
approval at the time of submission to the Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with
the fee in § 153.06.



   (C)   Governing body action on final plat.



      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer, within 20 days after receipt of the
final plat, shall place the review of the final plat on the agenda of the
governing body, if the County Road Commission (if its approval is required)
and County Drain Commission have approved the plat.



      (2)   The proprietor shall be notified officially by mail, by
the Clerk-Treasurer, of the decision of the governing body.



   (D)   Evidence of title. The proprietor shall furnish to the
Clerk-Treasurer an abstract of title or a policy of title insurance of the
final plat covering all of the land included within the boundaries of the
final plat, in accordance with Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.245.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-03-050)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)




DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS




§ 153.35  GENERALLY.



   The following principles and standards shall be construed as design
objectives which may be reasonably modified for reasons of practical
difficulty or site characteristics subject to the approval of the
municipality.



   (A)   Every subdivision’s plat shall conform to the requirements
and objectives of these design principles and standards and the Master Plan,
or any parts thereof, as may be adopted by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required,  to Ch. 157, other municipal ordinances, and
to the public acts of the state.



   (B)   Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a
street designated on the Master Plan, as may be adopted, such street shall be
platted in the location and width indicated on such plan.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-04-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.36  STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.



   (A)   Street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing
major or collector streets in surrounding areas, or conform to a plan for
neighborhood development approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required.



   (B)   Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,  shall be extended to the
boundary line of the tract to provide for future connections with adjoining
unplatted land. In general, these extensions shall be not more than 1,300
feet apart.



   (C)   Where a subdivision abuts any of the following rights-of-way
or zone districts, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required,  shall normally require location of a street approximately
parallel to, and one lot depth distant from, such rights-of-way or zones:



      (1)   Any street the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required,  may designate as a major traffic artery;



      (2)   Railroad and major overhead utility transmission lines;
and



      (3)   Commercial or industrial districts.



   (D)   Proposed streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing
topography as to produce desirable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.



   (E)   Except where justified in unique conditions, alleys will not
be approved in those parts of the plat proposed for one- or two-family
residential use.



   (F)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.



   (G)   Half-streets are prohibited, except where absolutely essential
to the reasonable development of the tract in conformity to principles herein
stated. Whenever a half-street has previously been platted outside of and
abutting the tract boundary line, the remaining half shall be platted within
the tract.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-04-020)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.37  STREET DESIGN.



   (A)   Minimum right-of-way widths.



      (1)   Major thoroughfares. As indicated on Master Plan and as
required by the County Road Commission for County Roads;



      (2)   Local subdivision streets. Sixty feet;



      (3)   Neighborhood collector streets. Eighty-six feet;



      (4)   Boulevard streets. Eighty feet;



      (5)   “U” streets. One hundred twenty feet, terminating in
a circle 120 feet in diameter;



      (6)   Cul-de-sac streets. Sixty feet, terminating in a circle
120 feet in diameter;



      (7)   Marginal access streets. Forty feet, abutting
thoroughfare right-of-way; and



      (8)   Alley. Twenty feet.



   (B)   Grades.



      (1)   Maximum. All streets, 5%; provided, that where essential
to reasonable development,7% may be permitted for collector and minor
streets; and



      (2)   Minimum. Forty hundredths percent (0.40%).



   (C)   Vertical alignment.



      (1)   Major thoroughfares. Minimum sight distance, 600 feet,
measured on and four feet above street centerline; and



      (2)   All other streets. Minimum sight distance, 300 feet,
measured as in above.



   (D)   Horizontal alignment.



      (1)   When tangent centerlines deflect from each other more
than ten degrees and less than 90 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve
with a minimum radius of:



         (a)   Collector streets. Three hundred feet; and



         (b)   Minor streets. One hundred fifty feet.



      (2)   Between reverse curves there shall be a minimum tangent
distance of 100 feet;



      (3)   Streets intersecting a major thoroughfare shall do so at
a 90-degree angle; and



      (4)   Minor streets intersecting a collector street or major
thoroughfare shall have a tangent section of centerline at least 50 feet in
length measured from the right-of-way line of the major street; provided,
that no such tangent is required when the centerline of the minor street has
a curve radius greater than 400 feet with curve center located on the
right-of-way line of the major street.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-04-030)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.38  BLOCK DESIGN.



   (A)   Maximum length of blocks, measured between intersections of
centerlines: One thousand three hundred feet. This maximum may be exceeded by
not more than 500 feet in developments with lot sizes averaging over one-half
acre, or where extreme topographic conditions warrant; and



   (B)   Maximum length of cul-de-sac and “u” streets, measured
from the intersection of right-of-way lines to the extreme depth of turning
circle along centerline of street: Six hundred feet. Exceptions shall not be
made for the purpose of avoiding the extension of streets to connect with
adjoining unplatted or platted parcels.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-04-040)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.39  LOT PLANNING.



   Minimum lot width, depth and area shall be in accordance with the
village zoning ordinance, see Ch. 157.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-04-050)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969; Ord. 266, passed
6-25-1996)



§ 153.40  EASEMENT PLANNING.



   (A)   All public utility easements included in the plat shall be
shown as follows:



      (1)   By their widths and relationship to the lot or street
lines;



      (2)   As at least 12 feet wide where the rear lines of lots
are contiguous; and



      (3)   As at least six feet wide if a lot has no adjoining
subdivisions.



   (B)   (1)   Poorly drained land, or land within a public drainage
easement intended for surface use, or land within a private utility easement
for major power transmission lines, shall not be considered as satisfying
more than 25% of the minimum required lot area of lots with less than 12,000
square feet in area.



      (2)   This shall not be construed as applicable to underground
easements or utility easements for distribution purposes.



   (C) (1)   Lots arranged to back to thoroughfares, railroads or
commercial and industrial districts, as required in § 153.36(C), shall be
provided an extra depth of at least 25 feet to be recorded as a non-access
private easement.



      (2)   Not more than 25 feet of such extra depth shall be
excluded in determining the depth to width ratio division (A)(3) above.



   (D)   Private fencing shall not be permitted within public drainage
easements for surface drainage.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-04-060)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)




STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS




§ 153.55  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish in outline the
minimum acceptable standards for improvement of streets and utilities; define
the responsibility of the proprietor in the planning, construction, and
financing of public improvements; and to establish procedures for review and
approval of engineering plans.



   (B)   For reasons of practical difficulty, the minimum dimensional
standards may be slightly varied by approval of the municipality.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-05-010)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.56  ENGINEERING PLANS.



   (A)   Preparation.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to have
prepared by a registered engineer a complete set of engineering plans,
including profiles, cross sections, specifications, and supporting data for
construction of required public improvements.



      (2)   Such engineering plans shall be based on the approved
preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Such
plans shall be prepared in compliance with the schedule of improvement
requirements and with applicable requirements of county and state authorities.



   (B)   Approvals. The proprietor shall obtain the approvals as
applicable, required by law, and furnish them attached to the engineering
plans.



   (C)   Submittal. Five copies of the engineering plans shall be filed
with the Clerk-Treasurer simultaneously with the filing of the final plat
(see § 153.24(B)).



   (D)   Review. The Clerk-Treasurer shall check the submission for
completeness, and if complete, record receipt and date thereof and
immediately distribute the documents as follows:



      (1)   One copy to the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, for review and recommendation; and



      (2)   Four copies to the Municipal Engineer for review of
compliance as to requirements and standards; review of construction cost
estimates; and recommendations for rejection or approval.



   (E)   Approval. The governing body shall not approve any final plat
until the Municipal Engineer has submitted his or her approval of engineering
plans.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-05-020)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.57  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following schedule of improvements requirements
establishes general policy on the types of utility and street improvements,
and street right-of-way cross sections for the various types of subdivision
development.



   (B)   This schedule may be supplemented by public improvement
standards establishing design and material specifications to be used in all
public improvements installed pursuant to these regulations.



      (1)   Schedule of improvement requirements.



         (a)   Major thoroughfares. Where an existing road abuts
the subdivisions, the proprietor shall improve his or her half of said road
to a width and standard equal to the County Road Commission right-of-way
plan, if applicable, and the Master Plan; subject plans to be approved by the
Municipal Engineer. The proprietor shall install five-foot concrete sidewalks
along his or her half of said road, and street trees unless waived by the
municipality as not being in character with the land use of the frontage;



         (b)   Local subdivision streets. Sixty-foot
right-of-way; 27-foot pavement measured back-to-back of curbs; five-foot
concrete sidewalks both sides; street trees; however, where parking will be
permanently prohibited in roadway, and adequate provision for off-street
parking is accordingly made, the pavement width may be reduced to 22 feet;



         (c)   Neighborhood collector-distributor streets.
Eighty-six-foot right-of-way; 39-foot pavement measured back-to-back of
curbs; five-foot concrete sidewalk both sides; street trees;



         (d)   Boulevard streets. Eighty-foot right-of-way; two
20-foot pavements measured back-to-back of curbs and separated by 18-foot
minimum island; five-foot concrete sidewalk next to both right-of-way lines;
street trees in island and along both sides;



         (e)   Marginal access streets. Forty-foot right-of-way
abutting major street right-of-way; Eighteen-foot pavement measured
back-to-back of curbs; curb on outside pavement edge; curb on inside pavement
edge if major street is curbed; no curb on inside if major street has swale
drainage; grassed island; five-foot sidewalk on outside only; street trees on
outside only;



         (f)   Cul-de-sac streets. Same as division (B)(1)(b)
above except for turning circle with 120-foot diameter right-of-way; 27-foot
pavement with 45-foot outside radius; landscaped island; curb all pavement
edges; five-foot concrete sidewalk both sides; street trees;



         (g)   “U” streets. One hundred twenty-foot
right-of-way; two 18-foot pavements measured back to back of curbs and
separated by a 44-foot island; terminated by turning circle with 120-foot
diameter right-of-way pavement with 40-foot outside radius; curb all pavement
edges; five-foot concrete sidewalk both sides; street trees in island and
along both sides;



         (h)   Alleys. Twenty-foot right-of-way; 20-foot pavement
with reverse crown;



         (i)   Street and lot grading. Per plans and profiles
approved by Municipal Engineer;



         (j)   Curb or curb and gutter details and
specifications. Approved by Municipal Engineer;



         (k)   Pavement details and specifications. Approved by
Municipal Engineer;



         (l)   Sidewalk details and specifications. Approved by
Municipal Engineer;



         (m)   Street trees. In accordance with standards of
variety, size, and installation adopted by the governing body, shall be
planted 60 feet apart, between curb and sidewalk;



         (n)   Street signs. Shall be placed at all intersections
by the time of completion of pavement. Detail and specifications in
accordance with adopted standards of municipality; and



         (o)   Monuments. Installed in compliance with law. After
installation of improvements, the proprietor shall have a registered engineer
or surveyor check the location of monuments and certify to their accuracy in
accordance with the law.



      (2)   Utility improvements.



         (a)   Water supply and sewage disposal shall be
installed as extensions and part of the municipality’s public systems in
accordance with the municipality’s standards. Subdivision systems of water
supply and/or sewage disposal may be acceptable if there are no public
systems within 3,000 feet of the subdivision. Such subdivision systems shall
be designed to be capable of ultimately tying in with municipal systems.
Individual wells and/or septic tanks shall not be approved for any lot of
less than 125 feet frontage and 20,000 square feet lot area.



         (b)   Such facilities shall be so located and designed
to facilitate economical connection with future public systems.



            1.   Drainage requirements. All frontage having
lots shall be furnished with enclosed storm drainage.



               a.   In addition to proposed development,
all existing roads within or abutting the plat shall be drained to acceptable
outlet.



               b.   All drains shall be located in public
easements of a width to be determined by the Municipal Engineer.



               c.   Drainage collection basins, where
approved, shall be public easements for municipal access.



               d.   All lots shall be graded to avoid
impounding of surface water on any lot.



            2.   Electric and telephone lines. In the
following situations, electric and telephone distribution lines shall be
buried:



               a.   Residential subdivisions of ten or more
lots, with an average lot width of 100 feet or less;



               b.   Multiple apartment developments of more
than 24 apartment dwelling units; and



               c.   Mobile home parks, shopping centers,
office districts, and commercial districts of more than 15 acres.



            3.   Waiver. This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,  where it finds
that because of unusual conditions such as subsoil conditions or lot
arrangements, the proprietor’s average cost per residential lot would
exceed $160; per apartment dwelling or mobile home site would exceed $50; or
for other types of development would exceed $30 per lineal foot of buried
line.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-05-030)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



§ 153.58  GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION.



   In lieu of actual installation of required public improvements, the
proprietor may elect to provide a financial guarantee of performance in one
or a combination of the following arrangements; provided, that the total
estimated cost of required public improvements is thereby covered.



   (A)   Performance or surety bond.



      (1)   Value of bond. An amount satisfactory to the governing
body;



      (2)   Length of term. A period specified by the governing
body; provided, that such a period shall not exceed 12 months; and further
provided, that under extraordinary circumstances this period may be extended
by governing body action for not more than 12 months; and



      (3)   Approval of bonding company. Surety company authorized
to do business in the state and approved by the governing body.



   (B)   Cash deposit, certified check, or negotiable bonds. Deposit
shall be made with the Clerk-Treasurer of a responsible escrow agent or trust
company, subject to the approval of the governing body, of money or
negotiable bonds in the same amount and kind approved by law for securing
deposits of public money in banks.



   (C)   Special assessment. In cases where all properties abutting on
a public right-of-way are not under the control of the proprietor, the
proprietor, may petition the municipality through the governing body to
provide the necessary improvements and to assess the cost thereof against the
abutting property in accordance with the local requirements regarding special
assessments; provided, however, that the proprietor shall be responsible for
any differences between the cost of improvements and the amount that can be
legally assessed by the municipality against the property to be subdivided
and shall furnish the necessary waivers to permit the assessment of the
entire cost of the improvements.



   (D)   Progressive installation. When any portion of an improvement
has been fully completed to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer, he or
she shall recommend, and the governing body shall authorize the reduction in
bonds or a partial withdrawal of funds equal to the estimated cost of such
completed portion.



   (E)   Penalty for failure to complete installation. In the event the
proprietor does in any case fail to complete such work within such period as
required by the conditions of the guarantee, the governing body shall have
such work completed. The municipality, in order to reimburse itself for the
cost and expense thereof, may appropriate the deposit of cash money or
negotiable bonds which the proprietor may have deposited in lieu of a surety
bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance by
the bonding company.



(1984 Code, § 6-02-06-040)  (Ord. 11, passed 8-26-1969)



CHAPTER 154:  SIGNS



Section



   154.01   Purpose



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Signs permitted in all districts



   154.04   Signs prohibited in all districts



   154.05   Signs in residential districts



   154.06   Limitations in the Neighborhood Office Commercial and
Commercial Districts



   154.07   Signs in the Central Business District



   154.08   Signs in the Manufacturing District



   154.09   Signs at churches



   154.10   Sign permits



   154.11   Existing nonconforming signs



   154.12   Variances



   154.13   Inspections, removal, and safety



 



   154.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Zoning, see Ch. 157



§ 154.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide framework
within which the identification and informational needs of all land uses can
be harmonized with the desires and aesthetic standards of the general public.



      (2)   It is intended through the provisions contained herein
to give recognition to the legitimate needs of business, industry, and other
activities in attaining their identification and informational objectives. It
is a basic tenet of this section that unrestricted signage does not benefit
either the private sector or the community at large.



   (B)   (1)   It is further the intent of this section to establish
signage regulation that will enhance the aesthetic appearance of the village,
in order to better protect the stability of the community; to promote the
health, welfare, and the safety of the residents; and to enhance and protect
properties within the village.



      (2)   Classic designs of shape, font, and colors are
encouraged. All signs will be inspected regularly and if found to be in a
deteriorated condition; owners may be required to remove or upgrade the signs.



   (C)   Note: right-of-way, easement; and setback distances may vary
according to location and type of signage.



   (D)   Additional regulations may apply to structures located within
the Village Historic Districts. One must consult with village officials with
regard to the applicability of such provisions and in determining compliance
with all those requirements before erecting any sign pursuant to this chapter.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  (Ord. 377, passed 2-23-2006)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. This term as used herein shall mean the
Village Manager or his or her designee.



   ADVERTISING SIGNS. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession lawfully conducted or to a commodity, service, or entertainment
sold or offered.



      (1)   OFF-PREMISES.An advertising sign which has a message
relating to a business, service, commodity, or profession lawfully being
conducted, sold, or offered on premises other than that upon which the sign
is located.



      (2)   ON-PREMISES. An advertising sign which has a message
relating to a business, service, commodity, or profession lawfully being
conducted, sold, or offered on the same premises.



   AWNING or CANOPY SIGN. A non-ridged fabric or Plexiglas (or similar
material) structure which is attached to a building by supporting framework,
which includes a business identification message symbol and/or logo.



   BILLBOARDS (OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE). A sign exceeding 50 square
feet of surface display area, that is affixed to or erected upon a
freestanding framework designed or intended to be used for posting
information not pertaining directly to the use of the premises on which it is
located.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGNS. A temporary sign placed on a property during
construction that lists the name of the contractor, developer, architect, or
engineer working on the project.



   ELECTION CAMPAIGN SIGNS. Signs advertising candidates or soliciting
votes in support of or against any proposition or issue during any general,
primary, special, school, municipal, or any other election.



   EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated by a source of light
outside of the sign structure, and shielded so that no direct rays are
visible from any surrounding areas.



   GROUND SIGN. A sign which is mounted permanently in the ground on a
masonry base or monument.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGNS. A sign that identifies the activity, business,
owner, or resident and/or the street address and which sets forth no other
advertisement.



   INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD. A sign containing a surface area upon
which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library,
community center, service, or civic institution, governmental unit, or
similar nonprofit institution and the announcement of its institutional
services, activities, or meetings.



   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated by a source of light
inside of the sign structure, and shielded so that no direct rays are visible
from any surrounding areas.



   MARQUEE SIGNS. An identification sign attached to or a part of a
marquee, canopy, or awning projecting from and supported by the building
above the sidewalk level. This sign shall not be higher than the $100 fine.



   MOVABLE SIGNS. A sign anchored to a trailer or frame that is capable of
being moved from place to place. Such sign must be anchored securely to the
ground.



   PORTABLE SIGNS. A freestanding sign not permanently anchored to either
a building or the ground or to a trailer and shall be displayed only during
business hours.



   PROJECTING SIGNS. A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall
of a building and does not extend beyond the minimum required setback line or
into and over street right-of-way, and not less than nine feet, at its lowest
point, above sidewalk, or ground level and shall not extend more than six
feet from its origin.



   REAL ESTATE SIGNS. A sign located on premises containing land or
buildings for sale, rent, or lease, or buildings under construction and
intended for sale, rent, or lease of these premises.



   ROOF SIGN. A sign that extends more than 24 inches above the roofline.



   ROOFLINE. The intersection of the plane of the outer surface of the
wall and the plane of the outer surface of the roof.



   SEASONAL or HOLIDAY SIGNS. Those used as Christmas decorations and
those used for a historic holiday, as long as they are installed for a
limited period of time, not to exceed 60 days, and contain no commercial
advertising.



   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, or illustration
that is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure, or property for the purpose of attracting attention or
conveying information.



   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The property which is measured from the
centerline of the road using one-half of the road’s right-of-way width
(typically extending to one foot on the house side of the sidewalk).



   SURFACE DISPLAY AREA. For the purposes of calculating display area, the
SURFACE DISPLAY AREA of any sign is defined as the entire area within a
single rectangular continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of
lettering, representations, emblems, or other figures, together with any
material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed.
Structural members bearing no sign copy shall not be included. Both sides or
all faces of a sign shall be included in calculating SURFACE DISPLAY AREA.



   TEMPORARY SIGNS.



      (1)   TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGN. Freestanding signs, movable
signs, portable sign, banner, pennant, streamer, balloon, or gas-filled
figures which are used for on-premises business promotional purposes. The
signs shall meet the size, area, and placement provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION SIGNS. Signs used for development
and construction projects in any zoning district; provided, that the signs
are used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   TEMPORARY EVENT SIGN. An on-premises sign that announces
a campaign, drive, activity, or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational,
religious organization, or nonprofit for noncommercial purposes and shall be
subject to the following:



         (a)   Limited to freestanding signs, portable signs, and
items such as banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and other gas-filled
figures. Banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and gas-filled items shall
be securely anchored and consistent with public safety standards. Each item
used shall constitute a separate sign usage and the number of signs shall be
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Movable signs may be used
as temporary event signs, upon the issuance of a sign special exception
permit, in any zoning district, except the (CBD) Central Business District,
however, no movable sign used as a TEMPORARY EVENT SIGN shall be located on
any premises with any other movable sign; and



         (b)   TEMPORARY EVENT SIGNS may be illuminated in
accordance with the chapter and under the supervision and discretion of the
administrative official.



   WALL SIGN. A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a
building wall and which does not extend more than 12 inches from the wall nor
above the top of the wall or the beginning of the roof. A canopy sign is
considered a WALL SIGN.



   WINDOW SIGNS. Signs affixed to, in contact with, or within 12 inches of
a window, installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. This
does not include merchandise located in a window.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)



§ 154.03  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following signs shall be permitted in all districts
subject to the requirements stated herein.



   (B)   Permits are not required for these signs, unless specifically
noted.



      (1)   House numbers legible from the street, and nameplates
(fraternal, social, apartment, and professional) identifying the occupant or
address of a parcel of land;



      (2)   Memorial signs or tablets, especially those containing
the names of buildings and dates of construction;



      (3)   For sale signs attached to vehicles that are properly
licensed and insured, unless exempted by other ordinances of the village;



      (4)   Flags bearing the official design of a national, state,
municipality, institution, or organization;



      (5)   Traffic, or other municipal signs, also private
traffic-control signs which conform to the requirements of the State Manual
of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices;



      (6)   Institutional bulletin board located on the premises to
which the sign pertains and not exceeding 50 square feet in surface display
area;



      (7)   Park and playground signs;



      (8)   Election signs subject to the following:



         (a)   They shall not be erected more than 45 days prior
to the election to which the sign pertains and shall be removed within ten
days following that election;



         (b)   They shall not be placed closer than 100 feet from
any polling place entrance;



         (c)   No election sign shall exceed six square feet in
surface display area;



         (d)   Said signs must be freestanding and not attached
to any tree, utility pole building, or structure;



         (e)   The top of said sign shall be no more than two and
one-half feet from the ground;



         (f)   Said signs shall be placed in such a manner that
it does not interfere with or obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
including the access, activity, or vision along the public right-of-way; or



         (g)   Election signs shall be placed outside of the road
right-of-way.



      (9)   Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease, or rental
of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed, up to
a total area of 12 square feet for residential, 32 square feet for commercial
and industrial. Such signs shall be removed within 14 days after the sale,
lease, or rental is completed. Such sign shall not exceed one per parcel and
must be contained within the confines of the parcel;



      (10)   Temporary construction signs subject to the following:



         (a)   Total surface display area shall not exceed 32
square feet;



         (b)   Sigh height shall not exceed eight feet;



         (c)   Placement shall be wholly within the property
boundaries to which the sign pertains;



         (d)   The sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of
a building permit for the proposed construction and shall be removed upon
issuance of a certificate of occupancy;



         (e)   Trespassing, safety, or caution signs not
exceeding two square feet in surface display are shall be permitted; and



         (f)   State and federal funded construction project sign
requirements shall supersede any local requirements.



      (11)   Garage and yard sale signs shall not exceed six square
feet per side and shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   Said signs must be freestanding and not attached
to any tree, utility pole, building, or other structure;



         (b)   The top of said sign shall be no more than two and
one-half feet from the ground;



         (c)   Said signs may only be placed on locations and
premises other than the sale premises with the written permission of the
owner of said location;



         (d)   The sign shall contain the name of the owner, the
address of the sale and the dates of the sale; and



         (e)   All garage and yard sale signs must be constructed
of material suitable for display and safety and all letters or numbers
(except the information requested in division (B)(10) above) shall be a
minimum of three inches.



      (12)   Temporary event signs are permitted in all districts in
accordance with the following provisions.



         (a)   A sign permit shall be obtained prior to the
installation of a sign. No more than four permits for temporary event signs
shall be issued to the same premises in any calendar year.



         (b)   The area, height, location, illumination, and
construction of the signs shall be in accordance with this chapter.



         (c)   The signs shall not exceed two in number and may
be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed 15 days prior to the
date on which the special campaign, drive, activity, or event is scheduled to
begin. The signs shall be removed within three days of the termination of the
special exception permit.



         (d)   Any temporary event sign which is permitted to
extend over a public right-of-way shall be erected and maintained in such a
manner that it does not interfere with or obstruct vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, including the access, activity, or vision along the public
right-of-way.



      (13)   Seasonal or holiday signs or decorations.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.04  SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which
are parked in a manner which makes them visible from a public right-of-way
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or person or to direct
people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property;
however, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on or
affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles, where
the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer. Nor does
this provision restrict the use of for sale signs placed on vehicles,
properly licensed and insured, unless otherwise permitted by ordinance (e.g.,
new or used car dealers).



   (B)   No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering light, or
other illuminating device, which has the effect of changing light intensity,
brightness, or color or any sign which moves or has any animated parts, or
images, including swinging signs and strings of flags or streamers, or cloth
flags moved by natural wind, except as permitted in § 154.02, definition of
surface display area, and § 154.03(B)(4). Public message signs located on
governmental property and those on public property which display the time,
temperature, or stock market information are exempt from this prohibition



   (C)   Beacon lights are not permitted.



   (D)   No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street in
such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or any location where by
reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device;
or which makes use of the words “stop”, “look”, “danger”, or any
word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular.



   (E)   Off-premise signs are not permitted, except as specifically
permitted elsewhere herein.



   (F)   Roof signs are not permitted.



   (G)   Bench signs are not permitted.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.05  SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.



   (A)   R1A and R1B Residential Districts. Signs in the R1A and R1B
Districts shall be permitted subject to the following limitations.



      (1)   Home occupation. One non-illuminated freestanding sign
announcing a home occupation or professional service not to exceed four
square feet in surface display area.



      (2)   Subdivision or development entry.



         (a)   A permanent sign which may be illuminated, may be
permitted by the administrative official; provided, that the sign copy may
include only the name of the development and the developer and; provided,
that the sign and structure shall be harmonious and appropriate in appearance
with the existing and intended character of the general vicinity. Such a sign
shall be limited to four feet in height and 16 square feet in surface area,
each side.



         (b)   For model homes within a subdivision, one sign per
model, which shall not exceed four square feet and four feet in height,
including the frame and base, for the purposes of identifying the model style.



      (3)   Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising
signs may be permitted by a sign permit in Cyclone Park (R1B, Single-Family
Dwelling District) in accordance with the following limitations.



         (a)   Location. The sign must be attached at the inside
of the softball field’s outfield fence facing the playing area.



         (b)   Size. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in
surface display area.



         (c)   Extension. The sign shall not extend above the top
of the softball field’s outfield fence.



         (d)   Placement. The sign shall be placed up no earlier
than April 1 and be removed no later than November 1.



      (4)   Off-site temporary builder directional signs. Off-site
temporary builder directional signs are allowed with a permit in a
residential district subject to the following:



         (a)   Maximum size equals six square feet;



         (b)   Maximum height equals three feet;



         (c)   Must be set back five feet from the right-of-way;



         (d)   Must be 25 feet from structures;



         (e)   Maximum length of time for display; up to two
permits per year, per development, maximum of six months each; and



         (f)   Must have written permission from the property
owner to place the sign on the property.



      (5)   Off-site temporary real estate signs. Off-site temporary
real estate signs are allowed with a permit in a residential district subject
to the following:



         (a)   Maximum of one sign per property for sale;



         (b)   Maximum size equals six square feet;



         (c)   Maximum height equals three feet;



         (d)   Must be set back five feet from the right-of-way;



         (e)   Maximum length of time for display; up to two
permits per year, per property, maximum of 30 days each; and



         (f)   Must have written permission from the property
owner to place the sign on the property



   (B)   RM residential districts and MHP Mobile Home Park Districts.
Signs in RM and MHP Districts shall be permitted subject to the following
limitations:



      (1)   All signs permitted in the R1A and R1B Residential
Districts subject to the limitations imposed for those districts; and



      (2)   One sign placed flat against the main building
announcing the identification of the apartment complex that shall not exceed
10% in surface display area of the wall on which it is attached. Such a sign
may be illuminated.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)



§ 154.06  LIMITATIONS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE COMMERCIAL AND COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Signs in the NOC Neighborhood Office Commercial Districts and
C-Commercial District shall be permitted subject to the following limitations.



   (B)   Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.



      (1)   Ground signs.



         (a)   One on-premises advertising sign per developed lot
or parcel not exceeding 32 square feet in surface display area per side.



         (b)   The sign shall contain only those items which are
permitted pursuant to the requirements of this section in order to promote
safety and clear sight paths.



         (c)   The top of ground signs shall not be higher than
six feet above the average grade or the finished elevation of the sidewalk
nearest the sign, whichever is less.



         (d)   All signs shall maintain a minimum setback from
the street right-of-way line of ten feet.



         (e)   The ground sign shall be located a minimum of ten
feet from any property line or to the edge of the pavement of any driveway
entrance off the right-of-way.



         (f)   The ground sign shall be integrated into the
landscape buffer design and shall be compatible with the design and materials
used for the structures on the site.



         (g)   The masonry base height of any ground sign shall
be a minimum of 16 inches and shall not exceed 36 inches. The masonry base
shall not exceed the length of the sign.



         (h)   Menu order and similar drive through assistance
signs: one freestanding sign not exceeding 24 square feet in size shall be
permitted. Such sign shall only be located at the point of vocal
communication with the main building.



         (i)   Billboards shall not be permitted.



         (j)   1.   Gasoline service stations may display the
following special signs that are deemed customary and necessary to their
respective businesses.



            2.   Sign permits shall be required for such signs.



               a.   No more than two signs, each sign not
exceeding six square feet in area, may be placed on the gasoline pump or
island for the purposes of designating “self-service” or
“full-service”.



               b.   No more than two signs, limited to two
square feet in area for the purposes of displaying gasoline prices and
acceptable methods of payment may be placed on each gasoline pump.



               c.   In no instance may advertising be
located on the gasoline pump or pump island or on any accessory structure,
landscaping, or utility, unless specifically allowed in this chapter.



         (k)   Electronic message boards shall be permitted
provided they are not a nuisance to residential neighboring properties after
sundown. Messages on electronic message boards must not blink, flutter, flash
or scroll across the viewing area. Messages may only switch from one message
to another by fading out then fading in the new message.



      (2)   Wall signs.



         (a)   Wall signs may include any of the following: flat
aluminum or steel with an automotive enamel finish, plywood with a high
quality latex painted surface, channel letters, or sandblasted or carved wood
and may include registered trademarks. All signs are subject to inspection by
the building or Zoning Official and owners may be required to repaint or
refinish these signs if not found to be in a safe, neat, and attractive
condition (see Section 15 of this chapter).



         (b)   The total square footage allowed for a wall sign,
an awning sign, or a combination of the two shall be determined by
multiplying one square foot by the linear footage of the building or legally
occupied space, but shall be limited to 100 square feet or 20% of the
building wall, whichever is smaller.



         (c)   Wall signs may only face public streets or parking
areas that are a part of the development.



         (d)   All wall signs must be safely and securely
attached to the building by means of anchors, bolts, or expansion screws. In
no case shall strips of wood or nails secure any wall sign.



         (e)   Wall signs shall not be placed on a roof or have
any part that extends above the roofline.



      (3)   Marquee signs. Marquee signs shall not exceed the
surface display area permitted for wall signs.



      (4)   Projecting signs.



         (a)   Two per building, but only one per wall with a
surface display area not exceeding one and one-half square feet in area for
each lineal foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 25 square feet per
side;



         (b)   Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a
building by means of building mounts or hung from a mast arm. These support
members may also include decorative appurtenances;



         (c)   Signs must project at a 90-degree angle to the
building surface to which attached; and



         (d)   Projecting signs shall not extend beyond the
minimum required setback line or into and over street right-of-way.



      (5)   Window signs.



         (a)   Permanent window copy, painted or otherwise
attached to the window surface, shall be limited to 50% of the total window
surface.



         (b)   Temporary window signs, painted or otherwise
attached to the window surface, shall not exceed 75% of the window surface.
No temporary window sign shall be displayed for more than 30 consecutive days.



         (c)    The provisions stated above shall not restrict
the reasonable application upon a window surface of lettering or decals
giving the address, hours of business, entrance or exit information,
professional or security information, credit cards which are accepted, or
similar information, nor shall the surface area of such lettering or decals
be included in the overall computation of allowable signage.



         (d)   Permanent window copy and temporary window signs
used in conjunction shall not exceed 75% of the total window surface.



      (6)   Illuminated signs.



         (a)   Signs may be illuminated but no blinking,
fluttering lights, or flashing or moving illumination shall be permitted.



         (b)   The source of illumination shall not be visible
beyond the property line of the parcel on which the sign is located.



         (c)   Neon signs shall be permitted, subject to the
limitations herein.



         (d)   Signs shall not revolve or move in any manner;
because of tradition, barber poles, are exempt.



         (e)   Canopy signs shall not be internally lighted.



      (7)   Parking lot signs.



         (a)   1.   One directional sign at each point of
ingress or egress shall be permitted.



            2.   The sign may bear the sponsor’s ad, name,
or trademark of the enterprise it is intended to serve.



            3.   Private traffic-control or traffic-movement
signs are permissible.



         (b)   Surface display area per sign shall not exceed six
square feet.



      (8)   Portable signs. One sign is allowed per business subject
to the following conditions.



         (a)   All signs shall not exceed 12 square feet of
surface display area per side.



         (b)   All signs shall not exceed four feet in height.



      (9)   Temporary business signs. A maximum of two signs may be
used in a C - Commercial District to identify a special, unique, or limited
activity, service, project, promotion, or sale of limited duration in
accordance with the following provisions:



         (a)   A sign permit shall be obtained prior to the
installation of the sign. Merchants, businesses, and organizations in the
Commercial District shall be permitted to display two temporary business
event signs, without a sign permit, during the three-day period of Carrie
Nation Festival; provided, that the signs are on-premises, are not a threat
to public safety and are removed promptly at the end of the applicable period;



         (b)   Must be placed on the same premises where the
business is located;



         (c)   No more than four permits for the signs shall be
issued for the same premises within one calendar year. A business center
consisting of two or more establishments that share a common parking lot
shall be considered as one premises;



         (d)   The signs shall not be used in excess of 15
calendar days and shall be removed within three days of the termination of
the special exception permit use;



         (e)   Pennants, flags, or streamers that display no
advertisement may be used for a maximum of 120 days per calendar year,
pursuant to special exception permit, not to exceed 30 days per permit; and



         (f)   The signs may only be illuminated in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



      (10)   Off-site temporary real estate signs. Off-site
temporary real estate signs are allowed with a permit in a C - Commercial
District subject to the following:



         (a)   Maximum of five;



         (b)   Maximum size equals six square feet;



         (c)   Maximum height three feet;



         (d)   Must be set back five feet from the right-of-way;



         (e)   Must be 25 feet from structures;



         (f)   Maximum length of time for display; up to two
permits per year, per development (all phases), maximum of six months each;
and



         (g)   Must have written permission from the property
owner to place the sign on the property.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  (Ord. 377, passed 2-23-2006; Ord. 439, passed
1-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.07  SIGNS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Generally. All sign requirements, except projecting signs,
ground signs, and portable signs shall be the same as those in the C -
Commercial District.



   (B)   Historic District. All signs within the Historic District
shall meet the requirements of the Historic District Commission, in addition
to the requirements herein.



   (C)   Projecting signs.



      (1)   Two per building, but only one per wall with a surface
display area not exceeding 16 square feet per side;



      (2)   Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a
building by means of building mounts or hung from a mast arm. These support
members may also include decorative appurtenances;



      (3)   Signs must project at a 90-degree angle from the
building surface to which attached;



      (4)   Projecting signs may extend over a public sidewalk to a
maximum of 48 inches. The bottom of the projecting sign shall be a minimum of
eight feet above the sidewalk. No projecting sign shall extend over any
portion of the curb or roadway; and



      (5)   Projecting signs shall be made of durable, permanent
materials consistent with the period and architecture of the building to
which it is attached.



   (D)   Portable signs. One sign is allowed per business subject to
the following conditions.



      (1)   All signs shall not exceed 12 square feet of surface
display area per side.



      (2)   All signs shall not exceed four feet in height.



      (3)   All signs shall be placed within six feet of the entry
or exit door of the structure.



   (E)   Ground signs. Due to the physical limitations of properties in
the CBD District and the proximity of businesses to the road, ground signs
are not permitted.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  (Ord. 332, passed 3-28-2000)



§ 154.08  SIGNS IN THE MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   Signs in an Industrial District shall be permitted, subject to the
following limitations. Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.



   (A)   All limitations governing signs in the C - Commercial District
shall apply.



   (B)   (1)   One freestanding sign identifying the development
near the entrance to an industrial complex, not exceeding 32 square feet in
surface display area and not higher than four feet above the ground shall be
permitted.



      (2)   Such signs shall be located a minimum of ten feet from
the street right-of-way and may be illuminated provided the source of
illumination is not visible beyond the property line of the parcel on which
the sign is located.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)



§ 154.09  SIGNS AT CHURCHES.



   (A)   Signs at churches, regardless of the zoning district they are
in, shall be permitted subject to the following provisions.



   (B)   Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.



      (1)   Ground signs.



         (a)   One on-premises sign per church not exceeding 32
square feet in surface display area per side.



         (b)   The sign shall contain only those items which are
permitted pursuant to the requirements of this section in order to promote
safety and clear sight paths.



         (c)   The top of the ground signs shall not be higher
than six feet above the average grade or the finished elevation of the
sidewalk nearest the sign, whichever is less.



         (d)   All signs shall maintain a minimum setback from
the street right-of-way line of ten feet.



         (e)   The ground sign shall be located a minimum of ten
feet from any property line or to the edge of the pavement of any driveway
entrance off the right-of-way.



         (f)   The ground sign shall be integrated into the
landscape buffer design and shall be compatible with the design materials
used for the structures on the site.



         (g)   The ground sign may provide a letter rail, up to
three lines, to display information pertaining to church services and events.



         (h)   The masonry base height of any ground sign shall
be a minimum of 16 inches and shall not exceed 36 inches. The masonry base
shall not exceed the length of the sign.



         (i)   Billboards shall not be permitted.



      (2)   Illuminated signs.



         (a)   Ground signs may be illuminated but no blinking,
fluttering lights, or flashing or moving illumination shall be permitted.



         (b)   The source of illumination shall not be visible
beyond the property line of the parcel on which the sign is located.



         (c)   Electronic message boards shall be permitted
provided they are not a nuisance to residential neighboring properties after
sun down. Messages on electronic message boards must not blink, flutter,
flash, or scroll across the viewing area. Messages may only switch from one
message to another by fading out then fading in the new message.



      (3)   Temporary event signs. Temporary event signs shall be
permitted subject to the conditions listed in § 154.02, in the definition of
“temporary event signs”. Permits shall be required for all temporary
event signs.



      (4)   Crosses as accessories to ground signs.



         (a)   Crosses used as an accessory to a ground sign
shall be permitted provided they are no more than 12 feet tall and are
constructed to withstand the weather by means of exterior covering or
constructed of weather resistant materials.



         (b)   Crosses must be mounted to a proper foundation or
placed a minimum of 42 inches below grade.



         (a)   A building permit shall be required to install a
cross.



         (b)   Crosses shall meet the same setback requirements
as the ground sign.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  (Ord. 386, passed 6-17-2007)



§ 154.10  SIGN PERMITS.



   The following provisions apply for the application, issuance,
administration, and enforcement of signs requiring a permit as set forth
herein.



   (A)   Application procedures.



      (1)   Applicant. Any person owning or having an interest in
the subject property may file an application for one or more sign permits
provided for in this section.



      (2)   Application. Applications shall be submitted through the
Village Clerk-Treasurer to the Zoning Official. Each application shall be
accompanied by a special form supplied by the Clerk-Treasurer, a plan or
drawing depicting the size, structure, construction, and placement of the
sign (in readable scale).



   (B)   Administrative Official action. Upon receipt of the sign
permit application, the Administrative Official shall consider the
application within 15 days. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the
applicant of the Administrative Official’s decision subject to any
conditions imposed upon the permit. All conditions shall be clearly specified
in writing.



   (C)   Revocation. The Administrative Official may cancel, withdraw,
or revoke the permit at any time if he or she determines that the terms and
conditions of the permit or this section have been violated or not met.



   (D)   Inspection. Signs for which a permit is required may be
inspected periodically by the Administrative Official for compliance with
this chapter and all other village ordinances.



   (E)   Appeals and variance requests. Decisions of the Administrative
Official regarding sign permits and applications may be appealed to the
Village Zoning Board of Appeals. Applicants will follow the provisions of the
§§ 157.240 through 157.247, as modified to reflect this chapter. Variance
requests will be handled as provided by § 154.12.



   (F)   Permits. All signs require a sign permit prior to
installation, unless exempted by other provisions of this chapter.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)



§ 154.11  EXISTING NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   It is the intent of this section to permit the continuance of
a lawful use of any sign or outdoor advertising structure existing at the
effective date of adoption of this chapter, although such sign or outdoor
advertising structure may not conform with the provisions of this chapter. It
is the intent that nonconforming signs and outdoor advertising structures
shall be gradually eliminated and terminated upon their natural deterioration
or accidental destruction.



   (B)   The continuance of nonconforming signs and outdoor advertising
structures within the village shall be subject to the conditions and
requirements set forth herein.



      (1)   Structural changes. The faces, supports, or other parts
of any nonconforming sign or outdoor advertising structure shall not be
structurally changed, altered, substituted, or enlarged, unless the resultant
changed, altered, substituted, or enlarged sign or outdoor advertising
structure conforms to the provisions of the section for the district in which
it is located, except as otherwise provided for.



      (2)   Repairs, alterations, and improvements. Nothing shall
prohibit the repair of a lawful nonconforming sign or outdoor advertising
structure, provided, such repair does not exceed an aggregate cost of 30% of
the appraised replacement cost as determined by the Building Inspector.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the periodic change of message on any
outdoor advertising structure.



      (3)   Restoration after damage.



         (a)   Any lawful nonconforming sign or outdoor
advertising structure damaged by fire, explosion, an act of God, or by other
accidental causes, may be restored, rebuilt, or repaired, provided, the
damaged area of the sign is 25% or less of the total square footage of the
sign face and structure as determined by the Building Inspector.



         (b)   If the sign or outdoor advertising structure is
damaged by more than 25% of the total square footage of the sign face and
structure, then the sign or outdoor advertising structure must be removed or
altered to conform to the provisions of this section. In the case of a lawful
nonconforming pole sign, if the pole is damaged to the extent it has to be
repaired or replaced to safely serve its purpose, the pole and its related
sign structure shall be removed. If the sign structure mounted to the pole
can lawfully be used as a ground sign then the provisions for the allowance
of ground signs found in this chapter shall apply.



      (4)   Discontinuance or abandonment.



         (a)   Whenever the activity, business, or usage of a
premises to which a sign (whether conforming or nonconforming) is attached or
related has been discontinued for a period of 30 consecutive days or evidence
shows an intent to abandon the use of the premises to which the sign relate,
said sign, though otherwise conforming, shall become nonconforming and shall
be removed. At the end of the period of abandonment, the nonconforming sign
and structure of the sign shall either be removed or altered to conform to
the provisions of this section.



         (b)   The owner’s intent to abandon or no longer
continue the use of the sign shall be established by a preponderance of the
evidence before the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required. Such evidence may include any factor involving the use (or lack
thereof) or the condition of the sign or the business it advertises, and may
include such considerations as:



            1.   Whether utilities have been disconnected to
the premises to which the sign relates;



            2.   Whether any fixtures within and outside the
premises to which the sign relates have been removed;



            3.   Whether the premises to which the sign
relates have fallen into disrepair or is considered “blighted”;



            4.   Whether U.S. mail delivery for the business
to which the sign relates has been terminated or mail is forwarded to another
address;



            5.   Whether the classification of the property
for tax purposes has been changed to reflect another use;



            6.   Whether any license associated with the use
of the premises to which the sign relates has expired; or



            7.   Any other evidence indicating that the
business or activity to which the sign relates is no longer operating from
the advertised premises.



      (5)   Addition or modification to an existing site. Whenever
an addition or modification to an existing site requires submittal and
approval of a special use permit, site plans pursuant to §§ 157.190 through
157.204 or a building permit, any nonconforming sign shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  (Ord. 386, passed 6-17-2007)



§ 154.12  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Village Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to grant
variances from the strict application of this chapter. The procedures used to
apply for and grant a variance will follow the provisions of §§ 157.240
through 157.247 The fee for a sign variance request shall be the actual cost
of the meeting or $50, whichever is more.



   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may giant variances for
dimensional cases only when the ZBA finds that all of the criteria identified
below apply in a specific case.



      (1)   Compliance with the strict letter of the regulation
applied to sign size, setbacks, location, height, or other dimensional
provisions would otherwise render compliance with the regulation
unnecessarily burdensome. The applicant must show more than a mere
inconvenience to justify a variance under this provision.



      (2)   Granting the requested variance would give substantial
justice to the applicant by considering the public benefits intended to be
secured by this chapter, by considering the result of the individual
hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the ZBA to grant a variance,
and by considering the rights of others whose property would be affected by
the allowance of the variance.



      (3)   Granting the requested variance will not increase the
hazard of fire or otherwise endanger public safety or create a public
nuisance.



      (4)   There are unique circumstances or conditions applicable
to the property that do not exist generally throughout the village.



      (5)   Granting the variance will not be contrary to the public
purpose and the general intent and purpose of this chapter.



   (C)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variances for
non-dimensional cases only when the ZBA finds that the applicant has
submitted evidence that all of the criteria identified below apply in a
specific case.



      (1)   Failing to grant a variance will result in substantially
more than an inability to attain a higher financial return.



      (2)   There are unique circumstances or conditions applicable
to the property that do not exist generally throughout the village.



      (3)   Granting the variance will not alter the essential
character of the area surrounding where the approved land use exists and will
not create a hazard or public nuisance.



      (4)   Granting the variance will not be contrary to the public
purpose and the general intent and purpose of this chapter.



   (D)   The Zoning Board of Appeals will grant no variance when the
sign is for a use that is not permitted in a zoning district by right, by
special land use approval, or by nonconformity.



   (E)   In the event of a nonconforming sign that is removed for any
reason (storm, road construction, and the like) and a request from the owner,
the Administrative Official shall conduct an administrative variance review
and issue a decision on the request. The Administrator shall follow the
criteria set forth in § 157.244(A) to make a determination on the request.
There shall be no fee for the administrative variance. The applicant has the
right to appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals in the manner
specified in division (A) above.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03) (Ord. 272, passed 1-28-1997)



§ 154.13  INSPECTIONS, REMOVAL, AND SAFETY.



   (A)   All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair
and in safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition.



   (B)   The Building Official for the village is hereby directed and
authorized to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   If the Administrative Official determines that a sign
or a component thereof is in violation of this chapter, then he or she shall
notify the owner of the premises where said sign is located and the user of
the offending sign, if the owner of the premises and the sign owner are
different.



      (2)   The Administrative Official shall set forth in writing
the provisions of the chapter which are being violated and said notice shall
advise the owner of the premises and the sign owner that the offending sign
must be removed within 24 hours or the Administrative Official may cause the
sign to be removed and any costs thereof shall be assessed against the
property; either real estate, personal property, or both.



   (D)   (1)   If the Village Clerk-Treasurer receives notice within
the 24-hour period (Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excepted) of an appeal
of the Administrative Official’s decision, then the matter shall be
submitted to the Village Council and its decision shall be final.



      (2)   If the Council affirms the Administrative Official’s
decision to remove the sign, then the sign must be removed within 24 hours or
the Administrative Official may cause the sign to be removed and the costs
thereof shall be assessed against the property; either real estate, personal
property, or both.



   (E)   Any cost for enforcement incurred by the village shall be paid
by the owner of the sign found in violation or, upon default thereof, by the
owner of the property on which the sign is located. If there is a failure of
the owner to reimburse the village for the costs of enforcement, the owner of
the property shall be billed for the cost in the same manner as other taxes.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies, and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $100.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall
be known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the third offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, Ch. 6-03)  (Ord. 126, passed 2-2-1982; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 139, passed 6-12-1984; Ord. 147, passed 4-9-1985; Ord. 155,
passed 12-16-1986; Ord. 162, passed 6-23-1987; Ord. 183, passed 5-9-1989;
Ord. 184, passed 5-9-1989; Ord. 247, passed 7-5-1994; Ord. 272, passed
1-28-1997; Ord. 306, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 317, passed 11-17-1998; Ord. 370,
passed 12-23-2004)



CHAPTER 155:  HISTORIC DISTRICTS



Section



   155.01   Title



   155.02   Historic preservation



   155.03   Purpose of chapter



   155.04   Definitions



   155.05   Historic District Study Committee



   155.06   Creation of Historic District



   155.07   Village Historic District Commission



   155.08   Permits required



   155.09   Acceptance of gifts, grants, or bequests



   155.10   Public acquisition and ownership of resources



   155.11   Certificate of appropriateness, notice to proceed, denial;
filing with Building Inspector; notice to applicant of appeal rights;
assistance



   155.12   Prior permits



   155.13   Appeals



   155.14   Public nuisance



   155.15   Administration



 



   155.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations, see Ch. 150



   Zoning, see Ch. 157



§ 155.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Holly Historic
District Ordinance”.



(1984 Code, 6-04-010)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.02  HISTORIC PRESERVATION.



   Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose in the
village.



(1984 Code, 6-04-020)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.03  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.



   The purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Safeguard the heritage of the village by preserving one or
more historic districts in the village that reflect elements of the
village’s history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture;



   (B)   Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the
surrounding areas;



   (C)   Foster civic beauty;



   (D)   Strengthen the local economy; and



   (E)   Promote the use of historic districts for the education,
pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the village.



(1984 Code, 6-04-030)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 130, passed
11-9-1982; Ord. 143, passed 7-24-1984; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERATION. Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.



   BUREAU. The Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a
resource.



   COMMISSION. The Historic District Commission created by § 155.07.



   COMMITTEE. A Historic District Study Committee appointed pursuant to §
155.05.



   DEMOLITION. The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of
a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.



   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT. Neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a
resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource
or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.



   DENIAL. The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture.



   HISTORIC PRESENTATION. The identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering, or culture.



   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A publicly- or privately-owned building structure,
site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a
community within this state, or of the United States.



   NOTICE TO PROCEED. The written permission to issue a permit for work
that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a
finding under § 155.08(F).



   OPEN SPACE. Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal
or human-made landscaped area that provides a connective length or a buffer
between other resources.



   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time,
in its exterior condition. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not change the external
appearance of the resource, except through the elimination of the usual and
expected effects of weathering. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not constitute work
for purposes of this act.



   PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area, or group of areas not necessarily
having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is
under review by a committee for a Standing Committee for the purpose of
making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic
district or added to an established historic district.



   REPAIR. To restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound
condition by any process. A REPAIR that changes the external appearance of a
resource constitutes work for purposes of this chapter.



   RESOURCE. One or more publicly- or privately-owned historic or
non-historic building, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces
located within a historic district.



   STANDING COMMITTEE. A permanent body established by the Village Council
pursuant to § 155.05 to conduct the activities of a Historic District Study
Committee on a continuing basis.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Holly.



   WORK. Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation,
or demolition.



(1984 Code, 6-04-040)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.05  HISTORIC DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   (1)   The village, pursuant to Ord. 76, adopted December
12, 1978, established a Village Historic District Study Committee consisting
of seven members appointed by the Village Council. The Committee contained
representation from any then existing historical preservation society in the
village. The Committee conducted studies and research and made a report on
the historical significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites,
objects, and surroundings in the village.



      (2)   The report contained recommendations concerning the
areas to be included in a proposed historic district. Copies of the report
were transmitted for review and recommendations to the Village Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, to the State Historical
Commission, and to the State Historical Advisory Council. Sixty days after
the transmittal, the Committee held a public hearing thereon after due
notice, which included a written notice to the owners of all properties
proposed to be included in such districts. The Committee submitted a final
report with its recommendations and those of the Village Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, together with the draft of a proposed
ordinance establishing an historic district or districts to the Village
Council and to the Village Historic District Commission.



   (B)   (1)   The Village Council may, at any time, establish by
ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts
previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing
historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before
establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a Historic
District Study Committee appointed by the Village Council shall, except as
provided in division (C) below, comply with the procedures set forth in
division (D) below, shall consider any previously written Committee reports
pertinent to the proposed action. To conduct these activities, the village
may retain the initial Committee, establish a Standing Committee, or
establish a Committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then
be dissolved.



      (2)   The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Village Council.
The Committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall
contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic
preservation organizations. If the Committee is to be a Standing Committee,
its members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except the initial
appointments of two of the members shall be for one year, and two other
members shall be for two years.



   (C)   If considering elimination of a historic district, a Committee
shall follow the procedures set forth in this division (C) for issuing a
preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but
with the intent of showing one or more of the following:



      (1)   The historic district has lost those physical
characteristics that enabled establishment of the district;



      (2)   The historic district was not significant in the way
previously defined; or



      (3)   The historic district was established pursuant to
defective procedures.



   (D)   The Committee shall do all of the following:



      (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within
each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved
by the Bureau;



      (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic
district and the historic resources located within that district;



      (3)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic
resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic
resources, the Committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for
evaluation issued by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of
Resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36
C.F.R. pt. 60, and criteria established or approved by the Bureau, if any;



      (4)   Prepare a Preliminary Historic District Study Committee
report that addresses at a minimum all of the following:



         (a)   The charge of the Committee;



         (b)   The composition of the Committee membership;



         (c)   The historic district or districts studies;



         (d)   The boundaries for each proposed historic district
in writing and on maps;



         (e)   The history of each proposed historic district; and



         (f)   The significance of each district as a whole, as
well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent
the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the
evaluation criteria.



      (5)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the village’s Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, to the Bureau, to the State Historical Commission,
and to the State Historic Preservation Review Board;



      (6)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the
public pursuant to division (D)(9) below;



      (7)   (a)   Not less than 60 calendar days after the
transmittal of the preliminary report, the Committee shall hold a public
hearing in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261
to 15.275, as amended. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the
hearing shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275, as amended.



         (b)   Written notification shall be mailed by
first-class mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the
owners of properties within the proposed historic district as listed on the
tax rolls of the village;



      (8)   After the date of the public hearing the Committee and
the Village Council shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise
authorized by the Village Council, to take the following actions:



         (a)   The Committee shall prepare and submit a final
report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the
Village Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, to the
Village Council. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district or
districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or
ordinances.



         (b)   1.   After receiving a final report that
recommends the establishment of a historic district or districts, the Village
Council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or
ordinances.



            2.   If the Village Council passes an ordinance or
ordinances establishing one or more historic districts, the Village Council
shall file a copy of that ordinance or those ordinances, including a legal
description of the property or properties located within the historic
district or districts, with the Register of Deeds.



            3.   The Village Council shall not pass an
ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after
a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as
listed on the tax rolls of the village, have approved the establishment of
the historic district pursuant to a written petition.



      (9)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of,
or retained by a Committee in the performance of an official function shall
be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as amended.



(1984 Code, 6-04-050) (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.06  CREATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT.



   As of September 7, 1993, the following historic districts have been
established.



   (A)   Historic District Number One. The following buildings
designated hereby by name, street addresses, and Sidwell tax numbers and
plats comprise Historic District Number One.



 


Name

 

Address

 

Property ID No.






Bernie Gundloch

 

307 Martha Street

 

01-34-303-008




Bobbie Benscoter

 

204 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-426-010




Bobbie Benscoter

 

Old Mill Building

 

01-33-426-009




Brian Gudith

 

101 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-001




C&O Railroad

 

Crapo Park

 

01-34-306-002




C&O Railroad

 

RR

 

01-34-501-006




C&O Railroad-J910

 

(Building)

 

01-34-305-003




C&O Railroad-J910

 

Depot

 

01-34-306-001




Cam Stoner

 

121 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-011




Carl Coleman

 

101 N. Saginaw

 

01-33-283-010




Carl Coleman

 

102 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-427-004




Carl Coleman

 

103 N. Saginaw

 

01-33-283-010




Celia Evans

 

112 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-427-007




Charles Phillips

 

102 Oakland

 

01-33-279-012




Clifford R. Snitgen

 

208 Washington

 

01-34-306-006




Detroit Model Railroad Club

 

104 N. Saginaw

 

01-34-151-036




Donald Campbell

 

115 Battle Alley

 

01-34-301-020




Donald MacKenzie

 

115 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-008




Donald Winglemire

 

107 N. Saginaw

 

01-33-283-014




Eilene Merrill

 

210 Washington

 

01-34-306-007




Estate of Erma White

 

208 S. Broad Street

 

01-34-304-009




Evelyn Raskin

 

203 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-304-001




Evelyn Raskin

 

216 S. Broad Street

 

01-34-304-013




George Kutlenios

 

109 Battle Alley

 

01-34-301-014




Gerald Sixeby

 

105 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-003




Harold S. Groves

 

119 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-010




Harold S. Groves

 

117 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-009




Holly SDA Church

 

205 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-304-004




Holly Township Hall

 

102 Civic Drive

 

01-33-427-011




Irving A. Mirsky

 

113 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-007




James Hilty

 

108 Battle Alley

 

01-34-304-007




James Hilty

 

214 S. Broad Street

 

01-34-304-011




Jerry Coale

 

215 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-304-005




Jerry Coale

 

215 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-304-006




Jerry D. Laatsch

 

103 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-002




John L. Montooth

 

106 Battle Alley

 

01-34-304-003




John Lauve

 

102 W. Maple

 

01-33-283-009




John Lauve

 

107 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-025




John Pagen

 

113 Battle Alley

 

01-34-301-019




Joseph Yuhas

 

204 Washington

 

01-34-306-004




Les Sher

 

110 Battle Alley

 

01-34-304-008




Loyal Order of Moose #11

 

210 S. Broad Street

 

01-34-304-010




Mark Bullock

 

106 John Street

 

01-34-302-008




Mark Carney

 

108 Washington

 

01-34-303-009




Mark Engleman

 

125 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-013




Mark D. Engelman

 

113 N. Saginaw

 

01-33-283-013




McKay’s Hardware

 

118 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-427-013




Pat Haney

 

206 Washington

 

01-34-306-005




Paul J. Arnott

 

115 N. Saginaw

 

01-33-283-005




Paul Wilmot

 

111 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-006




Raymond Rath

 

110 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-427-006




Richael Harris

 

104 John Street

 

01-34-302-007




Robert C. Bordeaux

 

202 Washington

 

01-34-306-003




Roger Studley

 

101 E. Maple

 

01-34-151-035




Russell A. Rau

 

100 Oakland

 

01-33-279-016




Samie Cody

 

104 Battle Alley

 

01-34-304-002




Sybil Winegarden

 

123 S. Saginaw

 

01-34-301-012




Trains ‘N” Things

 

108 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-427-005




Village of Holly

 

Parking Area

 

01-33-426-008




Village of Holly

 

202 S. Saginaw

 

01-33-426-005




William Tyler

 

201 N. Saginaw

 

01-33-279-015





 



   (B)   Historic District Number Two. The following buildings
designated hereby by name, street address, and Sidwell tax numbers comprise
Historic District Number Two.



 


Name

 

Address

 

Property ID#






C.J. McArthur

 

411 East Maple

 

01-34-176-019




Carl Smeltekop

 

210 College Street

 

01-34-329-016




Charles Farmer

 

202 College Street

 

01-34-329-012




Daniel J. Nuckolls

 

208 College Street

 

01-34-329-015




David Eyberse

 

120 College Street

 

01-34-326-038




David L. Taube

 

705 East Maple

 

01-34-178-032




David Summers

 

501 East Maple

 

01-34-177-017




Dennis E. Wagester

 

204 College Street

 

01-34-329-013




Dennis P. Rates

 

511 East Maple

 

01-34-177-038




Dewayne Edick

 

512 East Maple

 

01-34-326-015




Donald Bell, II

 

201 College Street

 

01-34-330-001




Donald R. McGuffin

 

108 College Street

 

01-34-326-032




Ellen Mills

 

506 East Maple

 

01-34-326-013




Frank M. Regan

 

701 East Maple

 

01-34-178-028




Frank Richmond

 

601 East Maple

 

01-34-178-025




Frederick R. Schwartz

 

510 East Maple

 

01-34-326-014




Gary Jackson

 

114 College Street

 

01-34-326-035




Gerald Frawley

 

416 East Maple

 

01-34-326-039




Helen D. Bates

 

411 E. Sherman Street

 

01-34-329-020




Helen D. Bates

 

212 College Street

 

01-34-329-021




Hugh R. Ambler

 

118 College Street

 

01-34-326-043




John Damanskas

 

112 College Street

 

01-34-326-034




John McTaggart

 

502 East Maple

 

01-34-326-040




John P. Burek

 

602 East Maple

 

01-34-327-001




Joseph E. Herronen

 

503 East Maple

 

01-34-177-018




Joyce Walters

 

608 East Maple

 

01-34-327-004




Katherine Holledy

 

415 East Maple

 

01-34-176-021




Kendall T. Dow

 

104 College Street

 

01-34-326-030




Kenneth G. Rugg

 

708 East Maple

 

01-34-328-004




Margaret Tucker

 

110 College Street

 

01-34-326-033




Marie Fairman

 

106 College Street

 

01-34-326-031




Marsha L. Hayes

 

704 East Maple

 

01-34-328-020




Melvin Crider

 

706 East Maple

 

01-34-328-003




Melvin Taylor

 

507 East Maple

 

01-34-177-020




Michael Ellsworth

 

206 College Street

 

01-34-329-014




Patrick W. Ogle

 

504 East Maple

 

01-34-326-041




Raymond Hezs

 

413 East Maple

 

01-34-176-020




Robert Campbell

 

505 East Maple

 

01-34-177-019




Robert Freiberg

 

414 East Maple

 

01-34-326-007




Roger Lemon

 

116 College Street

 

01-34-326-036




Steve Pascot

 

412 East Maple

 

01-34-326-006




Thomas Grady

 

607 East Maple

 

01-34-178-027




Travers VanDeMerwe

 

702 East Maple

 

01-34-328-001




Val Devroy

 

710 East Maple

 

01-34-328-005




Village of Holly

 

Driveway

 

01-34-326-012




Village of Holly

 

504 1/2 East Maple (HVA)

 

01-34-326-011




William Burke

 

703 East Maple

 

01-34-178-029




William T. Pearson

 

102 College Street

 

01-34-326-029




Winston C. Kemp

 

606 East Maple

 

01-34-327-003





 



(1984 Code, 6-04-060)  (Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.07  VILLAGE HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Village Historic District Commission shall consist of
seven members who shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice
and consent of the Village Council. Each member of the Commission shall
reside within the village. A majority of the members shall have a clearly
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Members shall
be appointed for three- year terms, except for the first appointment, which
shall contain staggered terms for purposes of continuity. The first
Commission shall contain two members appointed for one year, two members
appointed for two years and three members appointed for three years.



   (B)   A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled within 60 calendar
days by an appointment by the Village President with the advice and consent
of the Village Council. At least two members shall be appointed from a list
of citizens submitted by one or more duly organized local historic
preservation organizations, and at least one member shall be a graduate of an
accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural
experience or who is an architect registered in this state, if such person
resides in the village and is available for appointment.



(1984 Code, 6-04-070)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 85, passed
10-23-1979; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.08  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting
the exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district
or, if required under division (D) below, work affecting the interior
arrangements of a resource is performed within a historic district. The
person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an
application for a permit with the Building Inspector.



      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of an application, the Building
Inspector shall immediately refer the application, together with all required
supporting materials that make the application complete, to the Commission.



         (b)   A permit shall not be issued and proposed work
shall not proceed until the Commission has acted on the application by
issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed
in this chapter.



         (c)   The applicant shall pay such fee as shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Village Council.



   (B)   (1)   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the
Commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State
Historic Preservation Review Board of the State Historical Commission within
the Department of State, as provided by Public Act 169 of 1970, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 399.201 through 399.215, as amended.



      (2)   The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the
decision is furnished to the applicant.



   (C)   (1)   (a)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall
follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s standards for rehabilitation
and guidelines for rehabilitating historic districts, as set forth in 36
C.F.R. pt. 67.



         (b)   Design review standards and guidelines that
address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by
the Commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the
Secretary of Interior’s standards and guidelines and are established or
approved by the Bureau.



      (2)   The Commission shall also consider all of the following:



         (a)   The historic or architectural value and
significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of
the surrounding area;



         (b)   The relationship of any architectural features of
the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area;



         (c)   The general compatibility of the design,
arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used; and



         (d)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the
Commission finds relevant.



   (D)   The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior
features of a resource and shall not review and act upon interior
arrangements, unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior
of the resource. The Commission shall not disapprove an application due to
considerations not prescribed in division (C) above.



   (E)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the
exterior of a resource, the Commission considers valuable to the village, the
state, or the nation, and the Commission determines that the alteration or
loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the
village, the state, or the nation, the Commission shall attempt to establish
with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation
of the resource.



   (F)   Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the
issuance of a notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following
conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding
of the Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of
the following conditions:



      (1)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the
public or to the structure’s occupants;



      (2)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement
program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the
applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning
approvals, financing, and environmental clearances;



      (3)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial
hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other
events beyond the owner’s control created the hardship, and all feasible
alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering
the resource for sale at its market value or moving the resource to a vacant
site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the
owner; and



      (4)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the
majority of the community.



   (G)   The business that the Commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the
Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to
15.275, as amended. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting
shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267 of 1976, being,
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275, as amended. A meeting agenda shall be part of
the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be
reviewed or considered by the Commission.



   (H)   The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions,
proceedings, and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession
of, or retained by the Commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of
Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to
15.246, as amended.



   (I)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and
shall adopt design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to
carry out its duties under this Act.



   (J)   (1)   The Commission may delegate the issuance of
certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes or work to its
staff, to the Building Inspector, or to another delegated authority. The
Commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific written
standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this division (J).



      (2)   On at least a quarterly basis, the Commission shall
review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by it
staff, the inspector, or another authority to determine whether or not the
delegated responsibilities should be continued.



   (K)   Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource
within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its
review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission
may do either of the following:



      (1)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all
conditions contributing to demolition by neglect; and



      (2)   (a)   If the owner does not make repairs within a
reasonable time, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and make
such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of
the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the local unit
as a special assessment against the property.



         (b)   The Commission or its agents may enter the
property for purposes of the section upon obtaining an order from the Circuit
Court.



   (L)   (1)   (a)   When work has been done upon a resource
without a permit, and the Commission finds that the work does not qualify for
a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to
restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the
inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a
certificate of appropriateness.



         (b)   If the owner does not comply with the restoration
or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek
an order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource
to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a
certificate of appropriateness.



      (2)   (a)   If the owner does not comply or cannot comply
with the order of the court, the Commission or its agents may enter the
property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former
condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with the court’s order.



         (b)   The costs of the work shall be charged to the
owner, and may be levied by the village as a special assessment against the
property. When acting pursuant to an order of the Circuit Court, the
Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section.



(1984 Code, 6-04-080)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 85, passed
10-23-1979; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.09  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS, GRANTS, OR BEQUESTS.



   (A)   The village may accept gifts, grants, or bequests from the
state or federal government for historic preservation purposes, may
participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation,
and may accept public or private gifts, grants, or bequests for historic
preservation purposes.



   (B)   Further, the Village Council may appoint the Commission or the
Standing Committee, if one is appointed, to administer on behalf of the
village said gifts, grants, or bequests for the purposes herein provided.



(1984 Code, 6-04-090)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 85, passed
10-23-1979; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.10  PUBLIC ACQUISITION AND OWNERSHIP OF RESOURCES.



   (A)   (1)   If all efforts by the Historic District Commission to
preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the Village Council that
public ownership is the most suitable, the Village Council, if considered to
be in the public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds,
public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue
bonds.



      (2)   The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation
of the Commission or Standing Committee.



   (B)   (1)   The Commission or Standing Committee is responsible
for maintaining publicly-owned resources using its own funds, if not
specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for
that use by the Village Council.



      (2)   Upon recommendation of the Commission or Standing
Committee, the village may sell resources acquired under this section with
protective easements included in the property transfer document, if
appropriate.



(1984 Code, 6-04-100)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.11  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, NOTICE TO PROCEED, DENIAL; FILING
WITH BUILDING INSPECTOR; NOTICE TO APPLICANT OF APPEAL RIGHTS; ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   The Commission shall file certificates of
appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits
with the Building Inspector or other delegated authority. A permit shall not
be issued until the Commission has acted as prescribed by this chapter.



         (b)   If a permit application is denied, the decision
shall be binding on the Building Inspector or other authority.



         (c)   A denial shall be accompanied with a written
explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate,
a notice that an application may be resubmitted for Commission review when
suggested changes have been made.



      (2)   (a)   The denial shall also include notification of
the applicants rights of appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review
Board and to the Circuit Court.



         (b)   The failure of the Commission to act within 60
calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the
Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant
and the Commission, shall be considered to constitute approval.



   (B)   Public officials and employees of the village shall provide
information and records to the District Study Committee, the Commission, and
the Standing Committee, and shall meet with those bodies upon request to
assist with their activities.



(1984 Code, 6-04-110)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.12  PRIOR PERMIT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district or to prevent
work on any resource under a permit duly issued by the building Inspector of
other duly delegated authority before the adoption of the ordinance amending
this chapter.



(1984 Code, 6-04-120)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.13  APPEALS.



   Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the
local unit, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally
aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission may appeal the
decision to the Circuit Court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a
decision rendered under § 155.08 may not appeal to the Circuit Court without
first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation
Review Board under § 155.08(B).



(1984 Code, 6-04-130)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 85, passed
10-23-1979; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993)



§ 155.14  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any violation of the terms of this chapter shall also constitute a
nuisance and may be abated in the manner provided by law.



(1984 Code, 6-04-150)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.15  ADMINISTRATION.



   The historic districts of the village shall be administered in
accordance with the provisions this chapter (Ord. 76) commonly referred to as
the Village Historic District Ordinance, as amended.



(1984 Code, 6-04-160)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 239, passed
9-7-1993)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty clause. Any violation of this chapter is
hereby designated as a municipal civil infraction and violators shall be
subject to the civil fines, sanctions, remedies. and procedures as set forth
in §§ 10.99, 32.20 through 32.23, and state law.



   (B)   Fines paid at Violations Bureau.



      (1)   If the civil fine is paid at the Village Municipal
Violations Bureau, the initial fine shall be $50.



         (a)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the initial infraction, the civil fine shall be $100. (This shall
be known as the second offense.)



         (b)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the second offense, the civil fine shall be $250. (This shall be
known as the third offense.)



         (c)   In the case of another offense within one year of
the date of the third offense, the civil fine shall be $500. (This shall be
known as the fourth offense.) All subsequent offenses shall be $500.



      (2)   The Village Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to
accept civil fines in the amounts specified. In case of payment at the
Violations Bureau, no costs shall be imposed or collected.



(1984 Code, 6-04-140)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1978; Ord. 143, passed
7-24-1984; Ord. 239, passed 9-7-1993; Ord. 305, passed 7-14-1998)



CHAPTER 156:  FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



Section



   156.01   Intent



   156.02   Definitions



   156.03   Delineation of flood hazard overlay zone



   156.04   Development permit



   156.05   General standards for flood hazard reduction



   156.06   Specific base flood elevation standards



   156.07   Mobile home standards



   156.08   Standards for areas of shallow flooding



   156.09   Construction standards



   156.10   Disclaimer of liability



§ 156.01  INTENT.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to significantly reduce
hazards to persons and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in
the village and to comply with the provisions and requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accordance with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and rules and
regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, as published in the 41 F.R. 207, Tuesday,
October 26, 1976, and re-designated as 44 F.R. 31177, May 31, 1979.



   (B)   Further, the objective of this chapter include:



      (1)   The protection of human life, health, and property from
the dangerous and damaging effects of flood conditions;



      (2)   The minimization of public expenditures for flood
control projects; rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding;
repair of flood-damaged public facilities and utilities; and the
redevelopment of flood damaged homes, neighborhoods, commercial, and
industrial areas;



      (3)   The prevention of private and public economic loss and
social disruption as a result of flood conditions;



      (4)   The maintenance of stable development patterns not
subject to the blighting influence of flood damage;



      (5)   To ensure that the public has access to information
indicating the location of land areas subject to periodic flooding; and



      (6)   To preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and
discharge a base flood.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-010)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Land which on the basis of available floodplain
information is subject



to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given area.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazards have been designated as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see definition of FLOOD).



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas designated in the flood insurance study which must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood.



   HARMFUL INCREASE. An unnaturally high stage on a river, stream, or lake
which causes, or may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal
injury, or damage to land or water resources.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, gas, or liquid storage facility, as well as a mobile home.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:



         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or



         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition,
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, flood, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure.



      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project of improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-020)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.03  DELINEATION OF FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE.



   (A)   The flood hazard area zone shall overlay existing zoning
districts delineated on the official village zoning map. The boundaries of
the flood hazard area zone shall coincide with the boundaries of the areas
indicated as within the limits of the 100-year flood in the report entitled
“The Flood Insurance Study for the Village of Holly”, dated December 4,
1984, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and
floodway maps. Within the flood hazard area zone, a regulatory floodway shall
be designated. The boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall coincide with
the floodway boundaries indicated on the flood boundary and floodway map. The
study and accompanying maps are adopted by reference, appended, and declared
to be a part of this chapter (copies are on file in the office of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer).



   (B)   Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard
area zone boundary, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute in
accordance with the zoning ordinance.



   (C)   In addition to other requirements of Ch. 157 applicable to
development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the
requirements of this chapter shall be necessary for all development occurring
within the flood hazard area zone. Conflicts between the requirements of this
chapter and other requirements of Ch. 157 or any other ordinance shall be
resolved in favor of this chapter, except where the conflicting requirements
is more stringent and would further the objectives of this chapter. In such
cases the more stringent requirements shall be applied.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-030)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.04  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   Development, including the erection of structures and placement of
mobile homes, within a flood hazard area, shall not occur, except upon
issuance of a zoning compliance permit in accordance with the requirements of
Ch. 157 and the following standards:



   (A)   The requirements of this chapter shall be met;



   (B)   The requirements of the underlying zoning districts and
applicable general provisions Ch. 157 shall be met; and



   (C)   All necessary development permits shall have been issued by
appropriate local, state, and federal authorities, including a floodplain
permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the State Department of
Natural Resources under authority of Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A.
§ 324.32803, as amended by Public Act 167 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 323.1
to 323.5b. Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to the issuance
of a zoning compliance permit, a letter from the issuing agency indicating
intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning compliance shall be
acceptable.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-040)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.05  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements within a
flood hazard area, including the placement of prefabricated buildings and
mobile homes, shall:



      (1)   Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage; or



      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.



   (B)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.



   (C)   (1)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from systems into floodwaters.



      (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.



   (D)   All public utilities and facilities shall be designed,
constructed, and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage.



   (E)   Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.



   (F)   The zoning administrative official or his or her
representative shall review development proposals to determine compliance
with the standards in this section, and shall transmit his or her
determination to the Zoning Administrator.



   (G)   Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots
which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (H)   The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse not subject to state or federal regulations designed to ensure
flood-carrying capacity shall be maintained.



   (I)   (1)   Available flood hazard data from federal, state, or
other sources shall be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this
section.



      (2)   Data furnished by the Federal Insurance Administration
shall take precedence over data from other sources.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-050)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.06  SPECIFIC BASE FLOOD ELEVATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   On the basis of the most recent available base flood elevation
data, the following standards shall apply in the flood hazard area zone.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to one foot above the base flood level.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall have either:



         (a)   The lowest flood, including basement, elevated to
one foot above the base flood level; or



         (b)   Be constructed such that below base flood level,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this division
(A)(2) are satisfied, and that the flood-proofing methods employed are
adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and
uplift forces; and other factors associated with a base flood in the location
of the structure. Such certification shall be submitted as provided in Ch.
157 and shall indicate the elevation to which the structure is flood-proofed.



   (B)   The most recent base flood elevation data received from the
Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from other
sources.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-060)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.07  MOBILE HOME STANDARDS.



   (A)   All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties in
accordance with the following specifications.



      (1)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, except that on mobile homes less than 50 feet in length one tie
per side shall be required.



      (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home
with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that on
mobile homes less than 50 feet in length four ties per side shall be required.



      (3)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable
of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.



      (4)   All additions to a mobile home shall be similarly
anchored.



   (B)   An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and
escape routes shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer for mobile home
parks and mobile home subdivisions.



   (C)   Mobile homes within zones A1-30 on the flood insurance rate
map shall be located in accordance with the following standards.



      (1)   All mobile homes shall be placed on stands or lots which
are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the
mobile home will be at or above the base flood level.



      (2)   Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and
access for a mobile home hauler shall be provided.



      (3)   In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be
large enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable
soil no more than ten feet apart; and reinforcement shall be provided for
piers more than six feet above-ground level.



      (4)   In mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions which
exist at the time this division (C)(4) is adopted, where repair,
reconstruction, or improvement of streets, utilities, and pads equals or
exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the
repair, the standards in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(3) above, shall be
complied with.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-070)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.08  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING.



   The following standards shall apply in areas of shallow flooding
denoted as AO zones on the FIRM.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the crown of the nearest street to or above the depth number
specified on the FIRM.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall either:



      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the crown of the nearest street to or above the depth number specified
on the FIRM; or



      (2)   Be flood-proofed together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities to the level specified in division (B)(1) above in
accordance with the standards in § 156.06(A).



(1984 Code, § 6-06-080)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.09  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   (1)   New construction, substantial improvements, and all
other development, including fill, shall be prohibited within zones numbered
A1-30 on the FIRM, except where it is demonstrated to the Zoning
Administrator that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not
harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood.



      (2)   In determining whether a harmful increase will occur,
compliance with Public Act 451 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 323.1 to 323.12,
as amended by Public Act 167 of 1968, being M.C.L.A.§ 324.32803, shall be
required; provided, that the allowable increase shall not exceed one foot.
The provisions of this section shall not apply with the regulatory floodway.
The provisions of division (B) below shall be applied to land situated within
the regulatory floodway.



   (B)   All development occurring within the regulatory floodway shall
comply with the following standards.



      (1)   (a)   Encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be
prohibited.



         (b)   Exception to this prohibition shall only be made
upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the department of
natural resources that the development proposed will not result in any
increases in flood levels during a base flood discharge, and compliance with
Public Act 245 of 1929, being M.C.L.A. §§ 323.1 to 323.12, as amended by
Public Act 167 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 323.1 to 323.5b



      (2)   The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited,
except in mobile home parks and subdivisions which exist at the time this
chapter is adopted.



      (3)   Development which is permitted in the regulatory
floodway shall meet the requirements of §§ 156.04 through 156.07.



   (C)   The uses of land permitted in an underlying zoning district
shall not be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway,
except upon compliance with the provisions of this section.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-090)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



§ 156.10  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   (1)   The degree of flood protection required by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon
engineering and scientific methods of study.



      (2)   Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.



      (3)   Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural
causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. Approval
of the use of land under this chapter shall not be considered as a guarantee
or warranty of safety from flood damage.



      (4)   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood
hazard area will be free from flood damage.



   (B)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the
village or any officer or employees thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.



(1984 Code, § 6-06-100)  (Ord. 145, passed 11-20-1984)



CHAPTER 157:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   157.001   Short title



   157.002   Purpose



   157.003   Conflicting regulations



   157.004   Vested rights; effects on projects when significant
construction has begun and site plans approved prior to effective date



   157.005   Validity



   157.006   Illustrations and text



   157.007   Construction of language



   157.008   Definitions



   157.009   Schedule of regulations



   157.010   Administration and enforcement



   157.011   Amendments




General Regulations




   157.025   Introduction



   157.026   Withholding of approval



   157.027   Voting place



   157.028   Lot area



   157.029   Principle building, structure, or use



   157.030   Single-family dwelling design standards



   157.031   Regulations on use of building for dwelling



   157.032   Determination of similar uses



   157.033   Prohibited uses



   157.034   Essential public services



   157.035   Accessory buildings



   157.036   Waste receptacles



   157.037   Fences



   157.038   Reception antennas



   157.039   Accessory use and building parking



   157.040   Natural features preservation



   157.041   Minimum frontage on public street



   157.042   Calculation of building lot area



   157.043   Exterior lighting



   157.044   Entrances features



   157.045   Building grades



   157.046   Excavation of holes



   157.047   Buildings to be moved



   157.048   Requirements for environmental impact assessment



   157.049   Clear vision zone



   157.050   Access through yards



   157.051   Temporary uses and seasonal or special uses



   157.052   Maintenance of commonly-owned private facilities



   157.053   Performance standards for sound, vibration, odor gases,
and the like



   157.054   Land divisions not requiring platting (lot splits)



   157.055   Private road and driveway standards



   157.056   State-licensed residential child and adult care facilities



   157.057   Wireless communications towers and antennas



   157.058   Little free libraries




Zoning Districts and Maps




   157.070   Zoning districts and maps generally



   157.071   R1A and R1B Single-Family Residential Districts



   157.072   RM - Moderate-Density Residential Districts



   157.073   MHP - Mobile Home Park Districts



   157.074   NOC - Neighborhood Office Commercial Districts



   157.075   O - Office Districts



   157.076   CBD - Central Business District



   157.077   C - Commercial District



   157.078   M - Industrial Districts



   157.079   Waterfront Overlay District



   157.080   PUD - Planned Unit Development District




PUD-Application and Review Procedure




   157.095   Generally



   157.096   Rezoning to a PUD designation



   157.097   Conceptual submittal requirements



   157.098   Standards for approval of conceptual PUD site plan



   157.099   Expiration



   157.100   Process for final site plans



   157.101   Final PUD site plan submittal procedures and approval



   157.102   Final PUD agreement



   157.103   Schedule of construction



   157.104   Development of the PUD; proportional standard



   157.105   Appeals and violations



   157.106   Changes and amendment to the PUD



   157.107   Phased projects



   157.108   Condominium projects




Special Land Uses




   157.120   Intent



   157.121   Application, review, and approval procedures; appeals



   157.122   General review standards for all special land uses



   157.123   Conditions of approval



   157.124   Validity of permit



   157.125   Inspections



   157.126   Revocation



   157.127   Amendments to special land use permits



   157.128   Special land use expansions



   157.129   Restrictions on re-submittal of a special land use permit



   157.130   Special land use specific requirements




Parking and Loading




   157.145   Off-street parking requirements



   157.146   Parking units of measurement



   157.147   Stacking space requirements



   157.148   Barrier-free parking requirements



   157.149   Off-street parking space layouts, standards, construction,
and maintenance



   157.150   Off-street loading and unloading



   157.151   Parking and storage of recreational vehicles




Landscaping Standards




   157.165   Intent



   157.166   Requirements and timing of landscape



   157.167   Special provisions for existing sites



   157.168   Required landscaping along public streets



   157.169   Interior landscaping



   157.170   Parking lot landscaping



   157.171   Waste receptacle and mechanical equipment screening



   157.172   Plant materials and minimum spacing



   157.173   General layout and design standards



   157.174   Incentives to preserve existing trees



   157.175   Walls and buffer strips between land uses



   157.176   Waiver or modification of standards for special situations




Site Plan Review and Approval




   157.190   Intent



   157.191   Site plan and approval by Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission required



   157.192   Site plan not required



   157.193   Application information



   157.194   Site plan information



   157.195   Pre-application conference



   157.196   Site plan review



   157.197   Criteria for site plan approval



   157.198   Village design standards



   157.199   Length of time approval valid



   157.200   Conformity to approved site plans; sanctions for not
conforming to approved site plan



   157.201   Architectural Review Committee



   157.202   Submittal of as built plans



   157.203   Performance guarantees



   157.204   Environmental impact assessment




Nonconformance




   157.215   Intent



   157.216   Definitions



   157.217   Nonconforming lots



   157.218   Nonconforming uses of land



   157.219   Nonconforming structures



   157.220   Nonconforming uses of structures and land



   157.221   Nonconforming sites



   157.222   Repairs and maintenance



   157.223   Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses



   157.224   Change of tenancy or ownership



   157.225   Declaration of nonconforming building or use




Board of Appeals




   157.240   Creation and membership



   157.241   Meetings



   157.242   Application and procedures



   157.243   Jurisdiction



   157.244   Standards for variances and appeals



   157.245   Orders



   157.246   Notice



   157.247   Order validity; jurisdiction of the Board




Condominium Development Standards




   157.260   Intent



   157.261   Application of requirements



   157.262   Approval of plans



   157.263   Streets and necessary easements



   157.264   Subdivision of unit sites



   157.265   Water and wastewater



   157.266   Master deed



   157.267   As built plan and occupancy



   157.268   Final by-laws, consolidated master deed, and site plan



 



   157.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 157.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Village of Holly
Zoning Ordinance”.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is based on the Village Master Plan adopted by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, which provides
goals, objectives, and a future land use map for the village.



   (B)   This chapter is intended to implement the Master Plan by
regulating the use of land, buildings, and structures to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare by accomplishing the following:



      (1)   Establish zoning districts and uniform regulations
applicable to each district governing the use of the land, and dimensions for
building, and site development with such minimum regulations as are deemed
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Accommodate and promote land uses which are compatible
with the village’s character and conserve the property values and long term
stability of residential neighborhoods, community facilities, the downtown
area, commercial districts, and industrial areas;



      (3)   Encourage use of the lands and natural resources in
accordance with their character and capability. This chapter acknowledges the
importance of these features on the long term economic climate of all uses in
the village and the overall quality of life for village residents;



      (4)   Limit or prohibit improper use of land;



      (5)   Reduce hazards to life and property;



      (6)   Facilitate adequate and cost effective infrastructure
systems, and protect the substantial public investment in those systems,
including: transportation, sewage disposal, safe, and adequate water supply,
education, and recreational facilities;



      (7)   Establish controls over potential conflicting land uses
and uses which may need special regulations as special land uses to be
compatible with surrounding development patterns and zoning;



      (8)   Promote the gradual elimination of uses, buildings, and
structures which do not conform with the regulations and standards of this
chapter;



      (9)   Provide for administering this chapter, including
resolving conflicts with other ordinances, collection of fees, procedures for
petitions, hearings, and appeals; and to provide for any other matters
authorized by the City and Village Zoning Act; and



      (10)   Balance the village’s right to compatible and quality
development consistent with the future land use plan with the property
owners’ right to a reasonable rate of return on investment.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.003  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Where any provision of this chapter imposes either greater or
lesser restrictions than any other provision, limitations, conditions,
standards, or requirements in this chapter upon the use of buildings,
structures, or land; the height of buildings or structures; lot coverage; lot
areas; yards, wetlands, woodlands, or other open spaces; or any other use or
activity which is regulated by this chapter, the provision or standard which
is more restrictive or limiting shall govern.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every building
and structure erected; every use of any lot, building, or structure
established; every structural alteration or relocation of an existing
building or structure and every enlargement of, or addition to, an existing
use, building, or structure occurring after the effective date of this
section shall be subject to all regulations of this section which are
applicable in the zoning district in which such use, building, or structure
is located.



   (C)   No setback area or lot existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum
requirements set forth in this chapter. Yards or lots created after the
effective date of the section shall meet at least the minimum requirements
established herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall not abrogate or annul any easement, by-law,
master deed, deed restriction, covenant, or private agreement, except that
the regulations or provisions of this chapter shall govern if determined by
the Board of Appeals to be more restrictive or impose a higher standard.



   (E)   The regulations herein established shall be the minimum
regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare; any conflicting laws of a more restrictive nature shall
supersede the appropriate provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   Uses, buildings, and structures that were nonconforming under
the previous zoning ordinance gain no new rights through the adoption of the
standards of this chapter, unless they become conforming or more conforming
by the regulations of this chapter.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.004  VESTED RIGHTS; EFFECTS ON PROJECTS WHEN SIGNIFICANT CONSTRUCTION
HAS BEGUN AND SITE PLANS APPROVED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building upon
which actual construction was begun prior to the enactment of this chapter,
provided, significant construction has lawfully begun, is being diligently
carried on, and shall be completed within one year of the effective date of
this chapter.



      (2)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, may permit one extension of up to one year.



   (B)   A site plan approved within 12 months prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall remain valid if construction is begun within one
year and completed within two years of the effective date of this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   If the conditions of this section are not met, the
standards and provisions of this chapter shall govern.



      (2)   A site plan submitted prior to adoption of this chapter
but which has not yet received site plan approval shall be required to meet
all of the standards and provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Except as noted above, nothing in this chapter should be
interpreted or construed to provide any permanent vested rights in the
continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification of any
permissible activities therein, and they are hereby declared to be subject to
subsequent amendment, change, or modification as may be necessary for the
preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.005  VALIDITY.



   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare unconstitutional
or invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular
parcel, lot, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, use, building, or
structure not specifically included in said ruling.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.006  ILLUSTRATIONS AND TEXT.



   This chapter includes illustrations intended to convey the meaning of
terms and certain regulations. Where there are conflicts between the written
text and illustrations, the text shall prevail.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.007  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.



   The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter.



   (A)   The particular shall control the general.



   (B)   In case of any differences of meaning or implication between
the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.



   (C)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.



   (D)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (E)   A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof.



   (F)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”,
“designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained for”, or “occupied
for”.



   (G)   The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.



   (H)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, “either...or”, the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows.



      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.



      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.



      (3)   “Either...or” indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.



   (I)   The phrase “such as” shall mean “such as, but not
limited to”.



   (J)   The word “including” shall mean “including, but not
limited to”.



   (K)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.008  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY.



      (1)   A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found
in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking
spaces or loading) located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to
which it is related. When ACCESSORY is used in this text, it shall have the
same meaning as ACCESSORY USE.



      (2)   ACCESSORY USE includes, but it is not limited to uses
such as those that follow:



         (a)   Residential accommodations for servants and/or
caretakers within the principal building;



         (b)   Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a
residence, or their guests;



         (c)   Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed,
tool room, or similar accessory building, or other structure;



         (d)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock
in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is
excluded in the applicable district regulations;



         (e)   Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial
uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable
district regulations;



         (f)   Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the
district in which the zoning lot is located;



         (g)   Uses clearly incidental to a principal use such as
offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the
commercial or industrial complex; or



         (h)   Accessory signs, subject to Ch. 154 for the
district in which the zoning lot is located.



   ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, or STRUCTURE. A use, building, or structure
which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with,
subordinate to, and is located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to
which it is exclusively related and is devoted exclusively to an ACCESSORY
USE.



   ACT. The term ACT or DOING OF AN ACT includes OMISSION TO ACT, and for
the purpose of this chapter, does not include legislation.



   ADULT DAY CARE. A facility which provides care for over 12 adults for
less than 24 hours.



   ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY.



      (1)   A residential structure licensed to provide room, board,
and supervised care, but not continuous nursing care, for unrelated adults
over the age of 17, in accordance with Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 400.701 et seq., as amended, and the Adult Foster Care Administrative
Rules, being the State Administrative Code, R 400.1401 et seq., as
administered by the State Department of Social Services.



      (2)   The following four types of ADULT FOSTER CARE HOMES are
provided for by these rules.



         (a)   ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. Private residence
for six or fewer adults. The licensee must live in the home, and local zoning
approval is not required prior to issuance of a license.



         (b)   ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP FAMILY. Residence
for 13 to 20 adults. The licensee is not required to live in the home. Local
zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license.



         (c)   ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOMES. Residence for
12 or fewer adults. The licensee is not required to live in the home. Local
zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license only if seven or
more residents will live in the home.



         (d)   CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY. See HOUSING FOR THE
ELDERLY.



   ADULT REGULATED USES.



      (1)   ADULT BOOK OR SUPPLY STORE. An establishment having 10%
or more of all usable interior, retail, wholesale, or warehouse space devoted
to the distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other
periodicals and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, videotapes,
recording tapes, and/or novelty items which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined
herein), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.



      (2)   ADULT MODEL STUDIO. Any place where models who display
specified anatomical areas (as defined herein) are present to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
persons who pay some form of consideration or gratuity. This definition shall
not apply to any accredited art school or similar educational institution.



      (3)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel wherein visual displays, graphic
materials, or activities are presented which depict, describe, or relate to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein).



      (4)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE or MINI MOTION PICTURE
THEATER. Anyplace where motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images displayed depict, describe, or
relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined herein).



      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER or ADULT LIVE STAGE
PERFORMING THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more
persons wherein still or motion pictures, videotapes, or similar material is
presented or viewed which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities, or
specified anatomical areas (as defined herein) for observation by patrons
therein. Such an establishment is customarily not open to the public
generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor
by reason of age.



      (6)   ADULT, NUDE, PARTIALLY NUDE DANCING. A business having
as its principal activity the live presentation of or display of nude, or
partially nude, male or female impersonator(s), dancer(s), entertainers(s),
waiter(s) or waitresses), or employee(s) and which may or may not feature the
service of food or beverage. For the purpose of this chapter, NUDE or
PARTIALLY NUDE shall mean having any or all of the specified anatomical areas
exposed (as defined herein).



      (7)   ADULT OUTDOOR MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A drive-in theater
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas (as defined herein) for observation by patrons of
theater. Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally,
but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason
of age.



      (8)   ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS. A business having as a
principal activity a person of one sex, providing personal services for a
person of the other sex, or same sex, on an individual basis in a closed room
or a partitioned open space. It includes, but is not limited to, the
following activities and services: massage parlors; exotic rubs; modeling
studios; body painting studios; wrestling studios; and individual theatrical
performances. It does not include activities performed by persons pursuant
to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the state.



      (9)   ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT.



         (a)   Any establishment, club, or business by whatever
name designated, which offers or advertises, or is equipped or arranged so as
to provide as part of its services, massages, body rubs, alcohol rubs,
physical stimulation, baths, or other similar treatment by any person.



         (b)   The following uses shall not be included within
the definition of an ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT:



            1.   Establishments which routinely provide such
services by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed
osteopath, a licensed physical therapist, a licensed practical nurse, or any
other similarly licensed medical professional;



            2.   Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator
of electrolysis equipment;



            3.   Continuing instruction in martial or
performing arts, or in organized athletic activities;



            4.   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or
medical offices;



            5.   Barber shops or beauty parlors and salons
which offer massages to the scalp, the face, the neck, or shoulders only;



            6.   Adult photography studios whose principal
business does not include the taking of photographs of specified human
anatomical areas; and



            7.   A masseuse licensed by the state and not
engaged in massaging specified anatomical areas or engaged in specified
sexual activities as described in this section.



      (10)   CABARET. An establishment where live entertainment is
provided, presented, permitted, or performed, which performances are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or relationship to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein) for
observation by or participation of patrons therein. Also, an establishment
which features any of the following: topless dancers and/or bottomless
dancers; go-go dancers; strippers; male and/or female impersonators or
similar entertainers; topless and/or bottomless waiters; waitresses; and/or
employees.



      (11)   MASSAGE PARLOR or MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. A place where
manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the
human body by anyone using mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices or
techniques, other than the following: a duly licensed physician, osteopath,
or chiropractor; a registered or practical nurse operating under a
physician’s directions; or, registered physical or occupational therapists
or speech pathologists who treat patients referred by a licensed physician
and operate only under such physician’s direction. A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
may include, but is not limited to, establishments commonly known as massage
parlors, health spas, sauna baths, Turkish bathhouses, and steam baths.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, as defined herein, shall not include properly
licensed hospitals, medical clinics, or nursing homes, or beauty salons or
barber shops in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face,
the neck, or the shoulders.



      (12)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Portions of the human body
defined as follows:



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast below the point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      (13)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The explicit display of
one or more of the following:



         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



            1.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, or sodomy; or



            2.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast.



   ALLEY. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access
to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or
type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls
or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, the consummated act of which may
be referred to herein as ALTERED or RECONSTRUCTED.



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. See CLINIC, VETERINARY.



   APARTMENT. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.



   ARCADE. The use of a building or a portion of a building for the
location, operation, and placement of six or more mechanical amusement
devices. For the purposes of this definition, MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
shall mean any device, apparatus, mechanical equipment, or machine operated
as amusement for required compensation. The term does not include vending
machines used to dispense foodstuffs, toys, or other products for use and
consumption.



   AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR. An automotive repair establishment which may
conduct activities defined herein as “minor repairs” and one or more of
the following: general repair; engine rebuilding; rebuilding; or
reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision-service; such as body; frame; or
fender straightening and repair; overall painting and undercoating of
automobiles; major overhauling of engine requiring removal of cylinder-head
or crank casepan; recapping or retreading of tires; steam cleaning; and
similar activities.



   AUTOMOBILE. Unless specifically indicated otherwise,AUTOMOBILE shall,
mean any vehicle including, by way of example, cars, trucks, vans,
motorcycles, and the like.



   AUTOMOBILE or VEHICLE DEALERSHIP. A building or premises used primarily
for the sale of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles to include
outside storage of vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE CENTER (MINOR MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR). A building or
premises used primarily to provide general maintenance on automobiles such as
oil changes and lubrication; servicing and repair of spark plugs, batteries,
pumps, belts, hoses, air filters, windshield wipers, and distributors;
replacement of mufflers and exhaust systems, brakes, and shock absorbers;
radiator cleaning and flushing; sale and installation of automobile
accessories such as tires, radios, and air conditioners; wheel alignment,
balancing and undercoating; but excluding the recapping or grooving or any
major mechanical repairs, collision work, or painting. An AUTOMOBILE SERVICE
CENTER may also sell gasoline, but is distinct from an automobile service
station (i.e., gas station without repair).



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE (GASOLINE) STATION. An establishment which includes
buildings and premises for the primary purpose of retail sales of gasoline.
An AUTO SERVICE STATION may also include an area devoted to sales of
automotive items and convenience goods primarily sold to patrons purchasing
gasoline.



   AUTOMOBILE WASH. Any building or structure or portion thereof either as
a principal or accessory use containing facilities for washing motor vehicles
using production line methods with a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device,
or other mechanical washing devices; and shall also include coin and
attendant operated drive-through, automatic self-serve, track mounted units,
and similar high volume washing establishments, but shall not include hand
washing operations.



   BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or wholly below
grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to
the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the
ceiling. This definition shall not apply to earth-bermed or earth-sheltered
homes. A BASEMENT shall not be counted as a story.



   BED AND BREAKFAST. A single-family dwelling which is owner occupied in
which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests
for compensation, often including provisions for a morning meal for overnight
guests.



   BEDROOM. A room designed or used in whole or in part for sleeping
purposes.



   BLOCK. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the
nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided acreage, lake,
river, or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier
to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the
municipality.



   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Board of (Zoning) Appeals of the Village of Holly.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot after compliance with the
minimum required setbacks of this chapter.



   BUILDING.



      (1)   Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a
roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. A BUILDING
shall include tents, semi-trailers, or vehicles situated on a parcel and used
for the purposes of a building, and structures such as storage tanks, coal
bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures.



      (2)   A BUILDING shall not include such structures as signs,
awnings, fences, or smokestacks.



   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum
setback requirements within which building construction is permitted by the
terms of this chapter



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established
grade of the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck
line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs (see illustration below).







 



   BUILDING LINE. A line formed parallel to any face of the building, and
for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum BUILDING LINE IS the same as the
minimum setback line.



   BUILDING, MAIN, OR PRINCIPAL. A building, or where the context so
indicates, a group of buildings in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is situated.



   BULK. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings and
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, including
standards for the height and area of buildings; the location of exterior
walls in relation to lot lines, streets, and other buildings; gross floor
area of buildings in relation to lot area; open space; and, the amount of lot
area required for each dwelling unit.



   CALIPER. The diameter measured at four and one-half feet above the
natural grade for existing trees; 12 inches above the average surrounding
grade for new trees over four inches in caliper and six inches above the
average surrounding grade for trees less than four inches in caliper.



   CARE ORGANIZATION.



      (1)   A facility for the care of children under 18 years of
age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Public Act 116 of 1973,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through 722.128 and Public Act 218 of 1979 and
the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services.



      (2)   Such organizations shall be further defined as follows:



         (a)   CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER.



            1.   A facility other than a private residence,
receiving more than six preschool or school age children for group day care
for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians
are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility which
provides care for not less that two consecutive weeks, regardless of the
number of hours of care per day.



            2.   The facility is generally described as a
child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent
cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center. CHILD CARE CENTER or
DAY CARE CENTER does not include a Sunday school conducted by a religious
institution or a facility operated by a religious organization where children
are cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for such
children are attending religious services.



         (b)   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which one,
but less than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood,
marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated
child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.



         (c)   FAMILY FOSTER CARE or FAMILY HOME. A private home
in which one, but not more than four minor children, who are not related to
an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given
care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for
two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.



         (d)   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which more
than six, but not more than 12 children, are given care and supervision for
periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian,
except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage,
or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for
more than four weeks during a calendar year.



         (e)   GROUP FOSTER CARE or FAMILY GROUP HOME. A private
home licensed by the State Department of Social Services in which more than
four, but less than seven children, who are not related to an adult member of
the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for 24 hours
a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.



   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for burial of the human
dead, including columbariums, crematories, and mausoleums and dedicated for
such purposes.



   CHURCH (MOSQUE OR TEMPLE, AND THE LIKE). Any structure wherein persons
regularly assemble for religious activity.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL. A place for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick
or injured persons and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention.
A clinic may incorporate laboratories and pharmacies, but shall not include
facilities for in-patient care or major surgery.



   CLINIC, VETERINARY. An institution which is licensed by the State
Department of Health to provide for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of
animals, including those in need of medical or surgical attention.



   CLUB, PRIVATE OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION, and LODGE HALLS. An
organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of
sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated
for profit or to espouse beliefs or further activity that is not in
conformance with the constitution of the united states or any laws or
ordinances. The facilities owned or used by such organization may be referred
to as a CLUB in this chapter.



   COMMERCIAL USE. The use of property for retail sales or similar
businesses where goods or sendees are sold or provided directly to the
consumer. As used in this chapter, COMMERCIAL USE shall not include
industrial, manufacturing, or wholesale activities.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle possessing commercial license plates
and which falls into one or more of the categories listed below:



      (1)   Truck tractor;



      (2)   Semi trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds,
roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type
enclosures;



      (3)   Vending trucks, such as ice cream, milk, bread, fruit,
or vending supply trucks;



      (4)   Tow trucks;



      (5)   Commercial hauling trucks;



      (6)   Vehicle repair service trucks;



      (7)   Snow plowing trucks; or



      (8)   Any vehicle with a commercial license plate having a
gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds or a total length in excess
of 22 feet.



   CONDOMINIUM.



      (1)   A CONDOMINIUM is a system of separate ownership of
individual units and/or multi-unit projects according to Public Act 59 of
1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 to 559.276, as amended. In addition to the
interest acquired in a particular unit, each unit owner is also a tenant in
common in the underlying fee and in the spaces and building parts used in
common by all the unit owners.



      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, CONDOMINIUM terms
shall be defined as follows.



         (a)   COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the condominium
project other than the condominium units.



         (b)   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 to 559.272, as amended.



         (c)   CONDOMINIUM LOT. The portion of the land area of a
site condominium project designed as the building envelope and intended to
function similar to a platted subdivision lot for purposes of determining
minimum yard setback requirements and other requirements set forth in §
157.009.



         (d)   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. Drawings and
information which show the size, location, area, and boundaries of each
condominium unit, building locations, the nature, location, and approximate
size of common elements, and other information required by Public Act 59 of
1978, § 66, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 to 559.276, as amended.



         (e)   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. The portion of the condominium
project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in
the master deed for the condominium project.



         (f)   CONTRACTIBLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project
from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn
pursuant to provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with
this chapter and the Condominium Act.



         (g)   CONVERSION CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project
containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the
establishment of the condominium project.



         (h)   CONVERTIBLE AREA. A unit or a portion of the
common elements of the condominium project referred to in the condominium
documents within which additional condominium units or general or limited
common elements may be created pursuant to provisions in the condominium
documents and in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act.



         (i)   EXPANDABLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project to
which additional land may be added pursuant to express provision in the
condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium
Act.



         (j)   GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS. Common elements other
than the limited common elements, intended for the common use of all
co-owners.



         (k)   LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the common
elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all
co-owners.



         (l)   MASTER DEED. The condominium document recording
the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by
reference the by-laws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan.



         (m)   SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A condominium project
designed to function in a similar manner, or as an alternative to a platted
subdivision.



   CONGREGATE HOUSING. See HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.



   CONTRACTOR’S YARD.



      (1)   A site on which a building or construction contractor
stores equipment, tools, vehicles, building materials, and other
appurtenances used in or associated with building or construction.



      (2)   A CONTRACTOR’S YARD may include outdoor or indoor
storage, or a combination of both.



   CONVALESCENT HOME. See NURSING HOME.



   CONVENIENCE STORE. A one-story, retail store that is designed and
stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to
customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a
“supermarket”). CONVENIENCE STORES are designed to attract a large volume
of stop-and-go traffic.



   COUNCIL or VILLAGE COUNCIL. The governing body of the Village of Holly,
Michigan.



   CUL-DE-SAC. See STREET.



   CURB CUT (DRIVEWAY). The entrance to or exit from a property provided
for vehicular traffic to or from a public or private thoroughfare.



   DECKS AND PORCHES. Any enclosed, uncovered balcony, porch, terrace,
fire escape, or stairway attached to or directly accessed from a residential
dwelling may project into the required front or rear yard for a distance not
to exceed ten feet. Steps to a porch, deck, or terrace shall not exceed the
distance noted in this section. DECKS not attached or accessed directly from
a residential dwelling (such as a deck around a pool) shall meet the same
setback requirements of an accessory structure.



   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed
per net or gross acre of land, excluding area devoted to public right-of-way
or easements.



   DETENTION BASIN. A human-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface water in order to impede its flow and to release
the water gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development
of the property, onto natural or human-made outlets.



   DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new building or other structure on a
zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or
the use of open land for a new use.



   DISTRICT. A portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within
which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof
apply under the provisions of this chapter.



   DRIVE-THROUGH. An establishment so developed that some portion of its
retail or service character is dependent upon providing a staging area and
service window specifically designed for serving motorists while in a motor
vehicle with carry-out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed
from the premises (see also definitions for restaurants).



   DWELLING, ACCESSORY APARTMENT.



      (1)   A dwelling unit that is accessory to and typically
contained within a conventional single-family dwelling, and which is occupied
by:



         (a)   Persons related to the occupant of the principal
residence by blood, marriage, or legal adoption; or



         (b)   Domestic servants or gratuitous guests.



      (2)   An accessory apartment commonly has its own kitchen,
bath, living area, sleeping area, and usually a separate entrance.



   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED. A building or portion of a building designed
for long-term residential use and characterized by all of the following:



      (1)   The structure is produced in a factory in accordance
with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., as amended;



      (2)   The structure is designed to be transported to the site
in a nearly complete form, where it is placed on a foundation and connected
to utilities;



      (3)   The structure is designed to be used as either an
independent building or as a module to be combined with other elements to
form a complete building on the site; and



      (4)   A MANUFACTURED DWELLING may be a mobile home, defined as
a type of manufactured housing structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built upon a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in the structure. Recreational vehicles as
described and regulated herein shall not be considered “mobile homes” for
the purposes of this chapter.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.



      (1)   A building designed for and occupied by three or more
families living independently, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and
bathroom facilities for each.



      (2)   Examples of MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS units include
those commonly known as apartments, which are defined as follows:



         (a)   APARTMENT. An attached dwelling unit with party
walls, contained in a building with other apartment units which are commonly
reached from a common stair landing or walkway. APARTMENTS are typically
rented by the occupants. Apartment buildings often may have a central heating
system and other central utility connections. APARTMENTS typically do not
have their own yard space. APARTMENTS are also commonly known as garden
apartments or flats.



         (b)   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A type of multiple-family or
apartment unit consisting of one principal room, plus bathroom and kitchen
facilities, hallways, closets, and/or a dining alcove located directly off
the principal room.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY. An independent, detached
residential dwelling designed for and used or held ready for use by one
family only. SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS are commonly the only principal use on a
parcel or lot.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A detached building, designed
exclusively for and occupied by two families living independently of each
other, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.



   DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy
by one family for residential purposes and having single cooking and bath
facilities for each. In no case shall a travel trailer, motor home,
automobile, tent, or other portable building not defined as a recreational
vehicle be considered a dwelling. In the case of mixed occupancy where a
building is occupied in part as a DWELLING UNIT, the part so occupied shall
be deemed a dwelling unit for the purposes of this chapter.



   DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED, or TOWNHOUSE. An attached
single-family dwelling unit with party walls, designed as part of a series of
three or more dwellings, with its own front door which opens to the outdoors
at ground level, its own basement, and typically, with its own utility
connections and front and rear yards. TOWNHOUSES are sometimes known as
“row houses”.



   EASEMENT. A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any permanent structures.



   ENGINEER, VILLAGE. The person or firm authorized to advise the Village
Administration, Village Council, and Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, on drainage, grading, paving, stormwater management,
and control, utilities, and other related site engineering and civil
engineering issues. The VILLAGE ENGINEER may be a consultant or an employee
of the village.



   ERECTED. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any
physical operations on the premises which are required for construction,
excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of
erection.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground,
surface, or overhead, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission, or
distribution system, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including poles, wires, water towers, lift stations, iron removal facilities,
wells, water mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm, and
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar equipment in
connection herewith, but not including, buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for
the general health, safety, or welfare. ESSENTIAL SERVICES shall not include
storage yards, cellular telephone towers, commercial reception towers, air
quality monitoring stations, propane sales, school bus parking yards,
electrical towers, sales, or business offices, or commercial buildings or
activities or other similar uses.



   EXCAVATION. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening
and ground care.



   FACADE. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view.



   FAMILY. Either of the following.



      (1)   A domestic family, that is, one or more persons living
together and related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or adoption,
together with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one
additional unrelated person, with all of such individuals being domiciled
together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling.



      (2)   (a)   The functional equivalent of the domestic
family, that is, persons living together in a dwelling unit whose
relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional
equivalent of a domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond
which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the
domestic family a cohesive unit.



         (b)   All persons of the functional equivalent of the
domestic family must be cooking and otherwise operating as a single
housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization, or group where the
common living arrangement and/or the basis for the establishment of the
functional equivalency of the domestic family is likely or contemplated to
exist for a limited or temporary duration.



         (c)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption
enforceable by the Zoning Official in the first instance that the number of
persons who may reside as a functional equivalent family shall be limited to
six.



         (d)   Such presumption may be rebutted by application
for a special land use based upon the applicable standards in this chapter.



   FENCE. A structure of definite height and location constructed of wood,
masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other material or combination of
materials serving as a physical barrier, marker, or enclosure, but excluding
low solid masonry walls. (See also § 157.040(A).)



   FILLING. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the
ground, except as part of common household gardening or ground care.



   FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL.



      (1)   For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor
area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each
story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings.



      (2)   The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of
basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and
unenclosed porches.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The ratio of gross building floor area to total
site area. For example, the FAR of a 200,000-square foot building on a
100,000-square foot site is two or 200%.



   FLOOR AREA, USABLE (FOR PURPOSES OF COMPUTING PARKING).



      (1)   The area used or intended to be used for selling
merchandise or services, or for serving patrons, clients, or customers.



      (2)   Such floor area which is used or intended to be used for
utilities, hallways, or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from this
computation of USABLE FLOOR AREA.



      (3)   Measurement of USABLE FLOOR AREA shall be the sum of the
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the
interior faces of the exterior walls (see illustration).







 



   FLOOR, GROUND. The building portion which is partly below grade, but so
located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling is
greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor. A
GROUND FLOOR shall be counted as a story.



   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. See CLUB.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building
designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats, and
similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it
is accessory.



   GARAGE, SERVICE. Any premises used for the storage or care of
motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation,
repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.



   GARDEN CENTER. An establishment with retail sales of trees, fruits,
vegetables, shrubbery, plants, landscaping supplies, lawn furniture,
playground equipment, and other home garden supplies and equipment.



   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A place for the dispensing, sale, or offering
for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with
the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not
including, major automobile repair.



   GRADE. The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating
the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall
be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the
finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the GRADE shall
be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the
building.



   GREENBELT. A strip of land of specified width and location reserved for
the planting of shrubs and/or trees, along with similar plant materials, all
of which serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip.



   GROUP HOME. See CARE ORGANIZATION.



   GYM or GYMNASIUM. A room or building equipped for gymnastics, exercise,
or sport.



   HAZARDOUS USES. All uses which involve the storage, sale, manufacture,
or processing of materials which are dangerous and combustible and are likely
to burn immediately, and from which either poisonous fumes or explosions are
to be anticipated in the event of fire. These uses include all high hazard
uses listed in the most recent edition of the Building Code adopted by the
village.



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. See BUILDING HEIGHT.



   HIGHWAY. See STREET.



   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, trades, craft, profession, or hobby
conducted within a dwelling where such use is clearly incidental to the
principal use of the dwelling as a residence. Standards for permitted HOME
OCCUPATIONS are provided in § 157.071(C).



   HOSPITAL. A facility offering 24-hour emergency, inpatient and
outpatient care, and services for observation, diagnosis, and active
treatment of patients under the care and supervision of physicians and
professional medical staff. The term HOSPITAL shall also include medical
climes or hospitals offering care in special fields such as eye, cardiac
care, ear, nose, throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin, cancer, burn centers,
neo-natal care, children’s hospitals, and ophthalmology centers.



   HOTEL. A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or
entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily
for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services
are offered. maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or
desk service, and bellboy service. A HOTEL may include a restaurant or
cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms.



   HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.



      (1)   Housing constructed for the exclusive use of an
individual 55 years of age or older, or for a couple where at least one of
the individuals is over the age of 55.



      (2)   HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY may include the following.



         (a)   CONGREGATE HOUSING. A type of semi-independent
housing facility for more than 20 adults containing congregate kitchen,
dining, and living areas, but with separate sleeping rooms. Such facilities
typically provide special support services, such as transportation and
limited medical care.



         (b)   DEPENDENT HOUSING FACILITIES (NURSING HOMES).
Facilities which are designed for older persons who need a wide range of
health and support services, including personal nursing care.



         (c)   ELDERLY HOUSING COMPLEX. A building or group of
buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy is restricted to persons
60 years of age or older couples where either the husband or wife is 60 years
of age or older.



         (d)   SENIOR APARTMENTS. Multiple-family dwelling units
occupied by persons 55 years of age or older.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.



   INDOOR RECREATION CENTER. An establishment which provides indoor
exercise facilities and/or indoor court sports facilities, and which may
include spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. For the
purposes of this chapter, a bowling establishment shall be considered a type
of INDOOR RECREATION CENTER.



   INDOOR RECREATIONAL USE. A facility devoted to indoor sporting or
recreational activities. Such indoor uses of the space can be but are not
limited to the following: basketball courts, tennis courts, racquetball
courts, volleyball courts, batting cages, golf range simulators, miniature
golf courses, health fitness centers, pools roller skating rinks, ice rinks
and other similar activities.



   INDUSTRY, HEAVY. A use ngaged in the basic processing and manufacturing
of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a
use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or
explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially
involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.



   INDUSTRY, LIGHT. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.



   INGRESS AND EGRESS. As used in this chapter, generally is used in
reference to a driveway which allows vehicles to enter or leave a parcel of
property, or to a sidewalk which allows pedestrians to enter or leave a
parcel of property, a building, or another location.



   JUNK. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products, or
merchandise with parts missing, or other scrap materials that are damaged,
deteriorated, or are in a condition which prevents their use for the purpose
for which the product was manufactured.



   JUNK YARD.



      (1)   An area where waste, used, or second-hand materials are
bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap iron, and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber tires, and bottles.



      (2)   A JUNK YARD includes automobile wrecking yards and
includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping, or
abandonment of junk.



   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats, or other
domestic animals six months or older are kept, either permanently or
temporarily, either for sale, breeding, boarding, or training subject to the
regulations set forth herein regulating private and commercial kennels.



   LABORATORY. An establishment devoted to research and experimental
studies, including testing and analyzing, but not including manufacturing of
any nature.



   LANDFILL. A tract of land that is used to collect and dispose of
“solid waste” as defined and regulated in Public Act 641 of 1979, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501 et seq., as amended.



   LANDSCAPING.



      (1)   The treatment of the ground surface with live plant
materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs,
vines, and other live plant material. In addition, a landscape design may
include other decorative human-made materials, such as wood chips, crushed
stone, boulders, or mulch.



      (2)   Structural features such as fountains, pools, statues,
and benches shall also be considered a part of LANDSCAPING, but only if
provided in combination with live plant material. Artificial plant materials
shall not be counted toward meeting the requirements for LANDSCAPING.



      (2)   Various LANDSCAPING related terms are defined as follows.



         (a)   BERM. A continuous, raised earthen mound comprised
of non-toxic materials with a flattened top and sloped sides, capable of
supporting live landscaping materials, and with a height and width that
complies with the requirements of this chapter.



         (b)   GRASS. Any of a family of plants with narrow
leaves normally grown as permanent lawns in Oakland County, Michigan.



         (c)   GREENBELT. A strip of land of definite width and
location reserved for the planting of a combination of shrubs, trees, and
ground cover to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer for noise or visual
enhancement, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.



         (d)   GROUND COVER. Low-growing plants that form a
dense, extensive growth after one complete growing season, and tend to
prevent weeds and soil erosion.



         (e)   HEDGE. A row of closely planted shrubs or
low-growing trees which commonly form a continuous visual screen, boundary,
or fence.



         (f)   HYDRO-SEEDING. A method of planting grass where a
mixture of the seed, water, and mulch is mechanically sprayed over the
surface of the ground.



         (g)   INTERIOR OR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING. A landscaped
area located in the interior of a site or parking lot in such a manner as to
improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic
movement and improve the appearance of the site.



         (h)   MULCH. A layer of wood chips. dry leaves, straw,
hay, plastic, or other materials placed on the surface of the soil around
plants to retain moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in
place, or aid plant growth.



         (i)   NURSE GRASS. Any of a variety of rapidly-growing
annual or perennial rye grasses used to quickly establish ground cover to
prevent dust or soil erosion.



         (j)   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A deciduous tree which is
typically grown because of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other
attractive features, and which grows to a mature height of 25 feet or less.



         (k)   PLANTING. A young tree, vine, or shrub that would
be placed on or in the ground.



         (l)   SCREEN or SCREENING. A wall, wood fencing, or
combination of plantings of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a
visual barrier. If the SCREEN is composed of non-living material, such
material shall be compatible with materials used in construction of the main
building, but in no case shall include wire fencing.



         (m)   SHRUB. A self-supporting, deciduous or evergreen
woody plant, normally branched near the base, bushy, and less than 15 feet in
height.



         (n)   SOD. An area of grass-covered surface soil held
together by matted roots.



         (o)   TREE. A self-supporting woody, deciduous or
evergreen plant with a well-defined central trunk or stem which normally
grows to a mature height of 15 feet or more in Oakland County, Michigan.



            1.   DECIDUOUS TREE. A variety of tree that has
foliage that is shed at the end of the growing season.



            2.   EVERGREEN TREE. A variety of tree that has
foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year.



   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading and unloading merchandise or materials.



   LOT.



      (1)   (a)   A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be
occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory
buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto,
together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions
of this chapter.



         (b)   A LOT may or may not be specifically designated as
such on public records.



         (c)   A LOT shall have frontage on a dedicated road or,
if permitted by the regulations set forth herein, on an approved private road.



      (2)   A LOT may consist of:



         (a)   A single lot of record;



         (b)   A portion of a lot of record;



         (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, or
portion thereof;



         (d)   A condominium lot; or



         (e)   A piece of land described by metes and bounds.



   LOT AREA.



      (1)   The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the
lot exclusive of any abutting public street right-of-way or private road
easements, or the area of any lake.



      (2)   The NET LOT AREA shall be used in determining compliance
with minimum lot area standards.



   LOT, CONTIGUOUS. Lots adjoining each other.



   LOT, CORNER.



      (1)   A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at
the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees.



      (2)   A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of
less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points
where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form
an interior angle of less than 135 degrees (see illustration below).







 



   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of the lot occupied by a building,
including accessory buildings.



   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.



   LOT, FLAG. A lot which is located behind other parcels or lots fronting
on a public road, but which has a narrow extension to provide access to the
public road.



   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.



      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of an interior lot, is the
that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through or
corner lot, is that line separating said lot from either street.



      (2)   REAR LOT LINE. The lot line opposite the front lot line.
In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE for purposes of
measuring setbacks shall be along all lines on the opposite side of the lot
from the front lot line as determined by the Zoning Official.



      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the front lot
line or rear lot line. A lot line separating the “side” of a structure
from a street is a front lot line (i.e., corner lots have two front lot
lines). A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
interior side lot line.



   LOT, THROUGH. Any interior lot having frontage on two, more or less,
parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of
double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required.



   LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds or in common use by
municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any
part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the
remainder thereof.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot
lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line
intersects the side lot lines.



   LOT, ZONING.



      (1)   A single tract of land, located within a single block,
which at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner
or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control.



      (2)   A ZONING LOT shall satisfy this chapter with respect to
area, size, dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the
zoning lot is located. A ZONING LOT, therefore, may not coincide with a lot
of record as filed with the County Register of Deeds, but may include one or
more lots of record.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit which is designed for long-term
residential use and is wholly or substantially constructed at an off-site
location.



   MASTER PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, including graphic and written
proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public
buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any
unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.



   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine or device, which operates as a
game, entertainment, contest of skill, or amusement of any kind, and which
has the following characteristics:



      (1)   The device may be identified as a video, electronic, or
mechanical device;



      (2)   The device may be operated and/or initiated upon the
insertion of a coin, token, ticket, slug, plate, disc, key, or through the
payment of a price;



      (3)   The device and the playing thereof offers no direct or
automatic payoff or the return of money, goods, or services; and



      (4)   This definition does not apply to the following:



         (a)   A vending machine which does not incorporate
gaming or amusement features;



         (b)   Musical devices or coin-operated radios; or



         (c)   Television sets in private quarters.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A medical marijuana dispensary shall mean
a facility, jointly owned or operated by two or more “primary
caregivers”, where marijuana is grown, cultivated, stored, or dispenses or
offered for sale to “qualifying patients” under the Michigan Marijuana
Act of 2008. A “primary caregiver”, “qualifying patient”, and
“marijuana” shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Michigan
Medical Marijuana Act of 2008.



   MEZZANINE. An intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed
one-third of the floor area of such story.



   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings, each of which
contains several individual storage units, each with a separate door and lock
and which can be leased on an individual basis. MINI-WAREHOUSES are typically
contained within a fenced, controlled-access compound.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or
without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and
including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure. MOBILE HOME does not include a trailer coach
(recreational vehicle).



   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land, under the control of a
person, upon which three or; more mobile homes are located on a continual
non-recreational basis and including all appurtenances that are incidental to
the occupancy of a mobile home.



   MOBILE HOME SALES. A person, other than a manufacturer, engaged in the
business of buying, selling, exchanging, leasing, or renting mobile homes.



   MODULAR HOME. A pre-manufactured unit assembled of materials or
products intended to comprise all or part of a building or structure and is
assembled at other than the final location of the unit of the building or
structures by a repetitive process under circumstances intended to ensure
uniformity of quality and material content.



   MORTUARY or FUNERAL HOME. An establishment where the dead are prepared
for burial or cremation and where wakes or funerals may be held.



   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings occupied as a more or less
temporary abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals
in rooms consisting of a minimum of a bedroom and bath, occupied for hire, in
which provision is not usually made for cooking within the rooms, and which
provides customary motel sendees such as maid service, linen service,
telephone, and/or desk service, and the use of furniture. MOTELS typically
provide exterior entrances and on-site parking for each unit. A MOTEL may
also include a conference room or banquet facility, an attached dining room,
and/or an unattached standard restaurant.



   NATURAL FEATURES. Natural features shall include soils, wetlands,
floodplain, water bodies, and channels, topography, trees, and other types of
vegetative cover, and geologic formations.



   NONCONFORMING USE AND BUILDING. A use and/or a building, lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter or any subsequent amendment
hereto, which does not conform to the use, height, bulk, placement, or yard
provisions of the zoning district in which it is situated. (See § 157.261.)



   NUISANCE FACTORS. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious
thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or
repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across
a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the
generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such
as, but not limited to:



      (1)   Noise;



      (2)   Dust;



      (3)   Smoke;



      (4)   Odor;



      (5)   Glare;



      (6)   Fumes;



      (7)   Flashes;



      (8)   Illumination;



      (9)   Vibration;



      (10)   Shock waves;



      (11)   Heat;



      (12)   Electronic or atomic radiation;



      (13)   Objectionable effluent;



      (14)   Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night;



      (15)   Passenger traffic; or



      (16)   Invasion of non-abutting sheet frontage by traffic.



   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS. A space, building, or structure, or
combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered
for retail sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or
landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this chapter
does not include any space, building, or structure used for the sale of
fruits, vegetables, or Christmas trees.



   NURSING HOME (CONVALESCENT OR REST HOME). A home for the care of the
aged, infirm, or those suffering from bodily disorders, wherein two or more
persons are housed or lodged and furnished with nursing care.



   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF. A discontinuance of an existing use and the
substitution of a use of a similar or different kind or class, or, the
expansion of a use.



   OCCUPIED. Used in any manner at the time in question.



   OFFSET. The distance between the centerlines of driveways or streets
across the street from one another.



   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A facility or space which permits the
standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and other vehicles other than on or
directly from a public right-of-way.



   OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces
along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide
access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles.



   OFFICE. A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical
operations.



   ON-STREET LOADING SPACE. A location within the public street
right-of-way which has been approved by the village for the standing,
loading, or unloading of trucks, vans, or other vehicles.



   ON-STREET PARKING SPACES. Spaces designated and signed for public
parking within the public street right-of-way.



   OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES. Business and commercial uses conducted solely
outside of any building. Unless otherwise specified herein, OPEN AIR BUSINESS
shall include: retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including, but
not limited to, trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises,
lawn furniture, and Christmas trees and outdoor displays of structure and
vehicles sold on the premises.



   OPEN SPACE. Required open space shall be on the same lot with the
principal use and shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except for living plant material, recreational facilities, permitted
signs, sidewalks, bikepaths, and necessary drives and utility lines, unless
as otherwise provided in this chapter. Where OPEN SPACE is required, no more
than 50% of the required area shall be comprised of lakes, ponds, regulated
wetlands, or floodplain.



   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, outside of an enclosed building, of any
goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more
than 24 hours.



   OUTLOT. A parcel of land which is designated as an OUTLOT on the
recorded plat, and which is usually not intended to be used for the same
purposes as other lots in the plat.



   PARCEL. A continuous area, tract, or acreage of land that has not been
divided or subdivided according to the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.,  and has
frontage on a public sheet.



   PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width, said area shall be
exclusive of drives, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be
fully accessible for the parking, of permitted vehicles.



   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed
in compliance with the ordinance, regulations, and the approved plans and
specifications of a development.



   PERSON. An individual, trustee, executor, fiduciary, corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization, or other legal entity acting as a
unit.



   PERSONAL FITNESS CENTER. A facility which provides indoor exercise
facilities, such as exercise machines and weight-lifting equipment, usually
in a structured physical activity program supervised by professional physical
fitness instructors. As defined herein, PERSONAL FITNESS CENTER shall not
include court sports facilities or spectator seating for sports events. A
PERSONAL FITNESS CENTER may or may not be enclosed within a gym.



   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that permits full or partial absorption of
stormwater.



   PET. A domesticated dog, cat, bird, gerbil, hamster, guinea pig,
turtle, fish, rabbit, or other similar animal that is commonly available and
customarily kept for pleasure or companionship.



   PLANNER, VILLAGE. The Village Planner is the person or firm designated
by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, to advise
the Village Council, Village Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, and village staff on planning, zoning, land use, housing, and other
related planning and development issues.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Village of Holly Planning Commission.



   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist, in cases where there is more
than one use, the use comprising the greatest floor area shall generally be
considered the PRINCIPLE USE, except in cases where a use comprising a
secondary amount of floor area is considered to have greater impact in terms
of traffic generated, noise levels, disruption of views, and similar impacts.



   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a lot; the lot lines.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. A public corporation, franchise, municipal department,
board, or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal,
state, or municipal regulations to the public: gas; steam; electricity;
sewage disposal; telephone service (excluding cellular phone facilities);
cable television services; telegraph; transportation; or water.



   REASONABLE ACCESS. An access management term defined as ensuring a
motorist can enter or exit a parcel in an uncomplicated manner that will not
significantly prevent their visiting an establishment. REASONABLE ACCESS may
not always be the most direct access, but may involve use of a shared
driveway or service drive.



   RECEPTION ANTENNA FACILITY. An exterior apparatus that is capable of
receiving communication for radio or television purposes, including satellite
reception antennas, but excluding facilities considered to be essential
public service facilities or those preempted from township regulation by
applicable state, FCC, or other federal laws or regulations.



   RECREATION LAND. Any publicly- or privately-owned lot or parcel that is
utilized for recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, camping,
swimming, picnicking, hiking, nature study, hunting, boating, and fishing.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes the following.



      (1)   BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS. Includes boats, floats, rafts,
canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.



      (2)   FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on
wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.



      (3)   MOTOR HOME. A recreational vehicle intended for
temporary human habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis
with wheels and capable of being moved from place to place under its own
power. MOTOR HOMES generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical
facilities.



      (4)   OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Includes snowmobiles, jet
skis, all-terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus the
normal equipment used to transport them on the highway.



      (5)   PICKUP CAMPER. A structure designed to he or she mounted
on a pickup, or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable
for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational,
and vacation uses.



      (6)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable vehicle on a chassis, which
is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational,
and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a TRAVEL TRAILER by the
manufacturer. TRAVEL TRAILERS generally include self-contained sanitary,
water, and electrical facilities.



   RECYCLING CENTER. A facility at which used material is separated and
processed prior to shipment to others who will use the materials to
manufacture new products. This use is distinct from a junkyard or a salvage
yard.



   RECYCLING COLLECTION STATION. A facility for the collection and
temporary storage of recoverable resources, prior to shipment to a recycling
center for processing.



   RESTAURANT. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose
method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-
through, fast food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination
thereof, as defined below.



      (1)   BAR/LOUNGE/TAVERN. A bar or lounge is a type of
restaurant which is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic
beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks may also be
permitted. If a BAR or LOUNGE is part of a larger dining facility, it shall
be defined as that part of the structure so designated or operated.



      (2)   RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT. A business establishment whose
method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts
in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state
for consumption primarily off the premises.



      (3)   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A business establishment whose
method of operation involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its
consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of
an enclosed building.



      (4)   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH. A business establishment
whose method of operation involves the delivery of the prepared food to the
customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for
consumption off of the premises. Any restaurant with a drive-through
operation, whether the principal or accessory use, shall be defined as a
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT.



      (5)   RESTAURANT, OPEN-FRONT. An establishment that sells food
or beverages through a window to serve pedestrians not requiring the patron
to enter the structure. Any restaurant with an open front window shall meet
the ordinance standards for open-front windows whether the use is principal
or accessory.



      (6)   RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN. A standard restaurant is a
business establishment whose method of operation involves either:



         (a)   The delivery of prepared food by waiters and
waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed
building; or



         (b)   The prepared food is acquired by customers at a
cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within
a completely enclosed building.



   RETENTION BASIN. A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage
of stormwater runoff.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The strip of land over which an easement exists to allow
facilities such as streets, roads, highways, and power lines to be built.



   ROOM.



      (1)   For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and
density in a multiple-family district, a ROOM is a living room, dining room
or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area.



      (2)   A ROOM shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary
facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage.



      (3)   Plans presented showing one-, two-, or three-bedroom
units and including a “den”, “library”, or other extra room shall
count such extra ROOM as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density.



   SEASONAL or SPECIAL EVENT.



      (1)   An occurrence or noteworthy happening of seasonal,
civic, or religious importance, which is organized and sponsored by the
village or by a nonprofit community group, congregation, organization, club,
or society, and which offers a distinctive service to the community, such as
public entertainment, community education, civic celebration, or cultural or
community enrichment.



      (2)   SPECIAL EVENTS typically run for a short period of time
(less than two weeks) and are unlike the customary or usual activities
generally associated with the property where the special event is to be
located.



   SEMI-TRAILER. A trailer, which may be enclosed or not enclosed, having
wheels generally only at the rear, and supported in front by a truck tractor
or towing vehicle.



   SERVICE DRIVE. Any private road that is generally parallel to and
adjacent to an arterial road and that is designed to provide access to
abutting properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the
effects of the through traffic on the arterial road and so that the flow of
traffic on the arterial road is not impeded by direct driveway access from a
large number of abutting properties.



   SERVICE TRUCK. A pick-up truck or van that is used in conjunction with
a repair or maintenance business, such as a plumbing, electrical, or
carpentry business.



   SETBACK.  The distance required to obtain the minimum required
distance between the front, side, or real property lines and the building
line or parking lot. SETBACKS from a public street or private road shall be
measured from the right-of-way line or easement.  SETBACKS shall remain as
open space as defined herein, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
(Refer to the “schedule of regulations”, § 157.009 for minimum setback
requirements). (See definition for YARD ENCROACHMENTS).



   SHOPPING CENTER. A grouping of retail businesses and service uses on a
single site with common parking facilities.



   SHORELINE. The line between upland and bottomland which persists
through excessive changes in water levels, below which the presence and
action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land
is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil, the
configuration of the soil surface and the vegetation.



   SIGN. The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, or
trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an
individual, firm, profession, or business, and are visible to the general
public.



   SITE PLAN. A plan showing all salient features of a proposed
development so that it may be evaluated in order to determine whether or not
it meets the provisions of this chapter.



   SPECIAL LAND USE. Any land use which requires approval by the Village
Council according to the standards listed in this chapter, and as authorized
in the City or Village Zoning Act.



   STABLE, COMMERCIAL. A facility for the rearing and housing of horses,
mules, ponies, or for riding and training academies.



   STABLE, PRIVATE. An accessory building incidental to an existing
residential use, that shelters horses for the exclusive use of the occupants
of the premises and then guests, without remuneration, hire, or sale.



   STORY. The part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein,
included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor,
or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above.  A basement
shall not be counted as a STORY (see illustration below).







 



   STORY, HALF. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an
area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet, six
inches and a floor area of 50% or less than full floor below it. For the
purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at
least four feet clear height between floor and ceiling.



   STREET.



      (1)   Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way,
other than a public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for navel and
access to any land, lot, or parcel, whether designated as a road, avenue,
highway, boulevard, drive lane, place, court, or any similar designation.



      (2)   Various types of roads are defined as follows.



         (a)   ARTERIAL ROAD. A road which carries high volumes
of traffic and serves as an avenue for circulation of traffic onto, out of,
or around the village. An ARTERIAL ROAD may also be a major thoroughfare.



         (b)   COLLECTOR STREET. A road whose principal function
is to carry traffic between minor and local roads and arterial roads but may
also provide direct access to abutting properties.



         (c)   CUL-DE-SAC. A road that terminates in a vehicular
turnaround.



         (d)   LOCAL OR MINOR STREET. A road whose principal
function is to provide access to abutting properties and is designed to be
used or is used to connect minor and local roads with collector or arterial
roads.



         (e)   PRIVATE ROAD. Any road which is to be privately
maintained and has not been accepted for maintenance by the village, the
county, the state, or the federal government, but which meets the
requirements of this chapter or has been approved as a private road by the
village under any prior ordinance.



         (f)   PUBLIC STREET. Any road or portion of a road which
has been dedicated to and accepted for maintenance by the village, the
county, state, or the federal government.



   STREET LINE (RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE). The dividing line between the street
and a lot.



   STRUCTURAL ADDITION. Any alteration that changes the location of the
exterior walls or area of a building.



   STRUCTURE.



      (1)   Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on
the ground.



      (2)   STRUCTURES include, but are not limited to, principal
and accessory buildings, towers, decks, fences, privacy screens, walls,
antennas, swimming pools, signs, gas or liquid storage facility, and a mobile
home.



      (3)   Driveway access drives, sidewalks, street directional,
or street name sign, and landscape improvements are not considered a
STRUCTURE in regards to restrictions on placement within setback areas.



   SUBDIVISION PLAT. The division of a tract of land for the purpose of
sale or building development, in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act,
Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, as
amended, and Ch. 153.



   SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITY.



      (1)   Any establishment used for the dispensing, on an
in-patient or out-patient basis, of compounds or prescription medicines
directly to persons having drug or alcohol abuse problems.



      (2)   A generally recognized pharmacy or licensed hospital
dispensing prescription medicines shall not be considered a SUBSTANCE ABUSE
TREATMENT FACILITY.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:



         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or



         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being
restored before the damage occurred.



      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT occurs when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.



      (3)   The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.



   SWIMMING POOL.



      (1)   Any permanent, non-portable structure, or container
located either above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth of
greater than 24 inches and with a surface area greater than 250 square feet,
intended for swimming or bathing.



      (2)   A SWIMMING POOL shall be considered an accessory
structure for purposes of computing lot coverage.



   TEMPORARY BUILDING. A building which is not permanently affixed to the
property, and is permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specific
period of time. Construction of TEMPORARY BUILDINGS shall be subject to the
requirements listed in the Village Building Code, as amended.



   TEMPORARY USES AND SEASONAL EVENTS. Uses intended for a limited
duration within any zoning district. A TEMPORARY USE shall not be interpreted
to be a continuance of a nonconforming use. TEMPORARY USES AND SEASONAL SALES
events may include carnivals, circuses, farmers markets, art fairs, craft
shows, sidewalk sales, antique sales, Christmas tree sales, flower sales, and
similar events.



   THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting performances or
motion pictures which are observed by paying patrons from seats situated
within the building.



   TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP. A map showing existing physical characteristics,
with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of
proposed grades and drainage.



   TOWNHOUSE. A residential structure, or group of structures, each of
which contains three or more attached one-family dwelling units with
individual rear yards and or front yards designed as an integral part of each
one-family dwelling unit.



   TOXIC or HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste or a combination of waste and other
discarded material (including, but not limited to, solid, liquid, semi-solid,
or contained gaseous material) which because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contribute to the following if improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed:



      (1)   An increase in mortality;



      (2)   An increase in serious irreversible illness;



      (3)   Serious incapacitating, but reversible illness; or



      (4)   Substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment.



   TRANSITION ZONE. A transition zone generally refers to a zoning
district, an arrangement of lots or land uses, a landscaped area, or similar
means of providing a buffer between land uses or districts.



   TRUCK STORAGE. An area used for the temporary storage of private trucks
or trucks for hire.



   TRUCK TERMINAL. A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed
agricultural products, natural minerals, or other resources, are delivered
for immediate distribution to other parts of the village, amalgamation for
delivery in larger units to other intrastate or interstate destinations, or
distribution or amalgamation involving transfer to other modes of
transportation.



   USE. The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged,
designed, or intended or for which land or a building is or may be occupied.



   UTILITY TRAILER. A small trailer that is designed to be pulled by an
automobile, van, or pick-up truck.



   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter
granted when enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing to
circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A facility which provides diagnosis, treatment,
surgery, and other veterinary care for domestic animals, horses, and
livestock.



   WALKWAYS AND PATIOS. A patio built out of any material that is less
than seven inches above grade may project into any front, side, or rear yard.
Any WALKWAY, including a stepped walkway that follows the contour of the
grade and is less than seven inches above grade may project into any front,
side, or rear yard.



   WALL, OBSCURING. A structure of definite height and location to serve
as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. A
wall shall be a solid durable structure of masonry or concrete in contrast to
a fence which may be constructed of wood.



   WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials.



   WASTE RECEPTACLE. Any accessory exterior container used for the
temporary storage of rubbish, pending collection, having capacity of at least
one cubic yard. Recycling stations and exterior compactors shall be
considered to be WASTE RECEPTACLES.



   WETLAND. Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does
support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a
bog, swamp, or marsh, and which is any of the following:



      (1)   Contiguous to the Great Lakes or Lake St. Clair, an
inland lake or pond, or a river or stream;



      (2)   Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, an inland lake or
pond, or a river or stream; and more than five acres in size; (this
requirement does not apply to counties of less than 100,000 population,
unless the MDNR has inventoried the wetland in this county; or



      (3)   Determined by the MDNR that the protection of the area
is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state from
pollution, impairment, or destruction. (Refer to Goemaere-Anderson Wetland
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.30301 et
seq., as amended.)



   WHOLESALE SALES. The sales of goods generally in large quantities and
primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.



   YARDS. The open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, and as defined herein (see illustration below).



      (1)   FRONT YARD. An open space extending the full width of
the lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the front
property line and the nearest wall of the main building, excluding any
architectural features as defined in this chapter.



      (2)   REAR YARD.



         (a)   An open space extending the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the rear property line
and the nearest wall of the main building, excluding any architectural
features as defined in this chapter.



         (b)   In the case of a corner lot, the REAR YARD may be
opposite either street frontage.



      (3)   SIDE YARD. An open space between a main building and the
side property line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width
of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side
property line to the nearest wall of the main building.







 



   YARD ENCROACHMENTS and ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES.



      (1)   (a)   Architectural features, not including vertical
projections, may extend or project into a required front, rear, or side yard
not more than one-third of the required setback but not to exceed two feet.



         (b)   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES include bay windows,
shutters, roof eaves, gutters, and overhangs.



      (2)   (a)   YARD ENCROACHMENTS such as residing shall be
allowed in any yard up to six inches on an existing building.



         (b)   Vertical projections include porch roof supports
and chimneys.



   ZONING ACT. The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006,
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101, as amended).



   ZONING OFFICIAL or ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Official(s) designated by
the Village Council to administer and enforce the zoning ordinance of the
village or his or her designee.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 324, passed 5-11-1999; Ord. 407, passed
3-13-2011; Ord. passed 2-1-2012; Ord. 437, passed 1-17-2016)



§ 157.009  SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Schedule generally. The following is a schedule of regulations
for principle buildings.



      (1)   Residential districts.



Zone standards

District Minimum Lot Area Width Stories Feet Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Max. Lot Coverage Min. Floor Area Per Unit



MHP Mobile Home Park 5,500 square feet  50 feet per unit 1 14 - - - - -

R3 Multi-Family 4,000 100 feet 2.5 30 25 feet 20 feet 40 feet 35% 450 square feet

R1 Single- Family Attached 4,000 square feet 60 feet 2 30 25 feet 20 feet 40 ft 35% 450 square feet

R1A Single- Family 12,000 square feet 100 feet 2.5 30 30 feet 10 feet 35 feet 35% 1,400 square feet

R1B Single- Family 7,200 square feet 60 feet 30 25 feet 9 feet 35 feet 35% 1,200 square feet

RM Moderate-Density Multi-Family 4,000 square feet 100 feet 2.5 30 25 feet 12.5 feet 40 feet 35% 450 square feet

RM Moderate-Density Single-Family Attached 4,000 square feet 60 feet 2.5 30 25 feet 10 feet 40 feet 35% 450 square feet

Notes for Residential Districts:


1.   Minimum lot width is measured at the required front yard setback
distance from the right-of-way. Corner lots and double frontage lots are
considered to have two front yards. The depth of a lot shall not exceed three
times the width as measured at the building line for platted lots and four
times the width for unplatted lots



2.   Building heights shall be measured as the vertical distance from
grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the dock
line for mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. The maximum building height may be increased
upon application to and finding by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, that such increased height will not adversely affect
existing and surrounding adjacent properties



3.   In the case of corner lots or lots with dual frontage, front setback
requirements shall be maintained along all street frontages



4.   See §§ 157.035 through 157.040(A) for accessory building and
structure setbacks



5.   See division (B) below, average lot size option and division (C)
below, subdivision open space option (R1A District only), regarding
flexibility allowances



6.   For buildings with multiple dwelling units, a 10-foot landscaped
setback from all roads, drives, parking areas, and adjacent Single-Family
Residential Districts shall be provided meeting the requirements of § 157.168



7.   Other yard dimensions:



   (a)   No multiple-family building designed, erected, or used for
eight or more families shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
Single-Family Residential District; where findings of the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, conclude that the adjoining property
will eventually assume similar zoning as property in question, the Commission
may waive the 50-foot minimum separation



   (b)   No single building or connected buildings may exceed 160 feet
in any one dimension. All buildings shall be so arranged as to permit
emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sides



   (c)   The separation between grouped buildings shall be a minimum of
25 feet



   (d)   No building entrance to a multiple-family structure shall be
located closer to any street, access road, driveway, or parking area than 25
feet


8. The minimum 5,500 square feet per unit site may be reduced by 20%;
provided, that the individual site shall be equal to 4,400 square feet;
provided, that for each square foot of land gained through the reduction of a
site below 5,5000 square feet, at least an equal amount of land shall be
dedicated as open space, but in no case shall the open and distance
requirements be less than that required by the Mobile Home Commission

9. The minimum site area of a PUD may be reduced upon application to, and
approval by, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required




 



      (2)   Nonresidential districts.



 


Nonresidential Districts




District

 

Min. Lot Area

 

Min Lot Width1

 

Minimum Yard
Setbacks2

 

Max. Impervious Surface Coverage10

 

Max. Height3




Front Yard

 

Each Side Yard

 

Rear Yard





C Commercial
 

Governed by setbacks

 

Governed by setbacks

 

(Note 4)

 

(Note 4)

 

15 feet4

 

70%

 

40 feet or 2 stories5



C2 Central Business
 

Governedby setbacks

 

Governed by setbacks

 

(Note 6)

 

(Note 7)

 

(Note 7)

 

No maximum

 

40 feet or 3 stories5



M Industrial District
 

Governedby setbacks

 

Governed by setbacks

 

25 feet8

 

10 feet8

 

30 feet8

 

85%

 

40 feet or 2 stories5



NOC, Office or Commercial Uses
 

7,200 square feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

9 feet

 

30 feet

 

75%

 

30 feet or 2 stories



O Office
 

Governed by setbacks

 

Governed by setbacks

 

(Note 4)

 

(Note 4)

 

15 feet4

 

60%

 

40 feet or 2 stories5



PUD Planned Unit Development (Nonresidential)
 

Minimum 3 acre site9

 

Same as underlying zoning district, except as may be modified under § 157.080



Notes for Nonresidential Districts:


1   Minimum lot width is measured at the required front yard setback
distance from the right-of-way. Corner lots and double frontage lots are
considered to have two front yards. The depth of a lot shall not exceed three
times the width as measured at the building line for platted lots and four
times the width for unplatted lots



2.   See §§ 157.035 through 157.040 (A) for accessory building and
structure setbacks



3.   Building heights shall be measured as the vertical distance from
grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the dock
line for mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. The maximum building height may be increased
upon application to and finding by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, that such increased height will not adversely affect
existing and surrounding adjacent properties



4.   Whenever property zoned for industrial or commercial use has a
contiguous border with a residential district, the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, may require that no storage, driveway,
parking area, building, sign, commercial or industrial activity be allowed in
a setback area established by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required. The setback shall be at least 50, feet but not more
than 200 feet from the property line abutting the residential district. The
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may further
require that trees, shrubs, grasses, screening fences, berms, or other
landscaping be placed in the above described area abutting this residential
district.



   a.   The proposed use of the property;



   b.   Noise, odors, vehicle traffic, light, vibration, and dirt
caused by the proposed use;



   c.   Size, construction, appearances, and exterior lighting of
buildings, structures, parking areas, or driveways;



   d.   Exterior storage, including storage of waste or trash; and



   e.   Lot size and natural barriers



5.    The height of a sign or building shall not exceed 50% of the
horizontal distance to the nearest residential district boundary



6.   The front setback shall be equal to the minimum setback established
by existing buildings within 200 feet of a proposed principal building
location



7.   The principal building may be constructed on the side property line.
Rear yards shall be at least 10 feet. No structure shall be less than 20 feet
from any residential district



8.   No building, sign, storage, or industrial activity shall be located
within 20 feet of an abutting residential district and may be further limited
by site plan requirements under § 157.196



9.   The minimum site area of a PUD may be reduced upon application to and
finding by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
that the smaller site area can be developed to meet the intent and review
objectives of the PUD



10.   An IMPERVIOUS SURFACE is defined as surface that has been compacted
or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water. Maximum impervious surface calculations do not include
the area within the right-of-way on a parcel






 



   (B)   Averaged lot size option.



      (1)   The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider
or developer to vary lot sizes and lot widths to average the minimum size of
lot per unit as required in division (A) above, each Single-Family
Residential District.



      (2)   If this option is selected, the following conditions
shall be met.



         (a)   In meeting the average minimum lot size, the
subdivision shall be designed so that no lot has area or width reduced more
than 10% than the minimum or width-required in the schedule of regulations in
division (A) above and shall not create an increase in the number of lots.



         (b)   Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary
plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is
located. The area and dimensions of each lot shall be listed on, the plan in
tabular form.



   (C)   Subdivision open space option. The intent of the subdivision
open space plan is to promote the following objectives:



      (1)   Provide a more desirable living environment by
preserving the natural features such as woodlands, steep topography, water
bodies, and wetlands;



      (2)   Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in
the development of residential areas;



      (3)   Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable use
of open area, reducing development costs, and allowing the developer to avoid
natural obstacles on the site; and



      (4)   Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable
distance to lots in the subdivision and to further encourage the development
of recreational facilities, such as pathways which link up to the village’s
sidewalk system.



   (D)   Modifications. Modifications to the standards as outlined in
schedule of regulations in division (A) above, may be made in the R1A
Single-Family Residential Districts when the following conditions are met
(R1B Districts are not eligible for this option.).



      (1)   (a)   Individual lots in the R1 A Single-Family
Residential Districts may be reduced up to 20%. This reduction may be
accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to 20 feet.



         (b)   Lot area reductions shall be permitted; provided,
that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the land area to
be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required
for each Single-Family District under schedule of regulations in division (A)
above.



         (c)   The area remaining through the reduction of lot
sizes shall be retained as permanent open space.



      (2)   Rear yards may be reduced to no less than 30 feet when
such lots border land dedicated for park, recreation, and/or open space
purposes, provided, the width of the dedicated land shall not be less than
100 feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the
adjacent lot.



      (3)   The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space
purposes shall in no instance be less than one acre, and shall be in a
location and shape approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required.



      (4)   The plan for reduced lot sizes shall be permitted only
if it is agreeable to the village.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.010  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by a Zoning Official designated by the Village
Manager.



   (B)   Duties of Zoning Official.



      (1)   The Zoning Official shall have the power to grant zoning
compliance permits, and to make inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Official to approve any plans or issue
any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction
until he or she has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform
with this chapter.



      (2)   Under no circumstances is the Zoning Official permitted
neither to make changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter
in carrying out his or her duties as Zoning Official.



      (3)   The Zoning Official shall not refuse to issue a permit
when conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant
despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements
which may occur upon the granting of said permit.



   (C)   Zoning compliance permits.



      (1)   A zoning compliance permit shall be required prior to
the erection, extension, demolition, moving, or alteration of any
structure(s) or portion(s) thereof; prior to the use or change in use of a
structure or land including special land use approval; prior to any proposal
to fill, excavate, or grade land which causes more than a cumulative 100
cubic yards of earth to be disturbed within a six-month period; prior to any
proposal to create, expand, or alter a use or structure which involves using,
storing, or generating hazardous substances; or prior to clearing 25% of the
trees of eight-inch caliper or greater on a site. No such zoning compliance
permit shall be required for normal maintenance activities and minor repairs
which do not constitute an erection, extension, demolition, or alteration of
a site or building(s) as defined in § 157.191.



      (2)   No permit shall be granted by the Zoning Official for
any purpose, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or,
upon appeal, in compliance with an order of the Board of Appeals or the
courts.



         (a)   Application for zoning compliance permits.
Application for a zoning compliance permit shall be made to the village on
such forms and in such number as required by the village by administrative
directive. No application shall be accepted without the appropriate fee as
established by Council.



         (b)   Review of the application. All applications for
zoning compliance permits not requiring Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, review of the site plan shall be granted or denied
by the Zoning Official within 30 days from the receipt of the application and
payment of fees. Those applications requiring site plan review by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall be granted
or denied within 60 days from receipt of the application and payment of fees.
Those applications not meeting the deadlines established in this section
shall be deemed approved as if they were reviewed according to this chapter.
The applicants of all zoning compliance permit applications denied by
whatever official or agency shall be notified by the Zoning Official in
writing. The Zoning Official shall specify the provisions of this chapter
with which the applications failed to comply.



         (c)   Site plan review and approval by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, is required. Activities
covered in § 157.191 require a site plan submitted to and approved by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



         (d)   Sketch plan. All applications for a zoning
compliance permit not requiring a site plan shall be accompanied by a sketch
plan, drawn to scale, showing the following:



            1.   The actual shape, location, and dimensions of
the lot with a north arrow;



            2.   The shape, size, and location of all
buildings or other structures already on the lot and proposed to be erected,
altered, demolished, or moved. If nothing is being proposed, show only the
shape, size, and location of all buildings and other structures;



            3.   The existing and intended use of the lot and
of all such structures upon it, including residential areas, the number of
dwelling units the building units the building is intended to accommodate; and



            4.   Such other information concerning the lot or
adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of
this chapter are being observed.



         (e)   Permit issuance; length permit valid.



            1.   Approved applications for zoning compliance
permits shall be given a zoning compliance permit. Such permit with any
conditions noted on its face, as applicable, shall be evidence that all
proposed work or changes in use comply with the provisions of this chapter.



            2.   A zoning compliance permit shall be valid for
one year from the date of issuance and for such additional time as necessary
to complete the project under a valid building permit. If an applicant does
not obtain a building permit within one year after issuance of a zoning
compliance permit, the permit expires. The zoning compliance permit may be
extended for an additional six months from the date of initial expiration by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, for those
permits that required a site plan review and by the Zoning Official for those
permits that did not.



   (D)   Building Code coordination.



      (1)   No building permit shall be issued unless and until the
Zoning Official conducts an initial site inspection and issues a zoning
compliance permit for the project requiring a building permit.



      (2)   No certificate of occupancy noting completion of a
project for which a building permit was issued shall be given unless and
until the Zoning Official conducts a final inspection and issues a
certificate of zoning compliance.



   (E)   Certificate of zoning compliance. The holder of every zoning
compliance permit shall notify the Zoning Official immediately upon the
completion of the work or change of use authorized by such permit for a final
inspection. Upon the satisfactory completion of the work or change of use
authorized as evidenced by the final inspection, the Zoning Official shall
issue a certificate of zoning compliance.



   (F)   Fees.



      (1)   The purpose of fees is to cover the costs of
administering this chapter. Costs include inspections, issuance of permits
and certificates, public hearings, and such other oversight activities
necessary to administer this chapter. The amount of any fee is predicated on
the costs of providing the services. Council shall set fees accordingly and
may establish escrow accounts to cover the full costs of services not known
at the outset of any permit or certificate process.



      (2)   In no case shall the Zoning Official issue a certificate
of zoning compliance to any person owing the village fees.



   (G)   Violations.



      (1)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter or any
permit, license, or special approval granted hereunder, or any lawful order
of the building official, Zoning Official, Zoning Board of Appeals, or the
Village Council issued in pursuance of this chapter shall be a municipal
civil infraction. A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense by this chapter and any omission or
failure to act where the act is required by this chapter.



      (2)   The sanction for any violation of this chapter which is
a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine as provided in §
157.999(A)(2), plus any costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions, as
authorized under Public Act 327 of 1961, Ch. 87, Public Act 237 of 1961,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701 et seq., as amended, and other applicable laws.



      (3)   The Code Compliance Officer and the Village Manager,
together with police officers of the village, are the village officials
authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil
infraction violation notices for violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.011  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Initiation of amendments.



      (1)   The Village Council may, from time to time, amend,
modify, supplement, or revise the zoning district boundaries shown on the
official zoning map or the provisions of this chapter. Amendments to the
provisions of this chapter may be initiated by the Village Council, the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, the Board of
Appeals, the Administrative Official designated by the Village Council to
enforce the ordinance or by petition of one or more residents or land owners.
Amendments to the official zoning map may be initiated by the Village
Council, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, or by
the owner or owners of the subject site.



      (2)   All proposed amendments to the provisions of this
chapter or the official zoning map shall be referred to the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, for public hearing and
recommendation to the Village Council prior to action by the Village Council.



   (B)   Application procedure.



      (1)   An amendment to this chapter or the official zoning map,
except those initiated by the village, shall be initiated by submission of a
completed application form and fee.



      (2)   The following information shall accompany the
application form:



         (a)   A legal description and street address of the
subject property, together with a map identifying the subject property in
relation to surrounding properties;



         (b)   The name and address of the owner of the subject
site, and a statement of the applicant’s interest in the subject site if
not the owner in fee simple title;



         (c)   The existing and proposed zoning district
designation of the subject property;



         (d)   The land use classification for the subject site
as illustrated on the Village’s Master Plan;



         (e)   In the case of an amendment to this chapter, other
than an amendment to the official zoning map, a general description of the
proposed amendment and rationale for the change shall accompany the
application form; and



         (f)   A written description of how the requested
rezoning meets divisions (E) and (F) below.



   (C)   Amendment procedure; public hearing and notice.



      (1)   Upon initiation of an amendment, a work session and
public hearing to consider the proposed amendment shall be scheduled before
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. Notice of the
healing shall be given as required by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., as amended).



      (2)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall identify and evaluate all
factors relevant to the petition and shall report its findings and
recommendation to the Village Council. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, shall consider the criteria listed in division (E)
below for a requested amendment to the official zoning map, and the criteria
listed in division (F) below for requested amendments to the standards and
regulations in the text.



      (3)   Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, the Village
Council shall act on the proposed amendment. In the case of an amendment to
the text of this chapter, the Village Council may modify or revise the
proposed amendment recommended by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, prior to enactment. In the case of an amendment to
the official zoning map, the Village Council shall approve or deny the
amendment based on its consideration of the criteria in division (E) below.



   (D)   Amendments required to conform to court decree. Any amendment
for the purpose of conforming to a decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be adopted by the Village Council and published, without
necessity of a public hearing or referral thereof to any other board or
agency.



   (E)   Criteria for amendment of the official zoning map. In
considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, and Village
Council shall consider the following criteria in making its findings,
recommendations, and decision:



      (1)   Consistency with the goals, policies, and future land
use map of the Village Master Plan. If conditions upon which the Master Plan
was developed (such as market factors, demographics, infrastructure, traffic,
and environmental issues) have changed significantly since the Master Plan
was adopted, as determined by the village, the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, and Council shall consider the consistency
with recent development trends in the area;



      (2)   Compatibility of the site’s physical, geological,
hydrological, and other environmental features with the host of uses
permitted in the proposed zoning district;



      (3)   Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable
return on investment through developing the property with at least one of the
uses permitted under the current zoning;



      (4)   The compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in
the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of
land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic
impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure, and potential influence on property
values;



      (5)    The capacity of the village’s infrastructure and
sendees sufficient to accommodate the uses permitted in the requested
district without compromising the health, safety, and welfare;



      (6)   The apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in
the requested zoning district in the village area in relation to the amount
of land currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand; and



      (7)   The request has not previously been submitted within the
past one year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been
provided.



   (F)   Criteria for amendment to the zoning ordinance text. The
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, and Village
Council shall consider the following criteria to determine the
appropriateness of amending the text, standards, and regulations of this
chapter:



      (1)   Documentation has been provided from village staff or
the Board of Appeals indicating problems and conflicts in implementation of
specific sections of this chapter;



      (2)   Reference materials, planning and zoning publications,
information gained at seminars, or experiences of other communities
demonstrate improved techniques to deal with certain zoning issues, or that
the village’s standards are outdated;



      (3)   The Village Attorney recommends an amendment to respond
to significant case law; and



      (4)   The amendment would promote implementation of the goals
and objectives of the Village’s Master Plan.



   (G)   Restrictions on re-submittal of a rezoning request. An
application for an amendment to the official zoning map (i.e., a rezoning
request) that has been denied, shall not be reconsidered for one year, unless
the applicant demonstrates that conditions have changed.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 157.025  INTRODUCTION.



   The standards and regulations listed in this subchapter shall apply to
all uses, buildings, and structures within all zoning districts, unless
otherwise specifically addressed.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.026  WITHHOLDING OF APPROVAL.



   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, Board of
Appeals, or Village Council may withhold granting of approval of any use,
special land use, site plan, planned unit development plan, variance, or
other approval required by this chapter pending approvals which may be
required by state, county, or federal agencies or departments.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.027  VOTING PLACE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as to interfere
with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a
village, school, or other public election.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.028  LOT AREA.



   Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this chapter
may be used for any principal use permitted, other than special land uses for
which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, permitted
in the district in which such lot is located, whether or not such lot
complies with the lot area and width requirements of this chapter. Such use
may be made; provided, that all requirements other than lot area and width
prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided, that not more
than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot, except in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.029  PRINCIPLE BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE.



    No lot may contain more than one principal building, structure, or
use, except, groups of multiple-family dwellings under the same ownership;
condominium developments; manufactured housing parks; unified shopping
centers; an auto dealership; an office complex; a mixed-use development with
residential and office uses; a multi-building industrial use; or a planned
unit development.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012; Council Action Req.
passed 4-18-2018)



§ 157.030  SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   (1)   Single-family dwellings, whether mobile homes,
manufactured homes, modular homes, or site (“stick”) built homes, located
outside a mobile home park, shall conform to the standards of this section in
addition to HUD standards or the Village Building Code, as appropriate.



      (2)   In order to preserve the substantial investment of
property owners in single-family neighborhoods, single-family homes erected
in residential districts shall not be grossly dissimilar to the exterior
design and appearance of existing detached single-family homes in the
surrounding area. The term GROSSLY DISSIMILAR as used in this section, means
an immediately obvious difference apparent to professionals in the building
trade, neighbors, and potential residents.



   (B)   The standards herein are intended to prevent grossly
dissimilar dwellings which would adversely affect the value of dwellings in
the surrounding area, adversely affect the desirability of an area to
existing or prospective homeowners, impair the stability of the environment,
prevent the most appropriate use of real estate, and lessen the opportunity
to realize the development pattern envisioned in the community Master Plan.



      (1)   Code compliance.



         (a)   Each such dwelling unit shall comply with all
pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all
construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus, and insulation within
and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming
to the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, as promulgated by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 C.F.R. pt. 3280,
as amended.



         (b)   Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed
all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. Where there are
conflicting applicable regulations, the more stringent shall apply.



      (2)   Building permit. All construction required herein shall
be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance
with the Village Building Code and other building regulations.



      (3)   Certification. If the dwelling unit is a mobile home,
the mobile home must, either be:



         (a)   New and certified by the manufacturer and/or
appropriate inspection agency as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as
amended, or any similar successor or replacement standards which may be
promulgated; or



         (b)   Used and certified by the manufacturer and/or
appropriate, inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in
division (B)(2)(a) above, and found, on inspection by the Zoning Official or
his or her designee, to be in excellent condition and safe and fit for
residential occupancy.



      (4)   Dimensional standards. Each such dwelling unit shall
comply with the minimum standards listed in § 157.009 for the zoning
district in which it is located, including minimum lot area, minimum lot
width, minimum floor area, required setbacks, and maximum building height.



      (5)   Foundation.



         (a)   Each dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a
permanent basement or crawl space foundation constructed on the site in
accordance with the Village Building Code and shall have a wall of the same
perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and
type as required in the applicable Building Code for single-family dwellings.



         (b)   If said dwelling is a mobile home, the dwelling
shall be securely anchored to the foundation to prevent displacement during
windstorms.



      (6)   Undercarriage.



         (a)   In the event that such dwelling unit shall be a
mobile home, the wheels, tongue, hitch assembly, and other towing
appurtenances shall be removed before attachment to its permanent foundation.



         (b)   The foundation or skirting shall fully enclose the
towing mechanism, undercarriage, and chassis.



      (7)   Storage area.



         (a)   Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage
area equal to 10% of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet,
whichever shall be less.



         (b)   This storage area shall consist of a basement,
attic, or attached garage, or in a separate detached accessory structure
which complies with the standards of this section regarding accessory
buildings and structures. The intent of these standards is to limit the
extent of outdoor storage.



      (8)   Architectural compatibility.



         (a)   In the event that such dwelling unit shall be a
manufactured, modular, or mobile home as defined herein, each such home shall
be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with at least one-half
of all other residences in similar zoning districts in the surrounding area.
Surrounding area shall be defined as within 500 feet of the subject dwelling
unit; with measurements made from the edge of the lot in each direction.



         (b)   The determination shall be made by the Zoning
Official based on the following factors:



            1.   The type of material used in the proposed
dwelling is not grossly dissimilar to the type of materials used in
single-family homes in the surrounding area, provided, the reflection from
such exterior surface shall be no greater than from white semi-gloss exterior
enamel;



            2.   The design and position of windows shall not
be grossly dissimilar in relation to other single-family homes in the
surrounding area;



            3.   A roof overhang of not less than six inches
on all sides shall be provided, or alternatively with window sills or roof
drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the
sides of the dwelling;



            4.   A minimum of two exterior doors shall be
provided with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling;



            5.   The width across any front, side, or rear
elevation shall be a minimum of 20 feet and comply in all respects with the
Village Building Code;



            6.   An applicant may appeal to the Board of
Appeals within a period of 20 days from the receipt of notice of said Zoning
Official’s decision; or



            7.   The above standards shall not be construed to
prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy,
view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed
home.



      (9)   Exceptions. The foregoing standards shall not apply to a
mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park, except to the extent
required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in this
chapter and pertaining to such parks. Mobile homes which do not conform to
the standards of this section shall not be used for dwelling purposes within
the village, unless located within a mobile home park or a mobile home
subdivision district for such uses, or unless used as a temporary residence
as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 357, passed 3-16-2003; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.031  REGULATIONS ON USE OF BUILDING FOR DWELLING.



   (A)   The use of any portion of the cellar (more than one-half the
room is below grade) of a partially completed building, detached garage, or
accessory building for sleeping purposes in any zoning district is prohibited.



   (B)   (1)   Dwellings are not permitted in the office,
commercial, or industrial districts, except for legal nonconforming dwelling
existing at the time the zoning ordinance was adopted, a caretaker’s
quarters in a funeral home or veterinary clinic, upper story residential in
the Central Business District which meets applicable standards of this
chapter, and the Village Building Code, or housing used exclusively by
security or custodial personnel and approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (2)   The use of trailers and recreational vehicles for
housing such security and custodial personnel is prohibited.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.032  DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USES



   (A)   In recognition that every potential use cannot be addressed in
this chapter, districts may include the phrase “uses of the same nature or
class as uses listed in this district as either a permitted use or a special
land use, but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, based on the
standards of this section” at the end of the list of special land uses. The
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall make a
determination of “uses of the same nature and class...” according to the
following:



      (1)   A finding the proposed use is not listed as a principle
use permitted or special land use in any zoning district;



      (2)   If the use is not addressed in the zoning ordinance, the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall select the
use listed in the zoning ordinance which most closely resembles the proposed
use using criteria such as potential impact on property values, traffic
generated, aesthetics, noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, glare, and other
objectionable impacts terms of health, safety, and welfare in the village.
The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may determine
that there is no similar use and that the use should be prohibited (see §
157.033);



      (3)   Once a similar use is determined, the proposed use shall
comply with any special conditions or special land use standard that apply to
the similar use;



      (4)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, or applicant shall have the option to request that the Village
Council consider an amendment to the zoning ordinance to specifically address
the use in question, rather than treating the proposed use as a similar use;
and



      (5)   (a)   The determination as to whether a proposed use
is similar in nature and class to other principal use permitted or special
land uses within a district should be considered as an expansion of the use
regulations, not a variance applying to a particular situation.



         (b)   Any use determined by the Planning Commission to
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, be a “use of the same nature or
class as uses listed” shall thereafter be included in the enumeration of
the uses.



   (B)   The Planning Commission’s and/or Zoning Commission’s, as
required, determination of a “similar use” may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.033  PROHIBITED USES.



   (A)   (1)   Certain uses may not be appropriate within the
village given the existing development pattern, environmental condition, and
overall character of the community.



      (2)   In accordance with the Village and City Zoning Act, a
zoning ordinance or zoning decision can totally prohibit the establishment of
a requested land use within a village if there is not an appropriate location
within the community or the use is unlawful, even if there is a demonstrated
need for that land use either in the village or surrounding area.



   (B)   In determining if there is no appropriate location for the
requested use within the village, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, shall consider the following:



      (1)   The land area required by the proposed use;



      (2)   Existing environmental conditions and potential
environmental hazards;



      (3)   The potential impact on surrounding properties in terms
of traffic, noise, lighting, property valuation, and views;



      (4)   Demand and capacity of utilities and municipal services
to support the proposed use; and



      (5)   Finding there is an alternative land use for the
property that will provide the property owner with a reasonable rate of
return on investment.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.034  ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES.



   (A)   Essential services buildings and structures.



      (1)   Essential services buildings and structures shall be
permitted as authorized under any franchise in effect within the village,
subject to regulation as provided in any law of the state the list of uses
within each zoning district or in any other village ordinance provided it is
the intent of this section to ensure conformity of all buildings, structures
uses, and storage yards to the requirements of this chapter wherever such
conformity shall be practicable and not in conflict with the specific
requirements of such franchise, state legislation. or village ordinance.



      (2)   In the absence of such conflict, the zoning ordinance
shall prevail.



      (3)   Appeal from the application of this chapter in regard to
any essential service may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (B)   Public and on-site utilities. Prior to issuance of a building
permit under the terms of this chapter, the applicant shall obtain
engineering approval from the village.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.035  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   All accessory buildings and structures permitted in this chapter shall
be subject to the following.



   (A)   Relation to principal building.



      (1)   Accessory buildings, structures, and uses are permitted
only in connection with, incidental to and on the same lot with, a principal
building, structure, or use which is permitted in the particular zoning
district.



      (2)   No accessory building, structure, or use shall be
occupied or utilized, unless the principal structure to which it is accessory
is occupied or utilized.



   (B)   Maximum size.



      (1)   In residential districts, the total floor area of all
accessory buildings on a lot shall not exceed 35% of the floor area of the
principal structure, plus 4% of the total lot area.



      (2)   Not more than two accessory structures shall be
permitted on any residential lot.



   (C)   Placement and setbacks.



      (1)   Accessory buildings.



         (a)   Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any
right-of-way, easement, front yard, required front yard, or in the required
side yard between the required front yard and required rear yard.



         (b)   An accessory building wall shall be located a
minimum of five feet from a property line when the width of the lot is 80
feet or less.



      (2)   Accessory building wall.



         (a)   An accessory building wall shall be located a
minimum of nine feet from a property line on all other properties.



         (b)   Overhangs shall be allowed to extend into the
setback area up to a maximum of 18 inches.



         (c)   A separate accessory building overhang shall not
he or she located within five feet of any other building overhang.



         (d)   An enlargement or alteration of an existing
nonconforming building line shall be permitted; provided, that the accessory
structure is not enlarged by more than 50% of its existing gross floor area
and; provided, that the accessory building is setback at least three feet
from the lot line.



      (3)   Setback of the addition. The setback of the addition
shall not be less than the existing building as illustrated below.







 



      (4)   Corner lot location.



         (a)   When an accessory building is located on a corner
lot, it shall not be placed in either front yard. In the case of attached
residential dwelling complexes, detached parking garages, or carports may be
permitted in the non-required front yard provided the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, approves the site plan, landscaping,
elevation drawings, and construction materials.



         (b)   In reviewing such structures, the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall consider the impact
of headlights and views from nearby public streets and adjacent properties.



      (5)   Required setbacks (attached). Where the accessory
building, structure, or use is structurally attached to a principal building,
structure, or use (e.g., a deck, garage or breezeway), it shall be subject to
all the regulations of this section applicable to principal buildings,
structures, and uses.



      (6)   Maximum, height.



         (a)   The maximum height of any detached accessory
building or structure in any district shall be 12 feet when allowed to be
placed five feet or less from a property line, and 18 feet for all other
locations.



         (b)   The height may exceed the limits listed above if
the roof pitch matches the principal building, and the accessory building
wall height is limited to eight feet or less.



      (7)   Drainage. The placement and design of any accessory
building or structure shall not have a significant impact on stormwater
runoff. The Zoning Official may require grading plans to ensure compliance
with this section.



      (8)   Restrictions on use. Accessory buildings shall not be
occupied for dwelling purposes nor used for any business, trade, or
occupation, except for permitted caretaker’s dwellings, except as permitted
in § 157.031.



      (9)   Permit required. The construction or placement of any
accessory building or structure greater than 200 square feet shall require a
building permit.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 319, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 362, passed
9-14-2003; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.036  WASTE RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   (1)   Receptacles, including waste receptacles, waste
compactors, and recycling bins shall be designed, constructed, and maintained
according to the standards of this section.



      (2)   Waste receptacle location and details of construction
shall be shown on site plans.



   (B)   A change in receptacle location or size shall require
modification to the enclosure, as warranted by this section.



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   Waste receptacles shall be located in the rear
yard or non-required side yard, unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall be as far as
practical, and in no case be less than 20 feet from any residential district,
and in such a way that they are not easily damaged by the refuse device.



         (b)   The location and orientation of waste receptacle
and enclosure shall minimize the potential for the waste receptacle to be
viewed from public street or adjacent residential districts.



      (2)   Access. Waste receptacles shall be easily accessed by
refuse vehicles without potential to damage the building or automobiles
parked in designated parking spaces.



      (3)   Base design.



         (a)   The receptacle base shall be at least ten feet by
six feet, constructed of six inches of reinforced concrete pavement.



         (b)   The base shall extend six feet beyond the waste
receptacle pad or gate to support the front axle of a refuse vehicle.



      (4)   Enclosure.



         (a)   Waste receptacles shall meet the following
standards. Each waste receptacle shall have an enclosing lid or cover.



         (b)   Waste receptacles shall be enclosed on three sides
with a gate on the fourth side. The gate must be maintained in operable and
sanitary condition.



         (c)   The enclosure shall be a berm or constructed of
brick, decorative block, or decorative pre-cast panel with brick effect or of
the same material as the principal building with a maximum height of six feet
or at least one foot higher than the receptacle, whichever is higher, and
spaced on three sides at least three feet from the receptacle.



         (d)   Bollards or similar protective devices shall be
installed at the opening to prevent damage to the enclosure.



         (e)   Two bollards shall be located at the front corners
of the receptacle as shown on the sketch below. Two bollards or a concrete
curb shall be located at the rear of the enclosure, behind the receptacle.



         (g)   The gates shall be constructed of wood or metal
and shall be opaque so the receptacles are not visible when the gates are
closed.



         (h)   In locating trash enclosures, primary
consideration shall be given to access for service, minimizing on-site
traffic congestion and minimizing visibility or other effects on those
utilizing the site or adjoining properties.



         (i)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, may modify or waive the required enclosure or its construction
standards when it determines that no significant negative effects will result
from the waiver.







 



      (5)   Receptacle and enclosure required.



         (a)   All nonresidential uses shall have access to a
dumpster enclosure on site or on a nearby property. The dumpster may be
shared by two or more businesses.



         (b)   All newly created nonresidential sites shall be
required to have an exterior trash receptacle and enclosure included in their
site plan proposal.



         (c)   All existing nonresidential sites shall construct
and utilize a proper enclosure within five years from the adoption date of
this chapter. This provision shall be removed from this chapter at the end of
the fifth year.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 349, passed 1-30-2002; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.037  FENCES.



   Fences are permitted subject to the following regulations.



   (A)   Location in front yards. Fences of an ornamental nature may be
located in a front yard of any lot of record up to a height of 36 inches;
provided, that for corner lots adequate sight distance is provided as
described in § 157.049.



   (B)   Location in other yards. Fences between two properties should
be located on the property line or at least six inches inside the property
line and the fence owner is responsible for maintaining the property between
the fence and the property line. On all lots of record, fences which enclose
property and/or are within a required side, or rear yard shall not exceed six
feet in height, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer the
front of the house or the required front yard, whichever is greater.



   (C)   Prohibition in right-of way. Fences shall not be erected in
public street rights-of-way.



   (D)   Location/height in industrial districts. Fences in the M
Industrial Districts with a maximum height of six feet may be located in any
yard, except the front yard provided such fences shall be located on parcels
with a principal building containing an approved industrial use, the fence is
maintained in good condition and does not constitute an unreasonable hazard
or nuisance.



   (E)   Wood fence standards. Wooden fences shall be a maximum of six
feet in height measured from the surrounding grade at every point along the
fence line. Wood fences having one finished side shall have the exposed fence
posts facing inward with the finished side of the fence facing outward,
unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Official. There shall not be more
than two inches separating the bottom of the face board and the surface of
the ground.



   (F)   Chain link standards. No chain link or wire fence shall
hereafter be erected in any required rear or side yard area on any lot of
record in excess of six feet in height measured from the surrounding grade at
every point along the fence line. Welded wire fences are strictly prohibited,
unless utilized in conjunction with an approved fencing operation.



   (G)   Materials. Ornamental fences are of approved materials, of a
design as to be non-sight obscuring and of a fence type listed below:



      (1)   Post and rail;



      (2)   Split rail;



      (3)   Picket;



      (4)   Wrought iron; or



      (5)   Other types of ornamental fences must be approved by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, prior to placement
in a front yard area.



   (H)   Restrictions on electrification. Fences shall not contain
electric current or charge of electricity.



   (I)   Restriction on barbed wire, and the like. Barbed wire, spikes,
nails, or any other sharp instruments of any kind are prohibited on top of or
on the sides of any fence, except in industrial districts.



   (J)   Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained in a good
condition, in an upright position and shall not constitute an unreasonable
hazard. Any fence which is not maintained, as determined by the Zoning
Official, shall be removed or replaced (any required fence shall be replaced).



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.038  RECEPTION ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Radio or television antennas or towers, including satellite
dish antennas and transmission or reception antennas below 300 watts of
output, erected, or installed in any zoning district shall comply with the
following requirements.



   (B)   Traditional television and radio antennas, reception antennas
with a diameter of two feet or less and short wave (HAM) radio antenna are
exempted from these regulations when not exceeding a 50-foot height above
mean grade or ten feet above the roof line in a residential district; or 100
feet above mean grade in other zoning districts based on a finding that they
do not impose potential negative safety, aesthetic, and welfare problems.



      (1)   There shall be only one antenna constructed per parcel
or lot.



      (2)   An antenna, tower, or satellite dish antenna shall be
located only in a side or rear yard.



      (3)   No portion of an antenna, including a satellite dish
antenna, shall be located closer than six feet, measured on a horizontal
plane, from any side or rear lot line, or placed on any easement.



      (4)   (a)   Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas in a
yard fronting on a public street shall be screened from view from such street
by landscaping or a wall. The applicant shall submit a sketch plan to the
Zoning Official for approval. The sketch plan shall indicate the location and
height of the satellite dish and buildings, paved areas, and other
appropriate site features within 100 feet of the proposed location.



         (b)   Ground-mounted antennas shall be subject to the
following conditions:



            1.   Maximum height permitted shall be 14 feet and
17 feet if placed on a structure;



            2.   The antenna shall be located in the
non-required side or rear yard area; or



            3.   The antenna shall be obscured from the view
of adjacent properties by a screening wall or fence, evergreen plantings, or
a combination of the above.



      (5)   The diameter of antennas and satellite dishes shall not
exceed ten feet.



      (6)   No advertising or identification display shall be placed
on any portion of an antenna or tower, including a satellite dish antenna.



      (7)   (a)   Erection or movement of an antennas, tower, or
satellite dish shall require a permit from the Village Zoning Official.



         (b)   Roof-mounted antennas shall be subject to the
following conditions.



            1.   For the purposes of this section, a reception
antenna regulated by this section shall be considered to be a portion of the
structure and must comply with the maximum building height regulations in §
157.009.



            2.   All roof-mounted antennas must be anchored in
an approved as outlined in the Village Building Code.



            3.   The antenna shall not be mounted on the front
of the structure.



      (8)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from
these standards upon determining compliance with the standards of this
section would not provide reasonably good reception, that the variance
requested is the minimum necessary to provide reasonably good reception and
that adjacent properties shall not be negatively impacted.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.039  ACCESSORY USE AND BUILDING PARKING.



   Each accessory use that may generate additional demand for parking
shall provide parking in addition to that required for the principal use. The
parking standards provided in §§ 157.145 to 157.151, shall be used as a
guide to determine additional parking needed. If no specific standard is
provided, the Zoning Official shall determine the additional parking needed
based on factors such as increased occupancy potential, additional employees
or patrons expected.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.040  NATURAL FEATURES PRESERVATION.



   (A)   Woodlands.



      (1)   The standards of this section are intended to promote
the preservation of important woodlands and large mature trees which
contribute to the character, welfare, and quality of life in the village.



      (2)   These standards are intended to prevent the
unnecessarily removal of woodlands prior to, during, and following
construction on a site.



         (a)   Any property owner or his or her representative
proposing to clear more than 25% of the trees of eight-inch caliper or
greater on a site, as determined by the Zoning Official, shall first notify
the village of the intent of such clearing and/or earth change and submit a
proposed sketch plan describing the sites features for review and approval by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. In the case
that such clearing is proposed on a site requiring site plan review, this
information shall be provided as part of the submittal requirements for site
plan review.



         (b)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall review the sketch plan and approve a clearing plan which
minimizes disturbance to valuable natural site features and trees which
exceed the eight-inch caliper standard.



         (c)   This section shall not prevent tree clearing for
approved building envelopes, swimming pools, decks, essential services,
utility lines, or construction drives, nor shall this chapter prohibit site
alterations for farming purposes. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, may waive the caliper standard for select clearing
of lower quality species, including box elders, elms, poplars, willows, and
cottonwoods.



   (B)   Wetlands.



      (1)   The village intends to promote compliance with the
Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, Public Act 203 of 1979, 451 of
1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.30301 et seq., as amended. The village
encourages placement of buildings to protect State Department of Natural
Resources regulated wetlands and non-regulated wetlands between two acres and
five acres in size.



      (2)   The village intends to ensure important wetlands are
preserved, to prevent the mistaken elimination of regulated wetlands and to
promote the goals of the Village Master Plan.



         (a)   Any disturbance of soils, removal of landmark
trees or stumps, grading, alteration of water flowing into or from an MDNR
regulated wetland, or any prohibited activity as listed in Public Act 203 of
1979, § 5, without a permit from the MDNR, may result in a stop work order
issued by the village and/or require restoration of the wetland in accordance
with MDNR standards.



         (b)   Judicious effort shall be made through site plan
design to preserve non-MDNR regulated wetlands which exceed two acres in
size, particularly those with standing water or considered to be important
wildlife habitat.



         (c)   Where stormwater is planned to drain into a
wetland, a filtration strip or other material shall be used to control runoff
of sediment and the wetland. Maintenance of these material shall be addressed
in a deed or as a condition of site plan approval.



         (d)   Land shall not be subdivided in a manner creating
parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of
this section or the MDNR regulations.



   (C)   Grading, removal, and filling of land.



      (1)   Any grading which changes site elevation by more than
three feet, or the use of land for the excavation, removal, filling, or
depositing of any type of earth material, topsoil, gravel, rock, garbage,
rubbish, or other wastes or by-products, is not permitted in any zoning
district, except under a certificate from, and under the supervision of the
Zoning Official in accordance with a topographic plan, approved by the Zoning
Official, submitted at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet and
shall show existing and proposed grades and topographic features and such
other data as may from time to time be required by the Zoning Official.



      (2)   (a)   Such certificate may be issued in appropriate
cases upon the filing with the application of a performance or surety bond in
an amount as established by the Zoning Official sufficient to rehabilitate
the property upon default of the operator or such other reasonable expenses.



         (b)   The form of the bond shall be approved by the
Village Attorney. This regulation does not apply to normal soil removal for
basement or foundation work when a building permit has previously been duly
issued by the Building Department.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.041  MINIMUM FRONTAGE ON PUBLIC STREET.



   No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter, unless
said lot has at least 35 feet abutting a public or approved private street.
The minimum lot width is required at the front setback line as described in
§ 157.009. This shall not preclude use of existing lots of record which have
a frontage of less than 35 feet. The intent of this section is to ensure no
new lots with less than 35 feet of frontage are created and that conformance
be required, except where may be allowed by a variance granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Once obtained, the minimum lot width shall not be reduced
at any point on the lot (see definition of “lot width”).



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 327, passed 9-23-1999; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.042  CALCULATION OF BUILDING LOT AREA.



   Lakes and ponds, overhead utility easements, public street
rights-of-way and private road easements are excluded from area calculations
for buildable lot area.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.043  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   (A)   Intent and purpose.



      (1)   Village residents value small town character and the
qualities associated with this character, including the ability to view the
stars against a dark sky. They recognize that inappropriate and poorly
designed or installed outdoor lighting causes unsafe and unpleasant
conditions, limits their ability to enjoy the nighttime sky, and results in
unnecessary use of electric power. It is also recognized that some exterior
lighting is appropriate and necessary to maintain public safety and welfare.



      (2)   This section is intended to help maintain the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the village through regulation of
exterior lighting in order to:



         (a)   Promote safety and security;



         (b)   Help preserve the small town character;



         (c)   Eliminate the escalation of nighttime light
pollution;



         (d)   Reduce glaring and offensive light sources;



         (e)   Provide clear guidance to builders and developers;



         (f)   Encourage the use of improved technologies for
lighting;



         (g)   Conserve energy; and



         (h)   Prevent inappropriate and poorly designed or
installed outdoor lighting.



   (B)   Applicability. The lighting standards of this section shall be
applicable to all outdoor lighting within the village.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIXTURE HEIGHT. Height of the fixture shall be the vertical
distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the fixture to the
lowest direct light emitting part of the fixture.



      FOOTCANDLES. A unit of illumination of a surface that is equal to
one lumen per square foot. For the purposes of these regulations, FOOTCANDLES
shall be measured at a height of three feet above finished grade.



      FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT. Light fixtures shielded or constructed so
that no light rays are directly emitted by the installed fixture at angles
above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. The
fixture must also be properly installed to effectively direct light down in
order to conform with the definition.



      HIGH-INTENSITY DISCHARGE LIGHT SOURCE (HID). Light sources
characterized by an arc tube or discharge capsule that produces light, with
typical sources being metal halide, high pressure sodium, and other similar
types which are developed in accordance with accepted industry standards.



      LIGHT TRESPASS. The shining of light produced by a light fixture
beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.



      POINT LIGHT SOURCE. The exact place from which illumination is
produced (i.e., a light bulb filament or discharge capsule).



   (D)   Lighting plans.



      (1)   Subject to the provisions set forth herein, all parking
areas, walkways, driveways, building entryways, off-street parking and
loading areas, and building complexes with common areas shall be sufficiently
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons
using such public or common areas. One lighting structure shall be provided
on each side of an entrance or exit drive or street at its intersection with
the public road, except where a boulevard or divided entrance/exit drive is
proposed, one lighting structure may be located in the boulevard or island
area for the purpose of illuminating the intersection.



      (2)   (a)   An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted in
conjunction with applications for subdivision, planned unit development,
special use permit application, site plan review, and building permit
application for a commercial, industrial, or multi-family building. Such
lighting plans shall be subject to establishment and approval through the
applicable review processes.



         (b)   Said lighting plan shall show, the following:



            1.   The location and height above grade of light
fixtures;



            2.   The type (such as incandescent, halogen, high
pressure sodium) and luminous intensity of each light source;



            3.   The type of fixture (such as floodlight,
full-cutoff, lantern, coach light);



            4.   Estimates for site illumination resulting
from the lighting, as measured in footcandles, should include minimum,
maximum, and average illumination. Comparable examples already in the
community that demonstrate technique, specification, and/or light level
should be provided if available to expedite the review process; and



            5.   Other information deemed necessary by the
Zoning Official to document compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   Nonresidential lighting standards. The following lighting
standards shall be applicable to all nonresidential properties, including
mixed uses.



      (1)   Shielding.



         (a)   Outdoor lighting used to illuminate par-king
spaces, driveways, maneuvering areas, or buildings shall conform to the
definition for “fully shielded light fixtures” and be designed, arranged,
and screened so that the point-light source shall not be visible from
adjoining lots or streets.



         (b)   No portion of the bulb or direct lamp image may be
visible beyond a distance equal to or greater than twice the mounting height
of the fixture. For example, for a fixture with a mounting height of 12 feet,
no portion of the bulb or direct lamp image may be visible from 24 feet away
in any direction.



         (c)   All light sources which are not fully shielded
shall use other than a clear lens material as the primary lens material to
enclose the light bulb so as to minimize glare from that point light source.
Exceptions may be allowed where there is a demonstrated benefit for the
community determined through the exemption process listed in this section.



      (2)   Intensity. The light level shall maintain an average of
one-half footcandles over the entire area to be illuminated, but no more than
ten footcandles as measured three feet above finished grade in any given
area. Exemptions may be requested for areas with high commercial, pedestrian,
or vehicular activity up to a maximum of 20-footcandles. Where adjacent to
Residential (R) Zoned Districts, light levels at the property line shall be
limited to one-tenth footcandles. Exemptions may be granted by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, based on actual use of the
adjacent property or other conditions specific to the site plan.



      (3)   Height. Outdoor lighting shall be 12 feet or less in
height, maximum, unless it meets one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   Fixture heights may be match the roof height of
the primary building on the site or parcel which the public or common area
serves, provided the overall height does not exceed 20 feet;



         (b)   Fixtures in pedestrian walkways, i.e., along
internal sidewalks, shall be limited to 12 feet in height or less;



         (c)   Building mounted lighting located above
over-head-doors shall be limited to 36 inches above the top of the door
opening;



         (d)   Decorative building mounted lighting; and



         (e)   Lighting on above grade decks or balconies which
shall be fully shielded.



      (4)   Fixtures. Outdoor pole type light fixtures shall be
similar to that manufactured by D.S. Daley Co, of Highland, Michigan. See
sketch 320-A below.







 



      (5)   High-intensity discharge (HID) light sources. High
Intensity discharge (HID) light sources are allowed with a maximum of
175-watt metal halide (coated lamp - 3,000 degrees Kelvin). Standards for
other HID light sources may be established by the village for new technology
consistent with the above restrictions.



      (6)   Spacing. Based on 20-foot high fixture height, parking
lot lighting shall be no less then 80 feet and no more then 100 feet apart to
achieve required illumination levels. Decorative fixtures (which are also
fully shielded) are allowed to maintain 50 feet fixture spacing. Wall mounted
fixture spacing for security lighting shall be no less than 50 feet measured
horizontally. Decorative fixtures directed back toward a building face shall
be exempt from this spacing requirement when shielded and shall not exceed 50
watts. Decorative fixtures that are not shielded shall maintain a minimum
spacing of 25 feet and shall not exceed 50 watts.



      (7)   Color. Colors shall be determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, selected from the
manufacturer’s range of standard colors.



      (8)   Pole-mounted fixture. Pole-mounted fixtures shall be
limited to two light sources per pole.



      (9)   Mixed-use areas. Mixed use areas that include
residential occupancies shall comply with the residential standards on those
floors or areas that are more than 50% residential based on square footage of
uses.



      (10)   Up-lighting.



         (a)   Up-lighting is only permitted if the light
distribution from the fixture is effectively contained by an overhanging
architectural or landscaping element. Such elements may include awnings,
dense shrubs, or year-round tree canopies, which can functionally contain or
limit illumination of the sky.



         (b)   In these cases the fixture spacing is limited to
one fixture per 150 square feet of area (as measured in a horizontal plane)
and a total lamp wattage within a fixture of 35 watts. Up-lighting of flags
is permitted with a limit of two fixtures per flagpole with a maximum of 150
watts each. The fixtures must be shielded such that the point source is not
visible outside of a 15-foot radius.



      (11)   Time period. Required lighting shall be turned on daily
from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.



      (12)   Design. The design of building mounted light fixtures
shall compliment the character of the surrounding uses. In areas within the
Downtown Development Authority (DDA) District, the applicant shall consult
with the DDA on the appropriateness of the fixture, and the DDA shall provide
a recommendation to the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required. The DDA shall also provide a recommendation on the color of the
lighting fixtures. In areas within the Historic District, the applicant shall
consult with the Historic District Commission (HDC) on the appropriateness of
the fixture, and the HDC shall provide a recommendation to the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



   (F)   Residential lighting standards. The following lighting
standards shall be applicable to residential properties.



      (1)   Height.



         (a)   No light fixture shall be greater than 12 feet in
height.



         (b)   Exceptions are building mounted flood lights fully
shielded, downward directed lights using a light of 50 watts or less.



      (2)   Intensity. Light intensity shall not exceed
ten-footcandles measured three feet above finished grade. Outdoor lighting
with HID light sources in excess of 35 watts (bulb or lamp) shall be
prohibited. In addition, incandescent light sources, including halogen shall
not exceed 50 watts. Landscape lighting is limited to 35 watts per fixture
per 150 square feet of landscaped area (as measured in a horizontal plane).



      (3)   Shielding. Lights must be fully shielded, down directed
and screened from adjacent properties in a manner that limits light trespass
to one-tenths of a footcandle as measured at the property line. All light
sources that are not fully shielded shall use other than a clear lens
material, as the primary lens material, to enclose the light bulb to minimize
glare from a point source.



      (4)   Street lighting.



         (a)   New residential subdivision construction shall be
required to include street lighting.



         (b)   All new lighting illuminating public right-of-ways
and easements or private streets shall conform with the following standards
of this section.



            1.   Location. A minimum of one streetlight shall
be placed at all intersections and curves in streets that exceed 25 degrees.
One lighting structure shall be provided on each side of an entrance or exit
drive or street at its intersection with the public road, except where a
boulevard or divided entrance/exit drive is proposed, one lighting structure
may be located in the boulevard or island area for the purpose of
illuminating the intersection.



            2.   Fixtures. Streetlights shall be full cut-off
traditional tear-drop type fixtures and shall be mounted on aluminum pole.
Milled steel or cement poles may be considered as an option by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. Street light fixtures shall
not be attached to utility poles.



            3.   Design. In areas within the Historic
District, the applicant shall consult with the Historic District Commission
(HDC) on the appropriateness of the fixture, and the HDC shall provide a
recommendation to the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required.



      (5)   Security lights. Security lights shall be restricted as
follows.



         (a)   The point light source shall not be visible from
adjoining lots or streets.



         (b)   Floodlights must be controlled by a switch or
preferably a motion sensor activated only by motion within owners property.



         (c)   Timer-controlled flood lights shall be prohibited.



         (d)   Photo-cell lights shall be allowed under the
following circumstances:



            1.   At primary points of entrance (e.g., front
entries) or in critical common areas for commercial and multi-family
properties;



            2.   Where the light sources are fully-shielded by
opaque material (i.e., the fixture illuminates the area but is not itself
visibly bright); and



            3.   The light source or fluorescent (or compact
fluorescent) to eliminate excess electricity consumption.



      (6)   Motion sensor lights. Motion sensor lights may be
permitted, but only where the sensor is triggered by motion within the
owner’s property lines. Light trespass at property lines should not exceed
one-tenth of a footcandle as measured at the brightest point.



   (G)   Exemptions. The following types of lighting installations
shall be exempt from the provisions, requirements, and review standards of
this section, including those requirements pertaining to Zoning Compliance
Officer review.



      (1)   Holiday lighting. Holiday lighting which is temporary in
nature shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; provided, that
such lighting does not create dangerous glare on adjacent streets or
properties, is maintained in an attractive condition, and does not constitute
a fire hazard.



      (2)   Municipal lighting. Municipal lighting installed for the
benefit of public health, safety, and welfare, including, but not limited to,
traffic-control devices, existing streetlights, and construction lighting.



      (3)   Temporary lighting.



         (a)   Any person may submit a written request to the
Village Planner for a temporary exemption request. If approved, the exemption
shall be valid for not more than 14 days from the date of issuance of a
written and signed statement of approval. An additional 14-day temporary
exemption may be approved by the Planner. The Planner shall have the
authority to refer an application for a temporary exemption to the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, or the Historic District
Commission if deemed appropriate.



         (b)   A temporary exemption request shall contain at
least the following information:



            1.   Specific exemption or exemptions requested;



            2.   Type, use, and purpose of outdoor lighting
fixture(s) involved;



            3.   Duration of time requested for exemption;



            4.   Type of lamp and calculated lumens;



            5.   Total wattage of lamp(s);



            6.   Proposed location on premises of the outdoor
light fixture(s);



            7.   Previous temporary exemptions, if any;



            8.   Physical size of outdoor light fixture(s) and
type of shielding provided; and



            9.   Such other information as may be required by
the Village Planner.



      (4)   Approved historic lighting fixtures. Nonconforming
lighting fixtures which are consistent with the character of the historic
structure or district may be exempted with approval from the Historic
District Commission. Approved fixtures shall be consistent with the
architectural period and design style of the structure or district and shall
not exceed 50 watts.



      (5)   Decorative lighting. Decorative lighting elements such
as shades with perforated patterns and opaque diffusers may be exempted from
the fully-shielded requirement provided they do not exceed 50 watts.



      (6)   Lighting plans or fixture proposals.



         (a)   If a proposed lighting plan or fixtures are
proposed that do not meet this chapter but that have demonstrable community
benefit, an exemption may be considered by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required.



         (b)   The applicant shall submit additional information
to adequately assess the community benefit for review by the Village Planner.



   (H)   Prohibitions. The following types of exterior lighting
sources, fixtures, and installations shall be prohibited in the village.



      (1)   Light sources shall not be affixed to the top of a roof
or under a roof eave, except where required by the Building Code.



      (2)   Lighting for the purpose of illuminating a building
facade shall be prohibited when such lighting is mounted to the ground or
poles, or is mounted on adjoining/adjacent structures.



      (3)   Blinking, flashing, moving, revolving, scintillating,
flickering, changing intensity, and changing color lights and internally
illuminated signs shall be prohibited, except for temporary holiday displays,
lighting for public safety or traffic control, or lighting required by the
FAA for air traffic control and warning purposes.



      (4)   Unshielded floodlights and timer-controlled floodlights
shall be prohibited.



      (5)   (a)   No outdoor lighting may be used in any manner
that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public
thoroughfares.



         (b)   The following is prohibited:



            1.   Any fixed light not designed for roadway
illumination that produces direct light or glare that could be disturbing to
the operator of a motor vehicle; and



            2.   Any light that may be confused with or
construed as a traffic-control device, except as authorized by state,
federal, or city government.



      (6)   No beacon or searchlight shall be installed,
illuminated, or maintained.



      (7)   Up-lighting is prohibited, except as otherwise provided
for in this section.



   (I)   Nonconforming lighting. Unless otherwise specified within this
chapter, existing nonconforming outdoor lighting shall be replaced with
conforming fixtures or existing fixtures must be retrofitted to comply with
this chapter whenever an application is submitted for a building permit for
an addition or alteration to a structure or to part of a structure of which
said lighting is an integral part, or any instance in which a special use or
site plan review by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, is necessary.



   (J)   Review standards.



      (1)   Height.



         (a)   Outdoor residential and commercial lighting shall
not exceed the footcandles designated in their respective sections.



         (b)   Special review by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, may allow lighting of greater height under
the following circumstances: a fixture at a greater height is required due to
safety, building design, or extenuating circumstances in which case the light
shall be fully shielded with a non-adjustable mounting.



      (2)   Intensity.



         (a)   Outdoor nonresidential and residential lighting
shall not exceed the footcandles designated in their respective sections.



         (b)   Special review by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, may allow lighting of a greater intensity
under the following circumstances:



            1.   A fixture of a greater light intensity is
required due to safety, building design, or extenuating circumstances in
which case the light shall be fully shielded with a non-adjustable mounting;
or



            2.   An architectural or historical feature
requires greater illumination, in which case the light shall be fully
shielded with a non-adjustable mounting.



      (3)   Fixtures.



         (a)   Lighting fixtures must comply with the provisions
of the residential or nonresidential section as appropriate.



         (b)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, will consider the recommendations of the HDC and/or DDA as
appropriate.



   (K)   Procedures.



      (1)   Administrative review procedures. Lighting plans
submitted in conjunction with applications for subdivision, planned unit
development, development within any environmentally sensitive area, site plan
review, or special review application shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



      (2)   Appeals. Any appeals related to decisions regarding
outdoor lighting shall be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals compliant with
the procedures in the §§ 157.240 through 157.247, “Board of Appeals”.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 371, passed 1-20-2005; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.044  ENTRANCES FEATURES.



   In all districts, so called entrance-way structures, including, but not
limited to, walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family
subdivisions or multiple housing projects, office complexes, shopping
centers, and industrial parks may be permitted and may be located in a
required yard, but not within a public street right-of-way, provided, such
entrance-way structures do not conflict with required sight distance. (See §
157.049.)



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.045  BUILDING GRADES.



   (A)   Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an
elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of water
to run away from the walls of the structures thereon. The balance of yard
spaces shall be graded and adequate drainage provided where necessary to
deflect proper drainage of surface waters from the said premises.



   (B)   When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two
existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing
established grade shall be used in determining the grade around the new
building and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a
manner as to meet existing grades. The final grade shall be approved by the
Zoning Official.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.046  EXCAVATION OF HOLES.



   (A)   The construction, maintenance, or existence within the village
of any unprotected, un-barricaded, open, or dangerous excavations, holes,
pits or wells, or any excavations, holes or pits which constitute or are
reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to public health, safety,
or welfare, is hereby prohibited; provided; however, this section shall not
prevent any excavation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the
Village Building Code.



   (B)   Where such excavations are properly protected and warning
signs posted in such a manner as may be required by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.047  BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED.



   (A)   Any building or structure which has been wholly or partially
erected on any premises within or outside the village shall not be moved to
and/or placed upon any premises in the village, unless a building permit for
such a building or structure shall have been secured.



   (B)   Any such building or structure shall fully conform to all the
provisions of this chapter in the same manner as a new building or structure.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.048  REQUIREMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   (1)   For certain land uses that are considered to have a
significant potential impact on traffic, infrastructure, demands for public
services, and/or significant impacts on surrounding properties due to scale,
the applicant shall be required to provide an impact assessment during the
initial submittal for either a rezoning or site plan approval.



      (2)   The cost of the impact assessment and review by the
village shall be borne by the applicant.



      (3)   The applicant may request a meeting with village staff,
consultants, and key agency, staff prior to developing the impact assessment.



   (B)   The minimum contents of this impact assessment shall be:



      (1)   Generally. Name(s) and address(es) of person(s) or
firm(s) responsible for preparation of the impact assessment and a brief
statement of their qualifications;



      (2)   Area plan. An area plan or aerial photograph
illustrating the entire site and nearby properties;



      (3)   Overall site conditions. Narrative and illustration
describing adjacent uses, zoning, public roadways, utilities, significant
woodlands, trees over eight inches caliper, soils types, 100-year
floodplains, drainageways, and general topography. The area described shall
be within one-quarter mile for sites up to 100 acres, and one-mile radius for
larger sites. Aerial photographs are recommended to assist in describing the
general vicinity;



      (4)   Wetlands. Documentation by a qualified wetland
specialist shall be required wherever the village determines there is a
potential state or federally regulated wetland which may be impacted by the
proposed project;



      (5)   Conceptual site plans. Conceptual site plan illustrating
a very general layout of proposed uses upon which preliminary impact analysis
is based, and any proposed phasing;



      (6)   Land use impacts.



         (a)   Description of the types of proposed uses and
other man made facilities, including any project phasing, and an indication
of how the proposed use(s) conforms or conflicts with existing and future
development patterns.



         (b)   A description shall be provided of any increases
in light, noise, or air pollution which could negatively impact adjacent
properties, particularly associated with smoke or truck routing;



      (7)   Environmental impacts.



         (a)   Description of any general impacts expected to
wildlife areas, lakes, streams, ponds, and regulated wetlands. Conceptual
mitigation or replacement measures under consideration shall be described.



         (b)   The study shall also describe general measures to
control soil erosion and sedimentation during and after construction.



      (8)   Impact on public facilities and services.



         (a)   Describe the number of expected employees,
visitors or residents and the anticipated impact on police and fire
protection.



         (b)   In particular, describe the relationship of the
use to municipal fire stations and the need for any new facilities or
equipment. Letters from the appropriate agencies should be provided;



      (9)   Utility impacts.



         (a)   Describe proposed water and sanitary sewer
facilities, including any improvements or off-site extensions needed to serve
the long range development on the site.



         (b)   For sites served with sanitary sewer and public
water, general calculations for sewage flows, and water demands shall be
provided in comparison with sewer line capacity;



      (10)   Drainage.



         (a)   Describe conceptual plans to control drainage and
any significant changes from existing drainage patterns.



         (b)   If wetlands are to be used as stormwater basins,
methods to control fertilizers and filter runoff shall be identified.
Correspondence from the County Drain Commissioner shall be attached
indicating their concerns and suggestions;



      (11)   Storage and handling of waste and hazardous materials.



         (a)   Methods of on- and off-site disposal of solid
waste shall be identified. The information shall describe the type of
hazardous substances expected to be used, stored or disposed of on the site;
general location within the site; and method of containment.



         9b)   Documentation of compliance with federal and state
requirements, and a pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) shall be
submitted, as appropriate; and



      (12)   Traffic impacts.



         (a)   A traffic impact analysis, including information
regarding the existing volume of traffic and capacity of roads to be accessed
by the project and the forecasted trip generation by the proposed project,
including the a.m. and p.m. peak hour and average daily traffic generated.



         (b)   The forecasts shall be based on the data and
procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers Trip Generation Manual.



         (c)   The analysis shall include a distribution (inbound
versus outbound, left turn versus right turn) onto the existing street
network to project turning movements at major site access points and nearby
intersections.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.049  CLEAR VISION ZONE.



   (A)   There shall be a clear vision zone at all corners of
intersecting streets and/or private roads, consisting of a triangular area
defined by the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines and the two
points extended along such lines a distance of 25 feet from the point of
intersection, and within which area no obstruction to vision, excluding
existing topography, shall be permitted from a height of two feet to eight
feet above centerline elevation of abutting streets, except not more than two
trees with trunks of not more than 30 inches in diameter each, and clear of
any branches for such heights may be located within such area.



   (B)   A greater clear vision area may be reviewed where necessary in
view of anticipated traffic volumes, traffic speeds, geographic or
topographic conditions, or based on a traffic engineering analysis using the
standards of the American Association of State and Highway Transportation
Officials (AASHTO). See illustration.







 



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.050  ACCESS THROUGH YARDS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed
in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or
accessory or attached structures.



   (B)   These drives shall not be considered as structural violations
in front and side yards.



   (C)   Further, any walk, terrace, or other pavement servicing a like
function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed,
shall for the purpose of this chapter not be considered to be a structure,
and shall be permitted in any required yard.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.051  TEMPORARY USES AND SEASONAL OR SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Temporary uses, temporary sales, and seasonal or special
events may be allowed in any zoning district upon issuance of a license under
applicable village ordinances.



   (B)   Such events are permitted on the basis that they contribute to
the economy and welfare of the village but with recognition that some
regulation of such events is needed to protect the public health and safety.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.052  MAINTENANCE OF COMMONLY-OWNED PRIVATE FACILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, or Village Council, as appropriate, may require documents suitable
to the Village Attorney to ensure the quality, construction, maintenance, and
replacement of commonly- owned private facilities and land whether improved
or unimproved.



      (2)   These facilities may include, but are not limited to,
detention ponds, retention basins, lighting, open space, wetlands, signs,
landscaping, fences, screen walls, drains, trails, and sidewalks to which
more than two owners of lots or condominiums have rights of use or access or
enjoyment; or which are owned in common by an association of owners.



   (B)   Prior to approving such commonly-owned private facilities, the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, or Village Council
shall approve legal documents which assure the continuing maintenance, and
periodic replacement of any commonly-owned private facilities.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.053  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR SOUND, VIBRATION, ODOR GASES, AND THE
LIKE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to carry on or permit to be
carried on any activity or operation or use of any land, building, or
equipment that produces irritants to the sensory perceptions greater than the
measures herein established which are hereby determined to be the minimum
permissible hazards to humans or humans’ activities.



      (2)   Such measures may be supplemented by other means which
are duly determined to be maximum permissible hazards to humans or human
activity.



   (B)   The adoption of these standards is not intended to convey
legal nonconforming status to any existing use or activity that may be in
violation of these standards.



      (1)   Sound.



         (a)   The intensity level of sounds shall not exceed the
following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of uses.



 

In Decibels
 
Adjacent Uses
 
Where Measured


55
 
Residential dwellings
 
Common lot line


60
 
Commercial
 
Common lot line


75
 
Industrial and other
 
On lot line



 



         (b)   The sound levels shall be measured with type of
audio output meter approved by the Bureau of Standards. Objectionable noises
due to intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness, shall be muffled so as
not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.



      (2)   Vibration. All machinery shall be mounted and operated
as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding the displacement of
three thousandths of one inch measured at any lot line of its source, or
ground vibration which can be readily perceived by a person standing at any
such lot line.



      (3)   Odor. The emission of noxious, odorous matter in such
quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, when
diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of
clean air or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines, is
prohibited.



      (4)   Gases. The escape of or emission of any gas which is
injurious or destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and may be summarily
caused to be abated, except as required in the delivery of essential service.



      (5)   Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or
heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and
shield such operation from direct view from any point along the lot line,
except during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and
occupied.



      (6)   Light. Exterior lighting shall be 30 installed that the
surface of the source of light shall not be visible from any bedroom window,
and shall be so arranged as far a practical to reflect light away from any
residential use, and in no case shall more than one footcandle power of light
cross a lot line five feet above the ground in a residential district.



      (7)   Smoke, dust, dirt, and fly ash. It shall be unlawful to
discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever
any air contaminator for a period or periods aggregating more than four
minutes in any one half hour which is:



         (a)   As dark or darker in shade as that designated as
No. 2 on the Ringelmarm Chart. The Ringelmann Chart, as published by the U.S.
Bureau of Mines, is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the
standard; however, the unbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used
when correlated with the Ringelmann Chart. A Ringelmann Chart shall be on
file in the office of the Zoning Official; or



         (b)    Of such opacity as to obscure an observer’s
view to a degree equal to or greater than the smoke described in division
(B)(7)(a) above, except when the emission consists only of water vapor. The
quantity of gas-borne or airborne solids shall not exceed two-tenths grains
per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500°F.



      (8)   Drifted air blown material. The drifting or airborne
transmission beyond the lot line of dust, particles or debris from any open
stockpile shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated.



      (9)   Radioactive materials. Radioactive materials shall not
be emitted to exceed quantities, established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of
Standards.



      (10)   Water and sewage. Every building used or intended to be
used for human habitation or human occupancy, including, but not limited to,
dwellings, industrial, commercial, office, and institutional uses, shall be
furnished with water supply and sewage disposal as provided for in the
Village’s Building Code. Accessory buildings, such as garages or storage
buildings, intended and used for incidental or no human occupancy are
excluded from this requirement, except that if water supply and/or sewage
disposal is furnished to such building, it shall comply with the standards of
the Building Code.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.054  LAND DIVISIONS NOT REQUIRING PLATTING (LOT SPLITS).



   The following standards shall apply to proposed divisions of land not
requiring platting under the State Land Division Act Public Act 288 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., and Ch. 153.



   (A)   No lot, outlot, or other parcel shall be divided or changed
without the written approval of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, in accordance with the procedures of this section.



   (B)   Applicants for a lot, outlot, or other parcel division shall
submit a written application to the Zoning Official. The application shall be
accompanied by a survey prepared and certified by a licensed and registered
land surveyor. The survey shall depict the original parcel, the proposed
division, existing buildings, utilities, easements, drainage, all pertinent
dimensions, legal descriptions of the new parcels to be created by the
division, and such other pertinent data as the Zoning Official determines is
necessary.



   (C)   The proposed division shall not create parcels which would
fail to meet the minimum standards of the zoning district in which they are
located, nor shall such division leave any existing principal or accessory
buildings in violation of yard setback requirements; provided, however, that
if existing nonconforming conditions are to be lessened by the proposed
division, this requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required.



   (D)   The proposed division shall not create parcels which are
irregular in shape, unless the irregularity is due to a pre-existing natural
feature such as a wetland, waterway, or woodland area.



   (E)   The Zoning Official shall determine if reviews of the
application by the Village Planner, Village Engineer, or other Village
Officials are needed to determine compliance with this section. Upon
completion of the necessary reviews, and provided, that all taxes and special
assessments on the original parcel have been paid, the Zoning Official shall
recommend approval or denial of the application to the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, shall act on the application at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after receipt of the recommendation.



   (F)   If a property line is proposed to be altered (one parcel
losing area and the other receiving it) in a manner that will meet the
requirements of divisions (B) through (E) above, the Zoning Official shall be
authorized to approved or deny the application. No new parcels shall be
created under the provisions of this division (F). Not more than 10,000
square feet of property shall be reassigned from one parcel to another under
the provisions of this section. The Zoning Official shall report all lot
splits approved under this division (F) at the next regularly scheduled
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, meeting.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 327, 9-23-1999; Ord. 351, passed
7-14-2002; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.055  PRIVATE ROAD AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PRIVATE ROAD. A road owned and maintained by the owners of the
property it serves and that provides access to four or more dwelling units or
parcels, or four or more nonresidential principal buildings. PRIVATE ROADS
include roads within site condominium projects, roads serving two-family
dwelling units and roads within office or industrial complexes. A PRIVATE
ROAD may be used to provide public services such as utility easements, waste
collection, and emergency services.



      SHARED DRIVEWAY. A SHARED PRIVATE DRIVEWAY serving three or fewer
residential units shall be provided within an access easement recorded in the
deeds of all parcels that have access to the driveway. The minimum finish
surface width of the shared private driveway shall be 18 feet. A cul-de-sac
turnaround may not be required if the length of the shared private driveway
is 300 feet or less. For longer shared private driveways, a circular or
hammerhead “T” turnaround shall be required depending on the length of
the private driveway and the recommendation of the Fire Department. A
proposed shared private driveway exceeding 1,000 feet in length or serving
more than three residential units shall not be considered a shared private
driveway and must be reviewed as a private road meeting village’s Standard
Specifications for Street Construction.



   (B)   Exclusion for multiple family drives. The definitions of
“private road” or “shared private driveway” do not include drives
serving multiple family buildings with three or more attached dwelling units,
parking lot aisles, or drives connecting parking lots to internal roads.



   (C)   Access to public or private road. Any single-family
residential lot or site created after the effective date of this chapter
shall have frontage on and access to a public road right-of-way an approved
private road or shared private driveway meeting the definitions and standards
of this section.



   (D)   Submittal requirements for private roads. The following shall
be submitted to the village when applying for approval of a private road,
either separately or in conjunction with a site plan as required by §§
157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review and Approval”:



      (1)   Parcel number and name of owner for all properties
having legal interest in the private road;



      (2)   Plans designed by a registered engineer showing
location, dimension, and design of the private road. The plan shall identify
existing and proposed elevation contours within all areas to be disturbed or
altered by construction of the private road;



      (3)   Location of all public or private utilities located
within the private road right-of-way or easement, or within 20 feet,
including, but not limited to, water, sewer, telephone, gas, electricity, and
television cable;



      (4)   Location of any lakes, streams, drainage-ways, MDNR
regulated wetlands, or trees with a caliper of eight inches or greater,
within 100 feet of the proposed private road right-of-way or easement; and



      (5)   Evidence that property owners served by the road will
provide financial and administrative mechanisms to ensure maintenance of the
private road. A copy of a private road maintenance agreement shall be
provided to the village in a manner acceptable to the Village Attorney.



   (E)   Design standards. Private roads shall be constructed to the
following design standards.



      (1)   Road design.



         (a)   A private road shall meet the right-of-way width,
street base, pavement width, surface, slope, drainage system, and all other
standards of the Village’s Standard Specifications for Street Construction.



         (b)   The design of private roads shall be approved by
the Village Engineer.



      (2)   Reduced width to preserve natural features. The minimum
pavement width may be reduced to not less than 22 feet wide where the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, determines that
the reduced width will preserve significant natural features and there is no
alternative design that will preserve the natural features and meet the
regular width standard.



      (3)   Maximum length, cul-de-sac turnarounds.



         (a)   Maximum length of a private road providing access
to more than two lots, buildings, or dwellings units shall be 1,000 feet with
a maximum 24 lots or dwelling units served by a single means of access.



         (b)   Any single means of access serving more than five
lots or dwelling units shall include a turn-around with a 45-foot radius,
55-foot radius if a center landscaped island is included, a hammerhead
“T” turn or a continuous loop layout.



         (c)   A larger turnaround may be required for commercial
and industrial private roads. These standards may be modified by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, in particular cases, with
input from the fire department and township staff or consultants.



      (4)   Grade. Grades shall not exceed 10% with a maximum grade
of 2% for a minimum distance of 30 feet from its intersection with a public
right-of-way or another private road.



      (5)   Intersection design standards.



         (a)   Private roads which intersect with existing or
proposed private roads or public street rights-of-way should intersect at a
90-degree angle.



         (b)   Where constrained by environmental features, the
Village Engineer may allow a reduced angle of intersection, but in no case
shall the angle be less than 70 degrees.



      (6)   Intersection offsets from public streets.



         (a)   Proposed private roads or entrances to a
development shall align directly across from, or be offset at least 250 feet
from, public streets or private road intersections on the opposite side of
the street, measured centerline to centerline.



         (b)   This standard may be reduced if approved by the
County Road Commission.



      (7)   Minimum offsets along private roads. Private roads and
driveways (excluding driveways serving one or two dwelling units) within a
development shall align directly across from other private roads or driveways
or be offset at least 150 feet measured centerline to centerline.



      (8)   Vertical clearance. In order to provide adequate access
for emergency vehicles, 15 feet of overhead tree clearance shall be provided
within the width of the pavement.



      (9)   Street names. Street names may be required by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, to assist public
emergency services.



      (10)   Signs.



         (a)   All signs within the private road or access
easement shall be identified on the site plan and be in accordance with the
State Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, unless the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, approves another type of
design for consistency with the character of the development. Street signs
shall be provided at all intersections.



         (b)   These signs shall contrast in terms of color with
public street signs, and shall clearly indicate the road is private.



   (F)   Existing nonconforming private roads and access easements.



      (1)   (a)   The village recognizes there exist private
roads, service roads, and access easements which were lawful prior to the
adoption of this section and which are inconsistent with the standards
herein. Such roads are declared by this section to be legal nonconforming
roads or easements. The intent of this section is to permit legal
nonconforming roads and easements to continue and undergo routine maintenance
for safety purposes, as determined by the Zoning Official.



         (b)   This section is also intended to allow new
construction to occur on existing lots which front along such a road on the
adoption date of this section if the roads are reasonably capable of
providing sufficient access for the uses permitted in the zoning district and
for provision of emergency service vehicles.



      (2)   This section is also intended to discourage the
extension of nonconforming roads or increase the number of lots or building
sites served by such a road, except in platted subdivisions, divisions of
land, or site condominium projects existing on the adoption date of this
section, unless provisions are made to upgrade such road to comply with the
standards herein. Any reconstruction, widening, or extension of a
nonconforming private road or access easement shall be in conformity with
this section.



   (G)   Existing lot. For purposes of determining whether a lot along
a private road or access easement qualifies as an existing lot as used in
this section, at least one of the following conditions must have existed at
the time this section was adopted:



      (1)   The lot consists of a “condominium unit” for which a
master deed had been recorded with the County Register of Deeds in accordance
with the requirements of the State Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 et seq., and other applicable laws and ordinances;



      (2)   The lot consists of a parcel that was described by metes
and bounds as recorded by a deed or as a land contract, and registered with
the County Register of Deeds; and



      (3)   The lot had been assigned a unique parcel number by the
County Register of Deeds and was individually assessed and taxed on that
basis.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.056  STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL CHILD AND ADULT CARE FACILITIES.



   State-licensed child and adult care facilities, as defined in §
157.008, are allowed within a residential structure only as provided in Table
3.1.



 


Table 3.1




Type of facility

 

Districts

 






R1A and R1B

 

RM





Adult foster care family home (6 or fewer adults)
 

Permitted

 

Permitted



Adult foster care large group home (13 to 20 adults)
 

Not allowed

 

Special use



Adult foster care small group home (12 or fewer adults)
 

Permitted

 

Permitted



Family day care home (6 or fewer children less than 24 hours per day)
 

Permitted

 

Permitted



Foster family home (4 or fewer children 24 hours per day)
 

Permitted

 

Permitted



Foster family group home (5 to 6 children 24 hours per day)
 

Permitted

 

Permitted



Group day care home (7 to 12 children less than 24 hours per day)
 

Permitted

 

Permitted



Notes:

Permitted: permitted by right

Special use: may be allowed upon review and approval of a special land use
permit, in accordance with the general and specific standards of §§ 157.120
through 157.130, “Special Land Uses”

Not allowed: not allowed in zoning district




 



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.057  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers aud antennas.



      (2)   The goals of this section are to:



         (a)   Protect residential areas and land uses from
potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas;



         (b)   Encourage the location of towers on public land,
existing water towers, school, and park property areas;



         (c)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the
community;



         (d)   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and
existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers;



         (e)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;



         (f)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the
towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;



         (g)   Encourage the location of essential public
wireless services to be co-located on all new towers in the community;



         (h)   Enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to provide such services to the community
quickly, effectively, and efficiently;



         (i)   Consider the public health and safety of
communication towers; and



         (j)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.



      (3)   In furtherance of these goals, the village shall give
due consideration to the Village’s Master Plan, zoning map, existing land
uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location
of towers and antennas.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. Human-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.



      ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals,
or other communication signals.



      BACKHAUL NETWORK. The lines that connect a provider’s
towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.



      FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



      HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.



      PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND PRE-EXISTING ANTENNAS. Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this section, including permitted
towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.



      TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.



   (C)   Applicability.



      (1)   New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in
the village shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in
divisions (C)(2) through (C)(4) below.



      (2)   Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas.
This subchapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any
antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive only antennas.



      (3)   Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and
pre-existing antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, other than the requirements of divisions (D)(6) through (D)(7) below.



      (4)   AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an
AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one
tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured
from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional
tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.



   (D)   General requirements.



      (1)   Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.



      (2)   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot
coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located
on leased parcels within such lot.



      (3)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an
antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Zoning Official an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are
either within the jurisdiction of the village or within two miles of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height,
and design of each tower. The Zoning Official may share such information with
other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits
under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within
the jurisdiction of the village; provided; however that the Zoning Official
is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.



      (4)   Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:



         (a)   Towers shall be subject to any applicable
standards of the FAA, be constructed of a material with, or be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness;



         (b)   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and
related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings; and



         (c)   When an antenna is installed on a structure other
than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.



      (5)   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted,
unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.



      (6)   State or federal requirements.



         (a)   All towers must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or
federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.



         (b)   If such standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall
bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas
into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.



      (7)   Building Codes; safety standards.



         (a)   To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the
owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with
standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time.



         (b)   If, upon inspection, the village concludes that a
tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger
to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the
tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with
such standards.



         (c)   Failure to bring such tower into compliance within
said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna
at the owner’s expense.



      (8)   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower
setbacks, and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities located in village irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.



      (9)   Nonessential services. Towers and antennas shall be
regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated
or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.



      (10)   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or
antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in village
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Zoning Administrator.



      (11)   Site plan review. All requests for new towers shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
for a site plan review as provided in §§ 157.190 through 157.204, “Site
Plan Review and Approval”.



      (12)   Public notice. For purposes of this section, any
special use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively
approved use or special use shall require public notice to all abutting
property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within
the corresponding separation distance listed in division (G)(2)(e) below, in
addition to any notice otherwise required by this chapter.



      (13)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna, tower,
or associated buildings or equipment storage areas.



      (14)   Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the
requirements of division (H) below.



      (15)   Multiple antenna/tower plan. The village encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple
sites shall be given priority in the review process.



      (16)   Public wireless antennas and equipment. All new towers
and associated facilities shall provide space for collocation of public
wireless services and instruments used by police and fire departments,
weather departments, emergency preparedness organizations, and similar uses
as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



      (17)   Removal plan.



         (a)   All applications for the installation of any
wireless antenna or tower shall include a plan for the removal of the antenna
or tower to be executed when the antenna or tower is no longer needed. The
removal plan shall include security for the removal in the form of cash or a
surety bond covering the amount of the removal of the antenna or tower.



         (b)   The funds or bond would be released upon the
village determining that the antenna or tower had been completely removed.
Any costs incurred by the village in this process would be deducted from the
funds or bond.



   (E)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Generally. The uses listed in this section are deemed to
be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special
use permit.



      (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically
permitted:



         (a)   Antennas or towers located on property owned,
leased, or otherwise controlled by the village provided a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the village;



         (b)   Antennas or towers located on property owned by
the Village of Holly;



         (c)   Antennas or towers located on property owned by
the village area school district; and



         (d)   The Zoning Official shall review the application
for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with
division (D) above and divisions (G)(2)(d), and (G)(2)(e) below.



   (F)   Administratively approved uses.



      (1)   Generally. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas.



         (a)   The Zoning Official may administratively approve
the uses listed in this section.



         (b)   Each applicant for administrative approval shall
apply to the Zoning Official providing the information set forth in divisions
(G)(2)(a) and (G)(2)(c) below, and a non-refundable fee as established by
resolution of the Village Council for the costs of reviewing the application.



         (c)   The Zoning Official shall review the application
for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with
division (D) above and divisions (G)(2)(c) and (G)(2)(d).



         (d)   The Zoning Official shall respond to each such
application within 60 days after receiving it by either approving or denying
the application. If the Zoning Official fails to respond to the applicant
within said 60 days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.



         (e)   In connection with any such administrative
approval, the Zoning Official may, in order to encourage shared use,
administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in division
(G)(2)(d) below or separation distances between towers in division (G)(2)(e)
below by up to 50%.



         (f)   In connection with any such administrative
approval, the Zoning Official may, in order to encourage the use of
monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to
monopole construction.



         (g)   If an administrative request for approval is
denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special use permit
pursuant to division (G) below prior to filing any appeal that may be
available under this chapter.



      (2)   List of administratively-approved uses. The following
uses may be approved by the Zoning Official after conducting an
administrative review:



         (a)   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers
consistent with the terms of this division (F)(2)(a).



            1.   Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna
which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Administrator
as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional,
institutional, or multi-family structure of eight or more dwelling units,
provided:



               a.   The antenna does not extend more than
30 feet above the highest point of the structure;



               b.   The antenna complies with all
applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and



               c.   The antenna complies with all
applicable building codes.



            2.   Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which
is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the Zoning Official and,
to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and
clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided, such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the
following.



               a.   Modification or reconstruction. A tower
which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an
additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower,
unless the Zoning Administrator allows reconstruction as a monopole.



               b.   Height.



                  i.   An existing tower may be modified
or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower’s
existing height, to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna;



                  ii.   The height change referred to in
division (F)(2)(a)2.a.i. above may only occur one time per communication
tower.



                  iii.   The additional height referred
to in division (F)(2)(a)2.a.i. above shall not require an additional distance
separation as set forth in division (G) below. The tower’s pre-modification
height shall be used to calculate such distance separations.



               c.   On-site location.



                  i.   A tower which is being rebuilt to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on-site
within 50 feet of its existing location.



                  ii.   After the tower is rebuilt to
accommodate collocation, only one tower may remain on the site.



                  iii.   A relocated on-site tower shall
continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of
calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to division
(G)(2)(e) below. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be
deemed to cause a violation of division (G)(2)(e) below.



                  iv.   The on-site re-location of a
tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or
residentially zoned lauds as established in division (G)(2)(e) below shall
only be permitted when approved by the Zoning Official.



         (b)   1.   New towers in nonresidential zoning
districts.



            2.   Locating any new tower in a nonresidential
zoning district other than industrial, provided, a licensed professional
engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of
shared users proposed by the applicant; the Zoning Official concludes the
tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section a and the
requirements of division (D) above; the tower meets the setback requirements
in division (G)(2)(d) below and separation distances in division (G)(2)(e)
below; and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria:



               a.   For a single user, up to 90 feet in
height;



               b.   For two users, up to 120 feet in
height; and



               c.   For three or more users, up to 150 feet
in height.



      (c)   Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning
district other than industrial that in the judgment of the Zoning Official is
in conformity with the goals set forth in division (A) above.



      (d)   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of
multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline
systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology
that does not require the use of towers.



   (G)   Special use permits.



      (1)   Generally. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



         (a)   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use
under division (E) above or permitted to be approved administratively
pursuant to division (F) above, then a special use permit shall be required
for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning
districts.



         (b)   Applications for special use permits under this
section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of §§ 157.120
through 157.130, “Special Land Uses”, except as modified in this section.



         (c)   In granting a special use permit, the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may impose conditions to
the extent the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.



         (d)   Any information of an engineering nature that the
applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.



         (e)   An applicant for a special use permit shall submit
the information described in this section and a non-refundable fee as
established by resolution of the Village Council to reimburse the village for
the costs of reviewing the application.



      (2)   Towers.



         (a)   Information required. In addition to any
information required for applications for special use permits pursuant to
§§ 157.120 through 157.130, “Special Land Uses”, applicants for a
special use permit for a tower shall submit the following information:



            1.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type, and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other
municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all properties
within the applicable separation distances set forth in division (G)(2)(e)
below, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property
lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, and any other structures,
topographies, parking, and other information deemed by the Zoning Official be
necessary to assess compliance with this section;



            2.   Legal description of the parent tract and
leased parcel (if applicable);



            3.   The setback distance between the proposed
tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties;



            4.   The separation distance from other towers
described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to division
(D)(3) above shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant
shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the
owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.



            5.   A landscape plan showing specific landscape
materials;



            6.   Method of fencing, and finished color and, if
applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination;



            7.   A description of compliance with divisions
(D)(3) through (D)(7), (D)(10),(D)(11), (D)(13) above and divisions (G)(2)(d)
and (G)(2)(e) below and all applicable federal, state, or local laws;



            8.   A notarized statement by the applicant as to
whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional
antennas for future users;



            9.   Identification of the entities providing the
backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other
cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality;



            10.   A description of the suitability of the use
of existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology not requiring
the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided
through the use of the proposed new tower; and



            11.   A description of the feasible location(s) of
future towers or antennas within the village based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological, or geographical limitations in the event the
proposed tower is erected.



         (b)   Factors considered in granting special use permits
for towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of special use
permit applications pursuant to §§ 157.120 through 157.130, “Special Land
Uses”, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall
consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use
permit, although the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of
these criteria if the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, concludes that the goals of this section are better served thereby:



            1.   Height of the proposed tower;



            2.   Proximity of the tower to residential
structures and residential district boundaries;



            3.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby
properties;



            4.   Surrounding topography;



            5.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;



            6.   Design of the tower, with particular
reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;



            7.   Proposed ingress and egress; and



            8.   Availability of suitable existing towers,
other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers
or structures, as discussed in division (G)(2)(c) below.



         (c)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technology.



            1.   No new tower shall be permitted, unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, that no existing tower,
structure, or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers
or structures can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna. An
applicant shall submit information requested by the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology.



            2.   Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:



               a.   No existing towers or structures are
located within the geographic area which meet applicant’s engineering
requirements;



               b.   Existing towers or structures are not
of sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements;



               c.   Existing towers or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna
and related equipment;



               d.   The applicant’s proposed antenna
would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures
would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna;



               e.   The fees, costs, or contractual
provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or
structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable;



               f.   The applicant demonstrates that there
are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable; and



               g.   The applicant demonstrates that an
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures,
such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable.



               h.   Costs of alternative technology that
exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the
technology unsuitable.



         (d)   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall
apply to all towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this section
would be better served thereby:



            1.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to
at least 75% of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line; and



            2.   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the
minimum zoning district setback requirements.



         (e)   Separation. The following separation requirements
shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, may reduce the standard separation requirements if
the goals of this section would be better served thereby.



            1.   Separation from off-site uses/designated
areas.



               a.   Tower separation shall be measured from
the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated
areas as specified in Table 1 below, except as otherwise provided in Table 1
below.



               b.   Separation requirements for towers
shall comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1 below.



 


Table 1




Off-Site Use/Designated Area

 

Separation Distance





Existing multi-family residential units greater than duplex units
 

100 feet or 100% height of tower, whichever is greater



Nonresidentially-zoned lands or nonresidential uses
 

None; only setbacks apply



Single-family or duplex residential units1
 

200 feet or 300% height of tower, whichever is greater



Vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land which is either
platted or has preliminary subdivision plan approval which is not expired
 

200 feet or 300% height of tower2, whichever is greater



Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands3
 

100 feet or 100% height of tower, whichever is greater



Notes:

1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes

2 Reparation measured from base of tower to closest building setback line

3 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid
preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any
multi-family residentially zoned land greater than duplex




 



            2.   Separation distances between towers.



               a.   Separation distances between towers
shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and
pre-existing towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or
following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower.



               b.   The separation distances (listed in
linear feet) shall be as follows:



                  i.   All towers and antennas shall be
separated by a minimum distance of 2,000 feet;



                  ii.    Any new or existing municipal
water towers shall not be subject to the minimum separation distance listed
in division (G)(2)(e) above; and



                  iii.   All towers above 150 feet high
shall be separated from all other towers above 150 feet high by one mile
(5,280 feet).



         (f)   Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by
security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped
with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may waive such
requirements, as it deems appropriate.



         (g)   Landscaping. The following requirements shall
govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, may waive such requirements if the goals of this
section would be better served thereby.



            1.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist
of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the
compound. All landscaping shall meet the planting requirements of §§
157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping Standards”.



            2.   In locations where the visual impact of the
tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.



            3.   Existing mature tree growth and natural
landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around
the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.



   (H)   Buildings or other equipment storage.



      (1)   Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The
equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following.



         (a)   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more
than 200 square feet of gross floor area or be more than ten feet in height,
in addition, all structures placed on buildings shall not exceed the height
limitations found in § 157.009 for the zoning district in which the
structure is located.



         (b)   If the equipment structure is located on the roof
of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.



         (c)   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall
comply with all applicable building codes.



      (2)   Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The
equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following.



         (a)   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure may be located in a side or rear yard provided the cabinet or
structure is no greater than ten feet in height and no greater than 200
square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a
minimum of ten feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be
screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a
planted height of at least 36 inches.



         (b)   In commercial or industrial districts the
equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than ten feet in height or
200 square feet in gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a
minimum of 25 feet from the front property line, and ten feet from all other
lot lines. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches.



      (3)   Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned
equipment structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross
floor area or be more than ten feet in height, and shall be located in
accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which
located.



      (4)   Modification of building size requirements. The
requirements of divisions (H)(1) through (H)(3) above may be modified by the
Zoning Official in the case of administratively-approved uses or by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, in the case of
uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.



   (I)   Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.



      (1)   Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner
of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of
notice from the village notifying the owner of such abandonment.



      (2)   Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within
said 90 day shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner’s
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.



   (J)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   No expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are
constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of
a nonconforming use or structure.



      (2)   Pre-existing towers.



         (a)   Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist.



         (b)   Routine maintenance (including replacement with a
new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
pre-existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas.



         (a)   Notwithstanding division (I) above, bona fide
nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt
without having to first obtain administrative approval or a special use
permit and without having to meet the separation requirements specified in
divisions (G)(2)(d) through (G)(2)(e) above.



         (b)   The type, height, and location of the tower
on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility
approval building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with then
applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date
the facility is damaged or destroyed.



         (c)   If no permit is obtained or if said permit
expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in
division (I) above.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 340, passed 5-27-2001; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.058  LITTLE FREE LIBRARIES



   (A)   A little free library is a "take a book, return a book"
gathering place where neighbors share their favorite literature and stories.
In its most basic form, a little free library is a box full of books where
anyone may stop by and pick up a book (or two) and bring back another book to
share.



   (B)   Little free libraries are permitted to be placed on
single-family residential lots, church properties and public or parochial
school properties. These are considered an accessory structure and accessory
use to the property and shall conform to the following guidelines:



      (1)   The little free library shall not be located in or
overhang the public street right-of-way or any public or utility easement and
shall be at least five feet behind the curb;



      (2)   The associated structures shall not obstruct vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian traffic, either physically or by a person utilizing the
little free library;



      (3)   The structures shall not obstruct access aisles or paths
utilized by persons in wheelchairs or for ADA accessibility;



      (4)   The little free library must be placed in the front yard
between the face of the house or building and the street right-of-way. At its
discretion, the village may make exceptions for churches and schools which
may be approved administratively by the Village Manager;



      (5)   The library structure shall be designed to hold books.
The overall structure shall be limited to a height not to exceed 66 inches; a
width not to exceed 30 inches; a depth not to exceed 18 inches; and the box
height shall not exceed 30 inches from the ground on which it is placed;



      (6)   The structures shall be anchored to the ground or
securely attached to something having a permanent location on the ground;



      (7)   The structure shall be maintained and kept in good
repair at all times; and



      (8)   There shall be a limit of one little free library per
address.



   (C)   A little free library meeting the above conditions will not be
subject to any permits or special licensing requirements.



(Ord. 441, passed 8-23-2016)




ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS




§ 157.070  ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Districts established. For purposes of this chapter, the
village is hereby divided into the following districts:



      (1)   Residential districts.



         (a)   R1A Single-Family Residential District;



         (b)   R1B Single-Family Residential District;



         (c)   RM Moderate-Density Residential District; and



         (d)   MH Mobile Home Park District.



      (2)   Nonresidential districts.



         (a)   NOC Neighborhood Office Commercial;



         (b)   O Office;



         (c)   CBD Central Business District;



         (d)   C Commercial; and



         (e)   M Industrial.



      (3)   Special districts.




      (1)   PUD Planned Unit Development District; and




         (2)   WO Waterfront Overlay District.



   (B)   District boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are
hereby established as shown on the zoning map, which accompanies this
chapter, and which map with all notations, references, and other information
shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described
herein.



   (C)   District boundaries interpreted. Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning
map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow
such centerline.



      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following village
limits shall be construed as following city limits.



      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed to be the midway between the main tracks.



      (5)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be
construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the
shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.



      (6)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of
features indicated above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the
map.



      (7)   Where physical or natural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in
other circumstances not covered by the above, the Board of Appeals shall
interpret the district boundaries.



      (8)   Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be
indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity,
do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district
boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way.



   (D)   Zoning of annexed areas. Whenever any area is annexed to the
village the zoning classification and regulations applicable to that area
shall be subject to the provisions of Public Act 171 of 1958, being M.C.L.A.
§ 125.311. The Village Council may zone the area to an appropriate village
zoning district at any time following annexation. The zoning or rezoning of
the annexed land shall comply with the rezoning amendment procedures of §
157.011 which include a public hearing and notice to surrounding property
owners. Rezoning procedures may be initiated concurrently with the annexation
of the property so that the rezoning is effective immediately after
annexation.



   (E)   Zoning of vacated areas. Whenever any street, alley, or other
public way, within the village shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other
public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same
zone district as the property to which it attaches. Ownership of vacated
rights-of-way shall be by adjacent property owner to site, unless other
arrangements are specified by the village.



   (F)   District requirements. All buildings and used in any district
shall be subject to the provisions of § 157.009, “schedule of
regulations” and §§ 157.025 through 157.057, “General Regulations”.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.071  R1A AND R1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent. The R1A and R1B Single-Family Residential Districts
are intended to provide for low-density, detached one-family dwellings, and
other facilities which serve the residents in the district.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the R1A and R1B Single-Family Residential
Districts, no building or land shall be used or erected, except for one or
more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter:



      (1)   Detached single-family dwellings meeting the standards
of § 157.030. Single-family subdivisions and site condominium projects must
also comply with the design standards of Ch. 153;



      (2)   Publicly-owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational
facilities, court buildings, post offices, community centers, civic centers,
and municipal buildings;



      (3)   Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of
adoption of this chapter;



      (4)   Private swimming pools as an accessory use within the
rear yard only;



      (5)   State-licensed residential child and adult care
facilities in conformance with § 157.056;



      (6)   Essential public services not including storage yards,
when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to
serve the immediate vicinity; and



      (7)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures, customarily
incident to any of the above-permitted uses defined in § 157.008 and
regulated in §§ 157.035 through 157.039.



   (C)   Accessory home occupations.



      (1)   Permitted home occupations. The following are permitted
home occupations provided they meet all of the standards listed in division
(C)(2) below:



         (a)   Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring;



         (b)   Painting, sculpturing, or writing;



         (c)   Telephone answering or telemarketing.



         (d)   Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving,
and lapidary work.



         (e)   Tutoring, limited to four students at a tune.



         (f)   Computer program development.



         (g)   Salesperson's office or home office of a
professional person that meets all conditions of (C)(2), below, no sales or
director/customer are permitted on premise.



         (h)   Repair of clocks, instruments or other small
appliances which do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odor or results in electrical interference.



      (2)   Required conditions. Home occupations shall comply with
all of the following standards:



         (a)   Home occupation shall be based on an annual permit
for such home occupation, and fees are to be set by resolution of the Village
Council.



         (b)   There shall be no visible change to the outside
appearance of the dwelling.



         (c)   Traffic, parking, sewage or water use shall not be
noticeably different from impacts associated with a typical home in the
neighborhood.



         (d)   The use shall not generate noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, toxic substance, odors or electrical interference, at levels
greater than normally associated with a single-family home.



         (e)   Outside storage or display is prohibited.



         (f)   The home occupation shall not become a nuisance.



         (g)   Only an occupant of the dwelling may be employed
or involved in the home occupation.



         (h)   The home occupation shall occupy a maximum of 10%
of the usable floor area of the dwelling. Garages, whether attached or
detached, shall not be used for any home occupation.



         (i)   All delivery of goods and visits by patrons and
activity shall occur between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



      (3)   Prohibited home occupations. The following are
prohibited as home occupations:



         (a)   Private clubs;



         (b)   Repair shops which may create a nuisance due to
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference;



         (c)   Restaurants;



         (d)   Stables or kennels;



         (e)   Tourist homes;



         (f)   Repair, maintenance, painting and storage of
automobiles, machinery, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles, and similar
items.



      (4)   Any proposed home occupation that is neither
specifically permitted above, nor specifically prohibited above, shall be
considered a special land use and be granted or denied upon consideration of
the required conditions contained in division (C)(2) above.



      (5)   Home occupation permits shall be limited to the
applicant who legally resides in the residence.



   (D)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130.



      (1)   Churches and other facilities normally incidental
thereto;



      (2)   Public, parochial, and private elementary schools;



      (3)   Bed and breakfast inns with not more than four transient
sleeping units;



      (4)   Cemeteries;



      (5)   Essential public service buildings and uses (without
storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within
the district to serve the immediate vicinity;



      (6)   Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional
or community recreation centers, nonprofit swimming pool clubs;



      (7)   Public or private golf courses, excluding driving ranges
which are open to the public;



      (8)   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the
uses listed in this District as either a permitted use or a special land use,
but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, following a public hearing.
The determination shall be based on the standards of § 157.032. Any use not
listed and not found to be "similar" is prohibited in this district.



      (9)    Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily
incidental to an approved special land use permit; however, a separate
special land use permit shall be required for any use or storage of hazardous
materials and any fuel storage tanks.



   (E)   Site development standard; orientation of principal
structures. The front facade of all principal residential structures shall be
oriented to face a common front yard. The common front yard orientation shall
be determined by the zoning official based on a survey of the orientation of
buildings within the same zoning district and located within 500 feet of the
subject site. In the case of a platted subdivision or site condominium in
which there are an insufficient number of buildings to establish a
predominating orientation, the common front yard shall be determined by the
zoning official.



   (F)   Additional site development standards. No plat or site plan
shall be approved creating lots or parcels in accordance with the
requirements given for the Single-Family Residential District unless served
by water and sanitary sewer facilities as approved by the village. All
permitted and special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the zoning ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.



      (1)   Definitions.



      (2)   General provisions for standards on a variety of items
such as: calculation of buildable lot, regulations for single-family
dwellings; illegal dwellings; accessory uses, temporary buildings and
structures; parking and repair of vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception
antennae; limitations on dealing and grading site, etc.



      (3)   Schedule of regulations (minimum lot area, lot width,
setbacks, max. height, etc.).



      (4)   Parking and loading standards.



      (5)   Landscaping standards.



      (6)   Site plan review standards



      (7)   Condominium development standards



      (8)   Subdivision control, see Ch. 153; and



      (9)   Signs, see Ch. 154.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.072  RM - MODERATE-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent. The Moderate-Density Residential District is intended
to provide rental or individually- owned multiple-family dwelling units, and
related facilities. This District will generally serve as a transition zone
between nonresidential districts and lower-density single-family districts.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the RM District, no building or land shall
be used or erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



      (1)   Single-family homes;



      (2)   Two-family homes;



      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings;



      (4)   Activity center building specifically for the elderly;



      (5)   Publicly-owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational
facilities, court buildings, post offices, community centers, civic centers,
and municipal buildings;



      (6)   State-licensed residential child and adult care
facilities in conformance with § 157.056;



      (7)   Essential public services, not including storage yards
when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to
serve the immediate vicinity; and



      (8)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incidental to any of the above uses as defined in § 157.008 and described in
§§ 157.035 through 157.039, such as leasing offices, community buildings,
and recreation facilities.



   (C)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130:



      (1)   State-licensed adult foster care large group homes as
listed in § 157.056;



      (2)   Adult congregate care facilities;



      (3)   Nursing and convalescent homes;



      (4)   Housing for the elderly;



      (5)   Bed and breakfast inns with not more than six transient
sleeping units;



      (6)   All special land uses listed for the Single-Family
Residential Districts, except those uses already listed as a permitted use in
this District;



      (7)   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the
uses listed in this District as either a permitted use or a special land use,
but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, following a public hearing.
The determination shall be based on the standards of § 157.032. Any use not
listed and not found to be similar is prohibited in this zoning district; and



      (8)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incidental to an approved special land use permit are permitted without a
separate special land use permit.



   (D)   Additional site development standards.



      (1)   No site plan shall be approved unless the site is served
by public water and sanitary sewer facilities.



      (2)   All permitted and special land uses shall comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter and the following listed as a
reference guide:



         (a)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



         (b)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



         (c)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations”
(minimum lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



         (d)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



         (e)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



         (f)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan
Review and Approval”;



         (g)   Sections 157.260 through 157.268, “Condominium
Development Standards”;



         (h)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



         (i)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.073  MHP - MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent. The MHP Mobile Home Park Districts are intended to
provide sites for mobile home parks which are characterized by a relatively
high-density structures which are replaced periodically and dwelling units
which are permitted by state law to exist without conforming to local codes
and ordinances applicable to other dwelling units. Because the mobile home
park possesses site characteristics similar to multiple-family residential
development and because they typically develop with private streets and
utility systems, thereby creating an interruption in the continuity of the
local streets and utility systems, they are not compatible when located in an
otherwise single-family area. Therefore, in this chapter, mobile home parks
are intended to be located so as to provide a transition of use between
extensive nonresidential districts (Industrial and Commercial Districts) and
Moderate-Density Residential Districts.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In an MHP Mobile Home Park District, no
building, structure, or land shall be used or erected, and no building or
structure shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



      (1)   Mobile home parks, which conform to the requirements of
division (C) below; and



      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings as permitted and as regulated
in the RM Moderate-Density Residential Districts.



   (C)   Mobile home park required standards.



      (1)   Development. The mobile home park shall be developed
with sites averaging 5,500 square feet per mobile home unit. This 5,500
square feet for any one site may be reduced by 20%; provided, that the
individual site shall be equal to at least 4,400 square feet. For each square
foot of land gained through the reduction of a site below 5,500 square feet,
at least an equal amount of land shall be dedicated as open space. This open
space shall be in addition to that required under the standards required
under the Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96 of 1987, or any
administrative rules promulgated therein.



      (2)   Distances.



         (a)   Each mobile home site shall have a front yard
setback of ten feet;



         (b)   Each mobile home shall be in compliance with the
following minimum distances:



            1.   Ten feet from an on-site parking space of an
adjacent mobile home site; and



            2.   Ten feet from an attached or detached
structure or accessory of an adjacent mobile home which is not used for
living purposes.



         (c)   Fifty feet from a permanent building;



         (d)   One hundred feet from a baseball or softball
field; and



         (e)   Any park or structure that belongs to a mobile
home shall be set back the following minimum distances:



            1.   Seven feet from a parking bay;



            2.   Seven feet from a common pedestrian walkway;
and



            3.   Twenty five feet from a natural or human-made
lake, object, or walkway.



      (3)   Setbacks from property boundary lines:



         (a)   Mobile homes, permanent buildings, and facilities
and other structures shall not be located closer than ten feet from the
property boundary line of the mobile home parks or mobile home condominiums.



         (b)   If mobile homes, permanent buildings, and
facilities, and other structures abut a public right-of-way, they shall not
be located closer than 50 feet from the boundary line, except that if the
boundary line runs through the center of the public road, the 50 feet shall
be measured from the road right-of-way line.



      (4)   Service drive requirements.



         (a)   The service drives shall be hard surfaced.



         (b)   The service drive shall have access to a public
thoroughfare or shall be connected to a public thoroughfare by a permanent
easement which shall be recorded prior to approval by the state. Sole access
by an alley is prohibited.



         (c)   A dead-end road shall terminate with an adequate
turning area. A blunt-end road is prohibited.



         (d)   An adequate safe-sight distance shall be provided
at intersections.



         (e)   An offset at an intersection or an intersection of
more than two streets is prohibited.



         (f)   All roads shall be clearly marked with appropriate
traffic signs, subject to the provisions of the Mobile Home Commission Rules
and standards required under the Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96 of
1987, or any administrative rules promulgated thereunder.



         (g)   A road sign shall be named and so identified by
street signs located at all road intersections.



         (h)   A name of an internal road shall be approved by
the village.



         (i)   A service drive shall be constructed of materials
suitable for sub-grades and hard surface in compliance with the standards of
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials,
adopted herein by reference. The park developer may use other suitable
materials of equal quality, if approved by the Mobile Home Commission.



         (j)   The Village Engineer shall review ingress and
egress of the service drives as established in § 11 of the Mobile Home
Commission Act, Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2311 et seq.,
and standards required under the Mobile Home Commission Act, or any
administrative rules promulgated thereunder.



      (5)   Electrical system. A park electrical system shall, at a
minimum, be designed, installed, operated, and maintained in compliance with
the rules entitled “Electrical Liners and Equipment”, of the State
Administrative Code, pursuant to the construction, installation and safety
standards of the servicing public service company and in compliance with
standards required under the Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96 of
1987, or any administrative rules promulgated thereunder.



      (6)   Compliance with state law. All mobile home park
developments shall further comply with Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.2301 to 125.2350.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.074  NOC - NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   To permit the integration of office, personal service,
and limited business uses, in what is predominantly a residential setting.
This District is specifically designed for application to the transitional
sections where existing residential uses are experiencing redevelopment
pressures. Among the purposes of the NOC District is the accommodation of a
variety of housing types at a moderate density; as well as various office
uses performing administrative, professional, and personal services; and very
limited commercial ventures, such as boutiques and similar enterprises; and



      (2)   Upon individual review and the granting of a special
exception permit, day-to-day retail shopping facilities providing service to
persons living in adjacent areas, and having minimal impact upon surrounding
neighborhoods, may also be permitted. In order to minimize incompatibility
with existing residential development and to promote a unified and positive
physical image for these critical areas, all office or commercial uses shall
be housed in structures possessing a residential facade and general character
of a residence.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   All uses permitted in the RM Moderate-Density
Residential District;



      (2)   The following office establishments in structures not
originally erected for residential purposes which perform services on the
premises:



         (a)   Financial institutions;



         (b)   Insurance offices;



         (c)   Real estate offices;



         (d)   Office for attorneys, accountants, architects,
engineers, and similar professionals;



         (e)   Photographic studios; and



         (f)   Other office establishments similar to and
compatible with the above establishments.



      (3)   Professional service establishments providing human
health care on an outpatient basis;



      (4)   The following establishments customarily related to
medical and dental uses when located in a medical or dental building or
complex and when intended primarily to serve to occupants of the building or
complex in which they are located:



         (a)   Pharmacies;



         (b)   Medical, dental, and optical laboratories;



         (c)   Stores offering supportive or corrective garments
and prosthetic appliances;



         (d)   Other establishments similar to and compatible
with the above establishments;



         (e)   The following miscellaneous business service
establishments:



            1.   Consumer credit reporting agencies;



            2.   Mailing list and stenographic services;



            3.   Business management consulting services;



            4.   Duplicating services; and



            5.   Other establishments similar to an compatible
with the above establishments.



         (f)   Governmental offices and libraries;



         (g)   Churches and related facilities;



         (h)   Offices of nonprofit organizations, such as
professional membership organizations, labor unions, civic, social and
fraternal associations, political organizations;



         (i)   Mortuaries and funeral homes, subject to the
following restrictions.



            1.   Sufficient off-street automobile parking and
assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to be used in funeral
possessions. The assembly area shall be provided in addition to otherwise
required off-street parking area.



            2.   Loading and unloading areas uses by
ambulances, hearses, or other such service vehicles shall be obscured from
view with an opaque fence or wall not less than six feet in height.



         (j)   Fraternal lodges or similar civil or social clubs;
and



         (k)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures
customarily incident to the above uses as defined in § 157.008 and meeting
the standards of §§ 157.035 through 157.039.



   (C)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130.



      (1)   All special land uses permitted in the RM
Moderate-Density Residential District;



      (2)   Retail establishments marketing convenience goods, such
as groceries, fruit, meats, dairy products, produce, baked goods and
alcoholic beverages, stores selling drugs, hardware, novelties and gifts,
flowers, books, stationery, tobacco, and sundry small household articles;



      (3)   Office or commercial uses located in a structure
originally erected for residential purposes, provided, all commercial
structure standards of the Village Building Code are complied with;



      (4)   Boutiques or establishments operated expressly for the
sale of antiques, collectibles, and similar merchandise; and



      (5)   (a)   Uses of the same nature or class as the
majority of the uses listed in this District as either a permitted use or a
special land use, but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by
the Village Council, following a Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, public hearing and recommendation.



         (b)   The determination shall be based on the standards
of § 157.032.



         (c)   Any use not listed and not found to be similar is
prohibited in this zoning district.



   (D)   Additional site development standards.



      (1)   No site plan shall be approved, unless the site is
served by public water and sanitary sewer facilities.



      (2)   All permitted and special land uses shall comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter and the following listed as a
reference guide:



         (a)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



         (b)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



         (c)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations”
(minimum lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



         (d)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



         (e)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



         (f)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan
Review and Approval”;



         (g)   Sections 157.260 through 157.268, “Condominium
Development Standards”;



         (h)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



         (i)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.075  O - OFFICE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent. The O Office District is intended to accommodate uses
such as administrative offices, banks, and personal services. Office
Districts generally serve as a transitional area between residential and
commercial districts or to buffer residential neighborhoods from arterial
roadways.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In an O Office District, no building or land
shall be used or erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



      (1)   Offices for uses, including administrative,
professional, physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors,
psychiatrists, psychologists, real estate, legal, accounting, writing,
clerical, stenographic, and drafting;



      (2)   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and
similar uses with or without drive-through facilities and 24-hour ready
tellers;



      (3)   Personal service establishments, performing on-site
services, including barber shops, beauty shops, and health salons;



      (4)   Publicly-owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational
facilities, court buildings, post offices, community centers, civic centers,
and municipal buildings;



      (5)   Churches, places of worship, and related facilities;



      (6)   Colleges, universities, and similar institutions of
higher learning;



      (7)   Accessory essential public services and structures,
excluding buildings and storage yards; and



      (8)   Accessory and uses buildings and structures customarily
incidental to the above uses, as defined in § 157.008 and the standards of
§§ 157.035 through 157.039.



   (C)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130:



      (1)   Essential public service buildings, not including
storage yards, such as telephone exchange buildings, transformer stations,
substations, or gas regulator stations;



      (2)   Substance abuse treatment facilities;



      (3)   General and specialty hospitals and urgent medical care
centers;



      (4)   Nursing and convalescent homes;



      (5)   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the
uses listed in this District as either a permitted use or a special land use,
but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Village
Council, following a Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, public hearing and recommendation. The determination shall be based
on the standards of § 157.032. Any use not listed and not found to be
similar is prohibited in this Zoning District;



      (6)   Funeral homes or mortuary establishments; and



      (7)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incidental to an approved special land use permit are permitted without a
separate special land use permit, however, a separate special land use permit
shall be required for any use or storage of hazardous materials and any fuel
storage tanks.



   (D)   Required conditions.



      (1)   No interior display shall be visible from the exterior
of the building.



      (2)   The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be
prohibited.



      (3)   Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials,
beyond that normally incident to the above-permitted uses, shall be
prohibited.



   (E)   Additional site development standards. All permitted and
special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, including those listed below as a reference guide:



      (1)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



      (2)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



      (3)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations” (minimum
lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



      (4)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



      (5)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



      (6)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”;



      (7)   Sections 157.260 through 157.268, “Condominium
Development Standards”;



      (8)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



      (9)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.076  CBD - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   These special regulations are intended to promote
development of a pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use district, consisting of a
variety of retail, office, and service uses. Because of the variety of uses
permitted in the CBD, special attention must be paid to site layout, building
design, vehicular circulation, and coordination of site features between
adjoining sites. Buildings should be placed close to the street with parking
in the side, or preferably, rear yard.



      (2)   (a)   Permitted uses should be complementary to each
other, and should not have an adverse impact on street capacity, public
utilities, and services, or the overall image and function of this District.
Uses should reflect the traditional small-town character of the area and have
a design that accommodates pedestrian-shopper movement, rather than an
orientation to primarily automobile movement.



         (b)   A mixture of uses within a building, such as
retail on the ground floor and office or residential on upper floors is
permitted. It is the intent of this District to prohibit automotive related
sendees and non-retail uses which tend to interfere with the continuity of
the retail frontage.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the CBD, no building or land shall be used
or erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this chapter:



      (1)   Food service establishments; including grocery, meat
market, supermarket, bakeries, delicatessen, ice cream stores, and other food
service establishments similar to and compatible with the above;



      (2)    Personal service establishments; including barber shop,
beauty parlor, tailor shop, shoe repair, dress maker, photographic studio,
and other personal service establishments similar to and compatible with the
above;



      (3)   Other service establishments; that include a showroom,
workshop, or a retail adjunct, such as that occupied by an electrician,
decorator, painter, upholsterer, a business performing radio, television or
home appliance repair, and other service establishments similar to and
compatible with the above;



      (4)   Theaters, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, and other
similar entertainment facilities, where the patrons are seated or served
while seated in a building;



      (5)   Amusement enterprises; if conducted wholly within an
enclosed building;



      (6)   Boutiques or establishments operated expressly for the
sale of art, antiques, collectibles, and similar merchandise;



      (7)   General retail establishments whose principal activity
is the sale of new merchandise to the public. These include such
establishments as household appliance stores, furniture stores, department or
variety stores, drug stores, hardware stores, clothing stores; specialty
stores selling flowers, books, stationary, jewelry, novelties and gifts,
tobacco, and sundry small household articles; convenience stores selling
fruit, meat, dairy products, produce, and alcoholic beverages; and other
retail establishments similar to and compatible with the above;



      (8)   Hotels; and



      (9)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incident to the above uses as defined in § 157.008 and meeting the standards
of §§ 157.035 through 157.039.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall
be permitted subject to any licensing requirements of the village:



      (1)   Open air or outdoor restaurants, bars or cafés on
private property;



      (2)   Outdoor sales of specialty items, including flowers,
books, novelties, and gifts on private property;



      (3)   Circus, fair, carnival, or similar use;



      (4)   Sidewalk seating and cafés on village sidewalks shall
comply with the following: sidewalk seating and cafés (sit down). The
village may issue revocable annual permits to any commercial establishments
that apply for a permit to place benches and/or tables, or to operate a
sidewalk café as an immediate extension of an eating and drinking
establishment, on to a limited portion of a public sidewalk adjacent to the
business, provided:



         (a)   The sidewalk on which the tables and/or chairs are
to be located is flat and is in good repair;



         (b)   The location of the tables and/or chairs used on
the sidewalk will not interfere with the clear vision of a motorist on the
adjoining street, particularly at any intersection of the sidewalk with
another street or alley;



         (c)   The sidewalk use will leave a clear and
unencumbered area not less than five feet in width on the sidewalk for the
safe and efficient passage of pedestrian traffic. One bench placed against
the front wall of a building may encroach into this area by a maximum of 18
inches;



         (d)   When placed on the sidewalk, all tables and chairs
shall be located next to the building and as far away from the street curb as
possible. The location may be adjusted with approval from the village;



         (e)   All sidewalk furniture shall be subject to review
and approval by the village prior to installation. The goal of this item is
to have furniture that enhances the downtown area;



         (f)   Items such as pots of flowers shall be allowed on
the sidewalk immediately in front of a business as long as there is no
interference with any pedestrian traffic as required by this chapter;



         (g)   No goods shall be displayed on the sidewalk in any
fashion;



         (h)   The following indemnification and insurance
requirements shall apply.



            1.   The applicant shall execute a statement
agreeing, at the applicant’s sole expense, to hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials, employees, and agents harmless from,
indemnify them for, and defend them (with legal counsel reasonably acceptable
to them through any appellate proceedings they wish to pursue until a final
resolution, settlement, or compromise approved by them) from any liability
for loss, damage, injury, or casualty to persons or property caused or
occasioned by or arising from any act, use or occupancy or negligence by or
of the applicant and any of its agents, servants, visitors, licensees, or
employees occurring during the term of this agreement or any extended term.



            2.   The applicant shall furnish to the village a
certificate or other evidence indicating that the applicant has secured a
policy or policies of insurance against damage to village property in the
amount of $100,000 and bodily injury (including death) in the minimum amount
of $500,000 for injury to one person and $1,000,000 for injury to more than
one person. The certificate(s) of insurance shall show the village as a
certificate holder and an insured and shall provide that coverage may not be
terminated without 30 days prior written notice to the village. Such
insurance must provide coverage of the village and its officers, employees
and agents for any occurrence during the term of the permit (up to one year).
Upon request, the applicant shall also provide the village a copy of the
insurance policy(ies).



            3.   The applicant shall secure and maintain any
legally required worker’s disability compensation and unemployment
compensation insurance.



         (i)   The following items shall apply to all sidewalk
cafés.



            1.   Each business owner shall provide a trash
receptacle(s) in the eating area. The village shall specify the type and
number of trash receptacles provided in the café area. The property owner
and operator of the establishment shall keep the area clean and free of all
paper, trash, refuse, and debris.



            2.   All eating areas may be covered by a
temporary structure such as a canopy or awning approved by the village, or
umbrella-type shades affixed, in a manner acceptable to the village, securely
to a table or to the sidewalk. No advertising or signs will be allowed on the
temporary structures. All temporary structures must be totally within the
area permitted for the sidewalk case use.



            3.   The seating for any sidewalk café shall meet
all the requirements of the State Building Code for amount of seating,
spacing, restrooms, barrier-free accessibility, and exiting;



            4.    The sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages, beer, wine, and spirits shall not be permitted in any sidewalk
café permitted under this policy unless permission is granted by the Village
Council.



            5.   No outdoor cooking will be permitted in any
sidewalk café under this policy.



            6.   Materials other than tables and seating used
in conjunction with a sidewalk café shall be fully and completely removed
from the sidewalk and kept elsewhere, when the café is not in operation.



         (j)   1.   Prior to issuance of a sidewalk seating or
café permit, a fee established by resolution of the Village Council, shall
be paid by the applicant to the village.



            2.   The permit shall include the dates and
duration of the sidewalk use.



            3.   Any permit so issued shall be subject to
immediate revocation by the village for failure to meet or to maintain the
area of the sidewalk café in strict accordance with the requirements of this
policy or to comply with other applicable laws, rules, regulations, orders,
and directives;



         (k)   Applications for sidewalk seating and cafés shall
be in a form and contain the following information and such other information
as shall be deemed necessary by the Village Manager:



            1.   The name(s), address(es), and telephone
number(s) of the owner(s), operator(s), and responsible person(s);



            2.   The proposed dates and hours of operations;



            3.   A sketch of the site plan for the use; and



            4.   All other information required herein.



   (D)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130:



      (1)   Government offices, post offices, and libraries;



      (2)   Offices of nonprofit organizations, such as professional
membership organizations, labor unions, civic, social and fraternal
associations, political organizations;



      (3)   Banks, savings and loan associations, and other
financial or lending institutions;



      (4)   General office or professional office uses, including
the offices and facilities of publishing operations for newspapers, magazines
or other periodicals (excluding heavy printing facilities and machinery), and
business services such as mailing, copying and data processing;



      (5)   Professional service establishments, including, but not
limited to, offices or facilities for members of the dental, medical, legal,
architectural, accounting, or other professions, and other professional
service establishments similar to and compatible with the above; and



      (6)   Multi-family dwellings (apartments) above the first
story of any structure where the ground floor is devoted to a permitted use;
provided, that:



            1.   Existing and proposed dwelling units are kept
in an attractive condition conducive to an appealing Central Business
District, and in such a manner that residential activities do not interfere
with the customary business activities associated with the district;



            2.   Each dwelling unit or group of such units are
provided with adequate refuse containers suitable far the temporary outdoor
storage of household refuse. Such containers shall be fitted with a secured
lid and located to the rear of the building;



            3.   With the exception of legally registered and
operable automobiles, the storage of all personal property shall be done
within the dwelling unit or an approved accessory building located to the
rear of the building;



            4.   Dwelling unit entrances located on the street
frontage shall be inconspicuous, kept in good repair, and free of debris; and



            5.   Windows facing the street shall be maintained
in good repair.



      (7)   (a)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the
storage of trash or waste materials in the building or if such trash or waste
materials are to be temporarily stored outside the building, trash, or waste
containers shall be screened from view, on at least three sides, by a
structure.



         (b)   The waste storage areas shall be maintained free
from water.



      (8)   Where a commercial or C-2 District is directly
contiguous to property within a residential zoning district, a buffer yard,
vertical screen, or berm shall be provided along the side and/or rear yard as
approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required; and



      (9)   Architectural standards shall be as follows.



         (a)   All new buildings, additions, and significant
exterior changes or renovations shall be found to be architecturally
compatible with existing historic architectural styles found in the Central
Business District.



         (b)   In making such a determination, the following will
be considered.



            1.   Front facade materials must be consistent
with traditional buildings in the downtown. Materials should consist of brick
or another common material such as clapboard wood, not reflective glass.



            2.   Colors must be consistent with that of the
majority of the existing buildings in the downtown. Stark or bold colors and
other non-traditional downtown colors are not permitted.



            3.   Traditionally styled windows should be used
along facades facing a public street.



            4.   The site design shall provide for pedestrian
and bicycle needs, including direct and convenient access for pedestrians and
bicyclists from the walkway to the building entrance.



            5.   Rear or side entrances should be provided
where parking is on the side or rear of the building.



            6.   Parking shall be located in the side or rear
yards, not in the front yard; however, parking in one front yard shall be
permitted for corner lots.



   (E)   Additional site development standards. All permitted and
special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, including those listed below as a reference guide:



      (1)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



      (2)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



      (3)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations” (minimum
lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



      (4)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



      (5)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



      (6)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”;



      (7)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



      (8)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 356, passed 1-19-2003; Ord. passed
2-1-2012; Council Action Req. passed 5-3-2018)     Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.077  C - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of the C Commercial District is to promote
the following:



      (1)   Provide for a full range of business uses that may not
be compatible with residential and commercial uses in the CBD Central
Business District;



      (2)   Minimize the hazards of highway commercial activity;



      (3)   Encourage the clustering of similar retail and service
establishments;



      (4)   Meet minimum standards of health and safety by
protecting against hazards and nuisances; and



      (5)   Encourage stable retail and service development.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In a C Commercial District, no building or
land shall be used or erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



      (1)   Uses permitted in the CBD District, including §
157.075(D), excluding residential uses and bed and breakfast inns;



      (2)   Athletic clubs and health spas;



      (3)   Automobile supply, parts, and accessories;



      (4)   Medical, dental, and veterinary clinics;



      (5)   Laundromats and dry-cleaners;



      (6)   Mortuaries and funeral homes subject to the following
restrictions.



            1.   Sufficient off-street automobile parking and
assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to be used in funeral
possessions. The assembly area shall be provided on addition to otherwise
required off-street parking area.



            2.   Loading and unloading areas used by
ambulances, hearses, or other such service vehicles shall be obscured from
view with an opaque fence or wall not less than six feet in height.



      (7)   Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through service;



      (8)   Business schools and colleges operated for profit;



      (9)   Accessory essential public services and structures,
excluding buildings and storage yards; or



      (10)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incident to the above uses as defined in § 157.008 and meeting the standards
of §§ 157.035 through 157.039.



   (C)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130:



      (1)   Outdoor displays, bazaars, carnivals, and civic events
of a temporary nature;



      (2)   Essential public service buildings and storage yards. In
permitting such uses, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, may vary the area, height, bulk and placement regulations as
reasonably necessary for public convenience and service, and reasonably
compatible with the intent and character of the district;



      (3)   Public parking garages;



      (4)   New and used car lots, trailer sales, and rental lots;



      (5)   Outdoor retail sales of a limited and specified duration;



      (6)   Gasoline stations;



      (7)   Drive-in and drive-through services;



      (8)   Lumber yards, subject to the following:



         (a)   The use is primarily for the storage and sale of
retail goods; and



         (b)    No manufacturing, processing, planning, or
milling operations are permitted.



      (9)   Automotive repair and service facilities, including
minor and major maintenance and repair;



      (10)   Shopping centers over 60,000 square feet;



      (11)   Commercial outdoor recreation establishments (excluding
golf related uses);



      (12)   Golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses;



      (13)   Automobile towing;



      (14)   Medical marijuana dispensary;



      (15)   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the
uses listed in this District as either a permitted use or a special land use,
but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, following a public hearing.
The determination shall be based on the standards of § 157.032. Any use not
listed and not found to be similar is prohibited in this zoning district; and



      (16)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incidental to an approved special land use permit; however, a separate
special land use permit shall be required for any use or storage of hazardous
materials and any fuel storage tanks.



   (D)   Required conditions.



      (1)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.



      (2)   All business, servicing, or processing, except for
off-street parking or loading, and those open air uses indicated subject to a
special land use permit shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.



      (3)   No manufacturing processing or treatment of products
other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted
on the premises, shall be permitted.



      (4)   Where a commercial district is directly contiguous to
property within a residential zoning district, a buffer yard, vertical
screen, or berm shall be provided along the side and/or rear yard meeting the
conditions of § 157.168(B) or (C).



      (5)   Outside storage or work areas, or the storage of any
commercial vehicles are not permitted in this District.



   (E)   Additional site development standards. All permitted and
special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, including those listed below as a reference guide:



      (1)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



      (2)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



      (3)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations” (minimum
lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



      (4)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



      (5)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



      (6)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”;



      (7)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



      (8)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 407, passed 3-13-2011; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.078  M - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The M Industrial District is designed to accommodate
research, wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose
external physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in
no manner detrimentally affect any of the surrounding districts. The M
District is intended for the manufacturing, compounding, processing,
packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products
from previously prepared material. The processing of raw material for
shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial operation at another
location, shall not be permitted.



      (2)   Goals of the M District include the following:



         (a)   Provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations
to meet the needs of the village’s future economy for all types of
manufacturing and related uses;



         (b)   Prohibit the use of industrial areas for new
residential development; and



         (c)   Promote manufacturing development which is free
from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and
other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, odor, and other
objectionable influences.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In an M Industrial District, no building or
land shall be used erected or except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



      (1)   Research, design, or experimental laboratories and
product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building;



      (2)   The sale at wholesale or warehousing of automotive
equipment; dry goods and apparel; groceries and related products; raw farm
products, except livestock; electrical machinery, and equipment; tobacco and
tobacco products; beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverages; paper and
paper products; furniture and home furnishings; and any commodity the
manufacturer of which is permitted in this District. Also storage or transfer
buildings, commercial laundries or cleaning establishments, and frozen food
lockers;



      (3)   Communication facilities with buildings, public utility
buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and
substations, gas regulator stations, communication, and relay stations with
outdoor storage;



      (4)   Manufacturing (indoors), compounding, processing,
packaging, or treatment of such products as, but not limited to, bakery
goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware
and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops;



      (5)   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of
articles or merchandise indoors from previously prepared materials such as:
bone; canvas; cellophane; cloth; cork; elastomers; feathers; felt; fiber;
fur; glass; hair; horn; leather; paper; plastics; rubber; precious or
semi-precious metals or stones; sheet metal; shell; textiles; tobacco; wax;
wire; wood (excluding saw and planing mills); and yarns;



      (6)   Manufacturing of pottery and ceramic products using only
previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas;



      (7)   Manufacturing of musical instruments, toys, novelties,
and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products;



      (8)   Manufacturing or assembly of electrical appliances and
instruments;



      (9)   Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs,
light sheet metal products, such as heating and ventilating equipment,
cornices, eaves;



      (10)   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, with no
retail service;



      (11)   Tool and dye shops; metal working machine shops
involving the use of grinding or cutting tools, such as manufacturing tools,
dies, jigs and fixtures; publishing, printing, or forming of box, carton, and
cardboard products;



      (12)   Retail sales specifically incidental to contractor’s
establishments which require a workshop and retail outlet or show room as
accessory uses, including:



         (a)   Plumbing and electrical contractors;



         (b)   Building material suppliers and wholesalers such
as lumber yards which include manufacturing;



         (c)   Processing, planing, or milling operations, and
other similar uses;



         (d)   Carpenter shops, including door, sack, or trim
manufacturing;



         (e)   Jobbing and repair machine shops;



         (f)   Plastic products forming and molding;



         (g)   Printing and publishing;



         (h)   Trade and industrial schools;



         (i)   Air conditioning and heating dealers, including
incidental sheet metal work;



         (j)   Furniture re-upholstering and refinishing
establishments;



         (k)   Sign painting establishments;



         (l)   Establishments producing and selling monuments,
cut stone, stone, and similar products; or



         (m)   Other uses similar to and compatible with the
above uses.



      (13)   Greenhouses;



      (14)   Commercial mini-storage warehouses and storage
buildings, including the dwelling and office of a caretaker, with no outdoor
storage. Buildings shall be spaced not less than 30 feet apart;



      (15)    Automotive repair and service facilities, including
minor and major maintenance and repair; and



      (16)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incident to any of the above-permitted uses as defined in § 157.008 and
meeting the standards of §§ 157.035 through 157.039.



   (C)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted upon
review and approval in accordance with the general standards for all special
land uses in § 157.122 and the standards for the specific use in § 157.130:



      (1)   Special uses as may be permitted in the C District;



      (2)   Planned research or industrial parks;



      (3)   The storage of trucks, trailer coaches, campers, buses,
and recreation vehicles;



      (4)   (a)   The following uses may only be permitted upon
conclusive demonstration through specific plans that the performance
standards of § 157.053 shall be satisfied, and that the proposed use shall
not be obnoxious, hazardous, or detrimental to the public health, safety, and
welfare.



         (b)   No such use shall be located closer than 1,000
feet to a residential district:



            1.   Junk scrap paper or rag bailing or handling;
poultry killing, dressing, or live storage;



            2.   Abattoirs;



            3.   Ammonia-bleaching powder or chlorine
manufacture;



            4.   Asphalt manufacture or refining;



            5.   Boiler-works, forge works, aluminum, brass,
cooper, iron, or steel foundry employing five or more workers;



            6.   Brick, tile, or terra-cotta manufacture;



            7.   Celluloid manufacture or treatment;



            8.   Creosote treatment or manufacture;



            9.   Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture;



            10.   Distillation of bones; coal tar or wood;



            11.   Dye manufacture;



            12.   Electroplating;



            13.   Fat rendering;



            14.   Fertilizer manufacture;



            15.   Glue, gelatin, or size manufacture;



            16.   Lime, cement, or plaster of pans manufacture;



            17.   Molten bath plating;



            18.   Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture;



            19.   Plastic manufacture or articles therefrom;



            20.   Raw hides or skins or the storage, curing,
or tanning thereof;



            21.   Rock crushing;



            22.   Rolling mills;



            23.   Rubber manufacture;



            24.   Slaughtering of animal or fowl;



            25.   Melting of iron;



            26.   Soap manufacture;



            27.   Stock yards;



            28.   Sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid
manufacture;



            29.   Tallow, grease, or lard manufacture or
refining;



            30.   Tar distillation or manufacture of dyes;



            31.   Tar roofing or tar water-proof lag
manufacture;



            32.   Yeast manufacture;



            33.   Food processing employing more than ten
people; and



            34.   Concrete ready-mix plants; and similar uses.



      (5)   Automobile service centers, including major automobile
repair;



      (6)   Contractor’s storage yards;



      (7)   Lumber and planing mills if completely enclosed and no
property lines from the exterior boundary of the M District;



      (8)   Commercial composting;



      (9)   Recycling stations;



      (10)   Retail, restaurant, and service establishments serving
the needs of the Industrial District, such as, but not limited to, banks,
savings and loan associations, credit unions, automobile service stations,
motels, bowling alleys, trade or industrial schools, or industrial clinics;



      (11)   Outdoor theaters;



      (12)   Storage facilities for building materials, sand,
gravel, stone, lumber, contractor’s equipment and supplies;



      (13)   Commercial kennels;



      (14)   Radio, television microwave, and cellular phone towers;



      (15)   Essential public service and utility buildings and
facilities, stations structures, storage yards, and other related uses,
public utility plants, tanks, water supply, and sewage disposal plants.
Railroad transfer and storage tracks, rights-of-way, and freight terminals;



      (16)   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the
uses listed in this District as either a permitted use or a special land use,
but not listed elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, following a public hearing.
The determination shall be based on the standards of § 157.032. Any use not
listed and not found to be similar is prohibited; and



      (17)   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily
incidental to an approved special land use permit, however, a separate
special land use permit shall be required for any use or storage of hazardous
materials and any fuel storage tanks.



      (18)   Indoor recreational use or gymnasium uses and
supporting uses such as lockers, retail area for sales of sports related
items, and/or snack bar area.



         (a)   Parking requirements for the proposed recreational
use should follow the standards set forth by §§ 157.145 through 157.151 and
the table of § 157.146(A) and (B);



         (b)   One recreational activity use within a building
will account for the entire building's parking requirement given the
supporting uses are not on more than 50% of the main recreational use or 25%
of the total building's square footage; whichever is greater. These uses can
be but are not limited to the following business and commercial parking uses:
swimming pool (§ 157.146(A) and (B)), racquetball/tennis centers (§
157.146(A) and (B)), batting cages, go-cart track (§ 157.146(A) and (B)), or
ice skating/roller rink (§ 157.146(A) and (B));



         (c)   Establishments proposing multiple uses of the
space shall follow parking requirements as set forth by §§ 157.145 through
157.151 under business and commercial parking uses for a health fitness
centers without swimming pools. Pool areas should be calculated separately
for the parking requirements per (§ 157.146(A) and (B));



         (d)   Indoor recreational establishments proposing fixed
spectator seating shall use parking requirements as set forth by §§ 157.145
through 157.151 and the table of § 157.146(A) and (B): Institutional -
auditoriums, assembly halls and outdoor arenas.



   (D)   Other requirements.



      (1)   Unless specifically authorized by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, all activities in this
district shall be carried on in completely enclosed buildings.



      (2)   Storage of finished or unfinished materials, or any
equipment or machinery necessary to the operation, is permitted, but all
storage areas shall be effectively screened with a solid, uniformly finished
wall or fence with solid entrance and exit gates. Said wall or fence shall in
no case be lower than the enclosed storage.



   (E)   Additional development standards. All permitted and special
land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter,
including those listed below as a reference guide:



      (1)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



      (2)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



      (3)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations” (minimum
lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



      (4)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



      (5)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



      (6)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”;



      (7)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



      (8)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 340, passed 5-27-2001; Ord. passed
2-1-2012; Ord. 438, passed 1-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.079  WATERFRONT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The intent of these regulations is to preserve the
scenic and natural resource values of shorelines and river and stream banks
within the village.



      (2)   More specifically, the purposes of this Overlay District
are to:



         (a)   Promote public health, safety, and general welfare;



         (b)   Encourage the use of natural resources in the
village in accordance with their character and adaptability;



         (c)   Preserve and maintain the scenic views of
shorelines and river and stream banks;



         (d)   Establish the location and size of waterfront
structures which may hereafter be erected or altered; and



         (e)   Provide rules and regulations for the construction
of such waterfront structures.



      (3)   These regulations shall apply to all zoning districts in
the village which extend into, abut, or are adjacent to lakes and navigable
waterways in the village. This Overlay District regulates the construction of
waterfront structures and appurtenances proposed along, abutting upon, or
extending into lakes and navigable waterways in the village.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Principal uses are identified by each separate zoning
district.



      (2)   (a)   Waterfront structures and appurtenances are
permitted accessory uses to the principal use permitted in zoning districts
within the Waterfront Overlay District.



         (b)   They are permitted for recreational and personal
use of the principal user (occupant) and family members residing with the
principal user of the property. No structure will be approved without an
existing principal structure on the parcel.



      (3)   Applications to construct all waterfront structures and
appurtenances shall be subject to review and approval procedures outlined in
division (D) below.



   (C)   Waterfront requirements.



      (1)   Water-related structures and appurtenances. The
following structures and appurtenances shall be permitted, subject to the
conditions in division (C)(2) below:



         (a)   Piers and docks, including floating types;



         (b)   Boat hoists, davits, or mooring whips;



         (c)   Spring or mooring piles, ice cluster; and



         (d)   Enclosed or unenclosed boat port/wells not
exceeding a height of one story or 15 feet above mean high water.



      (2)   Standards for water-related structures and
appurtenances. The above structures and appurtenances shall be constructed to
meet the following conditions.



         (a)   Individually or collectively, the structure(s),
appurtenance(s), and dock(s) shall not be closer than six feet to a side lot
line.



         (b)   Construction or installation of structures and
appurtenances shall not obstruct the access of boaters to:



            1.   Adjoining or nearby parcels;



            2.   Normal boating routes; or



            3.   Obstruct the natural flow of water.



         (c)   No bulkheads shall be constructed which shall
extend into the waterway.



         (d)   A maximum of two covered unenclosed boat
ports/wells and a maximum of two out of water-lifting devices are permitted
per site and shall be designed and constructed as a unit.



         (e)   All permitted structures and appurtenances set
forth in division (C)(1) above shall be kept safe, secure, and in good repair.



      (3)   Number of boats and structures.



         (a)   The allowable accessory use of the waterfront
shall be limited to not more than one boat for every 33 feet of water
frontage to a maximum of three boats. For the purposes of this chapter, a
BOAT shall mean any water craft equipped with a motor or engine.



         (b)   The number of structures covered in this division
(C) is limited to the extent they serve the number of boats permitted in
division (C)(3)(a) above, except for covered boat ports/walls and lifting
devices which are otherwise limited to a maximum of two by division (B)(2)
above.



      (4)   Waterfront yards and accessory structures. Accessory
structures shall be permitted in yard areas as allowed by § 157.035, subject
to the following condition: the placement of the accessory structure shall
not obscure the view corridor across the yard of the subject lot to open
water from any adjoining residence. This standard is diagramed below.







 



      (5)   Shoreline fill, dredging, and construction of seawalls.



         (a)   Application for shoreline fill or construction of
seawalls shall be referred to the State Department of Natural Resources for
any necessary permits.



         (b)   Additionally, such activities must meet the
following standards, except as modified by any required state or county
permit.



               1.   In no case shall shoreline fill,
dredging, or construction of seawalls impede the natural flow of water or
obstruct the access of boaters to deeper waters.



            2.   No seawall or fill shall project beyond an
existing seawall or shoreline in such a manner as to interfere with the
normal flow of water, result in the deposit of debris, or cause a hindrance
to navigation.



            3.   Proposed fill shall avoid the appearance of
being added on. Any extension of land shall blend into the existing shoreline
in a natural appearing manner.



            4.   Prior to final inspection for shoreline
filling or construction of seawalls, the land shall be graded and seeded so
as to provide proper drainage within the applicants property, away from
buildings. The grade must be established within 90 days of the completion of
construction.



   (D)   Application and review procedures. Applications to construct
accessory structures, waterfront structures and appurtenances, to fill along
the shoreline or to construct, repair, or demolish a seawall shall be subject
to the following review procedures.



      (1)   Waterfront application.



         (a)   Applications for activities not requiring site
plan review under §§ 157.190 to 157.204, “Site Plan Review and
Approval”, shall include two sets of plot plans, drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet or other appropriate scale, which shall show the
information listed below.



         (b)   For applications which require site plan review
under §§ 157.190 to 157.204, “Site Plan Review and Approval”, the
following information shall be included on the site plan:



            1.   Existing seawalls, waterfront structures, and
appurtenances on the property and structures adjacent to the applicant’s
property;



            2.   Cross-sections and topography at two-foot
contour intervals which show the existing and proposed topography of
waterfront land, the depth of water along the shore, the relation of existing
rights-of-way for free passage of watercraft on waterways, and the relation
of proposed grades to adjoining property;



            3.   Designation of all property lines along with
the method used to verify the location of the property lines;



            4.   Quantities and type of shoreline fill
materials, if proposed;



            5.   Time frame for completion of the project; and



            6.   For proposed waterfront uses or activities
involving the use, storage, handling, or processing of hazardous or toxic
materials in excess of 25 gallons or 250 pounds, the applicant shall submit a
written statement describing measures to prevent groundwater and surface
water contamination caused by accidental spills or leakage.



            7.   Such measures may include, but not be limited
to, special check valves, drain back catch basins, and automatic shut- off
valves, as approved by the Fire Department.



            8.   Such measures also may include a location of
the proposed use or facility where accidental spills are not as likely to
contaminate surface or groundwater.



            9.   For the purposes of this section, hazardous
or toxic materials shall include materials listed as SARA Title III, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 11004, materials by the State Department of Natural Resources.



      (2)   Review procedure.



         (a)   The Zoning Official shall approve an application
that meets all village requirements and issue a permit, except that the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall have full
jurisdiction concerning applications where Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, review is required by this chapter.



         (b)   In the event the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, is required to review and act on an application for
waterfront development, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, shall conduct such review in accordance with the normal procedures
for review and approval as outlined in §§ 157.190 to 157.204, “Site Plan
Review and Approval”.



   (E)   Additional site development standards. All permitted and
special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, including those listed below as a reference guide:



      (1)   Section 157.008, “definitions”;



      (2)   Sections 157.025 through 157.057, “General
Regulations” for standards on a variety of items such as: calculation of
buildable lot; regulations for single-family dwellings; illegal dwellings;
accessory uses, temporary buildings, and structures; parking and repair of
vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennas; limitations on clearing
and grading site; and the like;



      (3)   Section 157.009, “schedule of regulations” (minimum
lot area, lot width, setbacks, maximum height, and the like);



      (4)   Sections 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”;



      (5)   Sections 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards”;



      (6)   Sections 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”;



      (7)   Ch. 153, Subdivision Control; and



      (8)   Ch. 154, Signs.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.080  PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The intent of the Planned Unit Development District
(PUD) is to permit flexibility in the regulations for development that either
includes a mix of land uses or is proposed for a site containing unique
natural or historic features which the developer and the village desire to
preserve. The standards of this section are intended to encourage innovative
design and create opportunities that may not be obtainable through the more
rigid standards of a single zoning district.



      (2)   The provisions of this chapter are to be used to promote
land use substantially consistent with the character of the surrounding
districts and area. Departure from the generally applicable requirements of
the existing zoning district will be made to provide flexibility in design to
the developer with proper review and approval by the village.



      (3)   The PUD standards are not to be used as a technique to
circumvent the intent of this chapter, to avoid imposition of specific zoning
ordinance standards, or the planning on which it is based.



   (B)   Criteria. A proposed PUD may be allowed as a distinct zoning
district for a particular parcel(s) of land within the village upon a
determination by the Village Council following a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, as required, based on the following criteria.



      (1)   The subject tract of land proposed as a PUD shall be a
minimum of three acres in size. The minimum site area of a PUD may be reduced
upon application to and finding by the Planning Commission, as required, that
the smaller site area can be developed to meet the intent and review
objectives of the PUD when preservation of existing buildings or natural
features are present on the site and shall be under single ownership.



      (2)   The proposed PUD shall directly abut a major street (a
collector or arterial road as defined in the Village Master Plan).



      (3)   The site shall contain significant natural or historic
features that will be preserved through development under the PUD standards
as determined by the Planning Commission, as required, or the site is
proposed with a complimentary mixture of housing types within a unique, high
quality design.



      (4)   The PUD will result in a recognizable and substantial
benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the village, where such
benefit would otherwise be unlikely to be achieved. The benefits can be
accomplished through a higher quality unified design than would be required
by the normal regulations of this chapter. The benefits shall be demonstrated
in terms of preservation of natural features, architectural design, extensive
landscaping, special sensitivity to adjacent land uses, well designed access
and circulation systems, or integration of various site features into a
unified development.



      (5)   The PUD type and density will not result in an increase
in traffic movements, the use of public services, residential population,
facilities, and utilities when compared to the most dense use allowed within
the current zoning requirements for the property.



      (6)   The development shall not place an unreasonable burden
on surrounding property or property owners.



      (7)   The PUD will only be applied to properties when
municipal sanitary sewers and water mains are provided to all segments of the
proposed development and are designed and constructed in accordance with
village engineering and design standards.



      (8)   Each lot, principal building, or principal use within
the PUD shall have vehicular access from a street that is designed and
constructed in accordance with the village engineering and design standards.



      (9)   The Village Council, upon Planning Commission, as
required, recommendation, may permit certain lots, principal buildings, or
principal uses to maintain vehicular access to a private street; provided,
that such street is constructed in accordance with the village engineering
and design standards and the continued maintenance of the private street by
the property owners(s).



      (10)   Each lot, principal building, or principal use shall
have pedestrian access from a public or private sidewalk that is physically
separated from streets and that provides for safe and convenient movement of
pedestrians.



      (11)   Each access from a major street shall be provided with
turn lanes, as required by the Village Council, upon a recommendation by the
Planning Commission, as required.



      (12)   A residential structure shall not have direct access to
an arterial road or a collector street.



      (13)   The proposed street layout shall provide for the
continuation of collector streets in the adjoining developments or the proper
projection of streets when the adjoining property is undeveloped.



      (14)   The minimum floor area for residential uses shall meet
the requirements of the R1B and RM Zoning Districts.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   A PUD may provide for a mixture of land uses; however,
industrial uses and mobile home parks are expressly prohibited.



      (2)   A PUD may provide for a variety of permanent housing
types, including single-family homes, townhouses, condominiums, apartments,
and cluster housing units.



      (3)   Commercial uses permitted in the C-Commercial District,
together with other uses deemed consistent within the overall plan by the
Planning Commission, as required, may occupy not more than 25% of the gross
land area of the PUD.



      (4)   (a)   A PUD shall provide a minimum of 15% of the
gross land area as common open space that shall be readily accessible and
available to the occupants of those dwelling units for whose use the open
space is intended. All common open spaces shall be of a size, configuration,
function, and location that is satisfactory to the Planning Commission, as
required.



         (b)   1.   If a PUD is developed in phases, the open
spaces shall be developed in a proportional manner.



            2.   A PUD may consist entirely of residential
use. A PUD with commercial and office uses shall also contain residential
development.



      (5)   The only uses permitted in a PUD are those approved by
the Village Council after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, as required.



   (D)   Density.



      (1)   The maximum permitted residential density for a PUD
shall be determined based upon the following average land area per each type
of dwelling unit.



 


Single-family attached unit (horizontal separation only)

 
7,200 square feet


Single-family detached unit
 
12,000 square feet


Townhouses, apartments, and other multiple family units
 
4,000 square feet



 



      (2)   The area used for computing residential density shall be
the total site area exclusive of any proposed or existing road right-of-ways
and unbuildable areas such as water-covered property, wetlands, and
floodplain areas.



      (3)   The maximum lot coverage of all uses in a PUD, including
accessory buildings, shall not exceed 35%.



   (E)   Building, height, setbacks, and floor area.



      (1)   The maximum building height permitted in a PUD shall be
35 feet.



      (2)   A minimum yard setback of 50 feet shall be provided
along the perimeter of a PUD fronting on a street.



      (3)   (a)   A minimum yard setback of 35 feet shall be
provided along the perimeter of a PUD not fronting on a street.



         (b)   Such area shall be designed and landscaped as a
buffer to neighboring properties.



         (c)   No parking lots and driveways shall be permitted
in this area.



      (4)   (a)   The distance between any residential building
and any nonresidential building shall be 150 feet.



         (b)   A heavily landscaped strip that is a minimum of 50
feet wide shall be provided between any residential building and any
nonresidential building.



         (c)   The strip shall be heavily planted with trees,
shrubs, and berms with ground cover as required by the Planning Commission,
as required.



      (5)   Residential buildings and nonresidential developments
shall maintain setbacks as follows.



 


Uses

 
Front
 
Side (Each)
 
Rear


Nonresidential developments
 
15 feet
 
10 feet
 
20 feet


Single-family attached unit (horizontal separation only)
 
15 feet
 
5 feet
 
20 feet


Single-family detached unit
 
15 feet
 
5 feet
 
20 feet


Townhouses, apartments, and other multiple family units
 
15 feet
 
10 feet
 
20 feet



 



      (6)   The minimum usable floor area for all uses in a PUD
shall be those stated in § 157.009.



      (7)   At least one bedroom shall be provided in each
residential unit.



      (8)   Residential and commercial uses may be combined in the
same building; however, no residential use shall be located on the same
floor, or below any commercial use.



   (F)   Signs. Signs shall be permitted in a PUD based on the
regulations provided in this code of ordinances and reviewed by the Planning
Commission, as required, as part of the PUD approval.



   (G)   The Planning Commission may waive or modify the requirements
of § 157.080(D) and (E) when it is determined that doing so will be
consistent with the general intent of that section and will encourage
development that promotes the health, safety and welfare of village residents.



   (H)   Landscaping. All portions of each lot, parcel, or area not
covered by buildings or paving shall be landscaped and permanently maintained
by the property owner, tenant or organization responsible for maintaining
common areas as provided in §§ 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping
Standards.”



   (I)   Phasing. Development within a PUD may be phased as delineated
on an approved plan and the time span for completion of each phase of a PUD
shall be as delineated on an approved plan, but in no case longer than five
years.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 321, passed 4-13-1999; Ord. passed
2-1-2012; Ord. 454, passed 10-23-2018)  Penalty, see § 157.999




PUD-APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE




§ 157.095  GENERALLY.



   The application process for a PUD involves:



   (A)   Request for rezoning to appropriate PUD designation, a
conceptual (preliminary) site plan. and an environmental assessment;



   (B)   A final site plan(s) and environmental impact assessment. The
final site plan shall meet the requirements of §§ 157.190 through 157.204,
“Site Plan Review and Approval”. For PUD projects over 30 acres, the
applicant may choose to submit a schematic site plan, and submit more
detailed final site plans for each project phase;



   (C)   Contractual agreement between the applicant and the village;
and/or



   (D)   A final site plan review for each building or project phase,
where appropriate.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.096  REZONING TO A PUD DESIGNATION.



   (A)   An optional pre-application workshop with the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may be requested by the
applicant to discuss the appropriateness of a PUD concept, solicit feedback,
and receive requests for additional materials supporting the proposal. An
applicant desiring such a workshop shall request placement on the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, agenda.



   (B)   The applicant shall prepare and submit to the Administrative
Official a request for rezoning to the appropriate PUD designation, including
12 copies of a conceptual PUD site plan meeting the submittal requirements of
§ 157.097 and 12 copies of an environmental impact assessment meeting the
submittal requirements of § 157.048. The conceptual PUD site plan shall
illustrate uses within each component, road layout, parking areas, and open
space. Materials shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the meeting at
which the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall
first review the request; 14 days for an applicant who has had a
pre-application workshop.



   (C)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
shall review the rezoning request, the conceptual PUD site plan, and the
environmental impact assessment, conduct a public hearing, and make a
recommendation to the Village Council based on the review standards of §
157.196.



   (D)   Within 90 days following receipt of a recommendation from the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, the Village
Council shall conduct a public hearing on the requested PUD rezoning and the
conceptual PUD site plan and either approve, deny, or approve with a list of
conditions made part of the approval. The Village Council may require a
re-submittal of the conceptual PUD site plan reflecting the conditions for
approval by the Administrative Official (prior to submittal of a PUD final
site plan).



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.097  CONCEPTUAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The purpose of the conceptual review is to provide a mechanism
whereby the applicant can obtain a substantial review of the proposed project
in order to prepare final site engineering and architecture plans, and to
execute necessary agreements between the applicant and the village.



   (B)   Submittal requirements include:



      (1)   Current proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or
evidence of a contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or
purchase agreement;



      (2)   A completed application form, supplied by the
Administrative Official, and an application fee. A separate escrow deposit
may be required for administrative charges to review the PUD submittal;



      (3)   An environmental impact assessment meeting the
requirements of § 157.204;



      (4)   Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be at least 24
inches by 36 inches, with graphics at an engineer’s scale;



      (5)   Cover sheet providing:



         (a)   The applicant’s name;



         (b)   The name of the development;



         (c)   The preparer’s name and professional seal of
architect, engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect indicating license in
the state;



         (d)   Date of preparation and any revisions;



         (e)   North arrow;



         (f)   Property lines and dimensions;



         (g)   Complete and current legal description and size of
property in acres;



         (h)   Small location sketch of the subject site and area
within one-half; and scale;



         (i)   Zoning and current land use of applicants property
and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private
street from the PUD site;



         (j)   Lot lines and all structures on the property and
within 100 feet of the PUD property lines; and



         (k)   Location of any access points on both sides of the
street within 100 feet of the PUD site along streets where access to the PUD
is proposed.



      (6)   A plan sheet(s) labeled existing site conditions,
including the location of existing buildings and structures, rights-of-way
and easements, significant natural and historical features, existing drainage
patterns (by arrow), surface water bodies, floodplain areas, wetlands over
two acres in size, the limits of major stands of trees and a tree survey
indicating the location, species, and caliper of all trees with a caliper
over eight inches, measured four feet above grade. This sheet shall also
illustrate existing topography of the entire site at two-foot contour
intervals and a general description of grades within 100 feet of the site. A
reduced copy of this sheet may be included in the environmental assessment.



      (7)   A conceptual PUD site plan sheet including:



         (a)   Conceptual layout of proposed land use, acreage
allotted to each use, residential density overall, and by underlying zoning
district (calculations shall be provided for both overall and useable
acreage), building footprints, structures, roadways, parking areas, drives,
driveways, pedestrian paths, and identification signs. Note: useable area is
total area less public road rights-of-way, year-round surface water bodies,
and MDNR regulated wetlands;



         (b)   Building setbacks and spacing;



         (c)   General location and type of landscaping proposed
(evergreen, deciduous, berm, and the like) noting existing trees over eight
inches in caliper to be retained, and any woodlands that will be designated
as “areas not to be disturbed in development of the PUD”;



         (d)   A preliminary layout of contemplated stormwater
drainage, detention, or retention pond location, water supply and wastewater
disposal systems, any public or private easements and a note of any utility
lines to be removed; and



         (e)   If a multi-phase planned unit development is
proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase. For residential
uses identify the number, type, and density proposed by phase.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.098  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF CONCEPTUAL PUD SITE PLAN.



   (A)   Based upon the following standards, the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may recommend denial, approval, or
approval with conditions, and the Village Council may deny, approve, or
approve with conditions the proposed planned unit development:



      (1)   The planned unit development meets the qualification
requirements;



      (2)   The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in
terms of public health, safety, welfare, or convenience, on present and
future potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will not adversely
affect the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties, or
the environment. The public benefit shall be one which could not be achieved
under the regulations of the underlying district alone, or that of any other
zoning district;



      (3)   Judicious effort has been used to preserve significant
natural and historical features, surface, and underground water bodies and
the integrity of the land; and



      (4)   Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well defined
vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the site is provided.
Drives, streets, and other elements shall be designed to discourage through
traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the
site and at its access points.



   (B)   The village may impose additional reasonable conditions:



      (1)   To ensure that public services and facilities affected
by a planned unit development will be capable of accommodating increased
service and facility loads caused by the planned unit development;



      (2)   To protect the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy;



      (3)   To ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land; and



      (4)   To promote the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner.



   (C)   Upon approval of the conceptual PUD site plan by the Village
Council, the property shall be rezoned to an appropriate Planned Unit
Development Zoning District, with the underlying zoning district noted on the
official zoning map for a residential planned unit development.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.099  EXPIRATION.



   Approval of the conceptual PUD site plan by the Village Council shall
confer upon the owner the right to proceed through the subsequent planning
phase for a period not to exceed two years from date of approval. If
application for final PUD site plan approval is not requested within this
time period, re-submittal of the application shall be required. The Village
Council may extend the period up to an additional two years, if requested in
writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.100  PROCESS FOR FINAL SITE PLANS.



   A final site plan review and environmental impact statement for each
building or project phase for larger scale PUDs, as noted above shall be
submitted according to the procedures and standards of this section.



   (A)   The applicant shall submit 12 copies of an environmental
impact assessment and a detailed final site plan for the entire approved
conceptual PUD site plan to the Administrative Official at least 30 days
prior to the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
meeting at which the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, shall first review the request. For projects over 30 acres, the
applicant may submit a schematic site plan illustrating general building
footprints, parking lot areas, road alignments, open space, and general
landscaping; with more detailed site plans submitted at a later date for each
building or project phase in accordance with §§ 157.190 through 157.204,
“Site Plan Review and Approval”.



   (B)   Upon submission of all required materials and fees, the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall hold such
hearings as may be required by law, and shall approve, deny, or approve with
conditions in accordance with the standards and regulations of §§ 157.190
through 157.204, “Site Plan Review and Approval”.



   (C)   If the final PUD site plan was approved with conditions, the
applicant shall submit a revised site plan to the Administrative Official for
approval prior to the issuance of any building permits.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.101  FINAL PUD SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL.



   The purpose of the PUD final review is to consider the final site plan
and environmental impact assessment for the entire PUD which is consistent
with the approved conceptual PUD site plan. Receipt of a building permit
shall require final approval by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required.



   (A)   The final submittal shall include the materials required by
§§ 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review and Approval”, including
an environmental impact assessment and a proposed written agreement
specifying all the terms and understanding of the PUD development.



   (B)   The final site plan and impact assessment shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, according to
the procedures outlined in §§ 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”. The impact assessment for an individual phase or site may
consist of minor modifications to the material submitted for the overall PUD
if the proposed uses are consistent with the approved PUD Plan.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.102  FINAL PUD AGREEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   Upon approval of the final PUD site plan, the
applicant shall submit a written agreement setting forth the conditions upon
which the PUD approval was based, as specified in § 157.198.



      (2)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, shall review the agreement, with assistance from the Village
Attorney and Village Planner.



      (3)   The agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the
County Register of Deeds at the expense of the applicant.



   (B)   The agreement shall:



      (1)   Set forth the conditions upon which the approval is
based, with reference to the approved final PUD site plan, and environmental
impact assessment;



      (2)   When open space or common areas are indicated in the PUD
plan for use by the residents, the open space or common areas shall be
conveyed in fee or otherwise committed by dedication to an association of the
residents, and the use shall be irrevocably dedicated for the useful life of
the residences, and retained as open space for park, recreation, or other
common uses;



      (3)   Set forth a program and financing for maintaining common
areas and features, such as walkways, signs, lighting, and landscaping;



      (4)   Assure that trees and woodlands will be preserved as
shown on the site plan, or replaced on a caliper for caliper basis;



      (5)   Assure the construction and maintenance of all streets
and necessary utilities (including public water, wastewater collection, and
treatment) through bonds or other satisfactory means, for any and all phases
of the PUD. In the case of phased PUD, this requirement shall be reviewed at
the time of any final site plan approval; and



      (6)   Address any other concerns of the village regarding
construction and maintenance.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.103  SCHEDULE OF CONSTRUCTION.



   Final site plan approval of a PUD, PUD phase, or a building within a
PUD shall be effective for a period of three years. Further submittals under
the PUD procedures shall be accepted for review upon a showing of substantial
progress in development of previously approved phases, or upon a showing of
good cause for not having made such progress.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.104  DEVELOPMENT OF THE PUD; PROPORTIONAL STANDARD.



   In the development of a PUD, the percentage of one-family dwelling
units under construction or lots sold, shall be at least in the same
proportion to the percentage of multiple-family dwelling units under
construction at any one time; provided, that this section shall be applied
only if one-family dwelling units comprise 25% or more of the total housing
stock proposed for the PUD. Nonresidential structures designed to serve the
PUD residents shall not be built until the PUD has enough dwelling units
built to support such nonresidential use. The Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, may modify this requirement in its conceptual
or final submittal review process.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.105  APPEALS AND VIOLATIONS.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide
appeal requests by property owners for variances from this chapter, however,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the authority to change conditions
or make interpretations to the PUD site plan or written agreement. A
violation of the PUD plan or agreement shall be considered a violation of
this chapter.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.106  CHANGES AND AMENDMENT TO THE PUD.



   (A)   Minor modifications to the PUD site plan may be handled in the
same manor as provided for in §§ 157.190 through 157.204. When the
Administrative Official determines that the requested amendment to the
approved final PUD site plan is major, re-submittal to the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall be required.



   (B)   Should the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, determine that the modifications to the final PUD site plan
significantly alter the intent of the conceptual PUD site plan, a revised
conceptual PUD site plan shall be submitted according to the procedures
outlined in § 157.244 illustrating the modification shall be required.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.107  PHASED PROJECTS.



   (A)   For projects over 30 acres, the applicant may submit a
schematic site plan illustrating general building footprints, parking lot
areas, road alignments, open space, and general landscaping; with more
detailed site plans submitted for the first building or project phase.



   (B)   Each detailed site plan and impact assessment shall be
reviewed according to the procedures and standards of §§ 157.240 through
157.247.



   (C)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
may waive the required impact assessment for subsequent buildings or phases
where the earlier submittal is determined to be acceptable.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.108  CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS.



   (A)   For any condominium section of a PUD, the applicant shall
provide a copy of the master deed and condominium association by-laws for
approval by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



   (B)   The condominium documents shall provide limits on use of
common areas or open space for accessory structures such as swimming pools,
decks, playground equipment, and buildings.



   (C)   A plan shall be provided indicating the limits of such
accessory structures within a defined envelope.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)




SPECIAL LAND USES




§ 157.120  INTENT.



   (A)   (1)   This subchapter is intended to regulate uses which
may be compatible with uses in some, but not all, locations within a
particular zoning district.



      (2)   Among the purposes of the special land use standards of
this subchapter are to accomplish the following:



         (a)   Provide a mechanism for public input on decisions
involving more intense land uses;



         (b)   Establish criteria for both new development and
infill/redevelopment consistent with the village’s land use goals and
objectives as stated in the Village Master Plan;



         (c)   Regulate the use of land on the basis of impact to
the village overall, and adjacent properties in particular;



         (d)   Promote a planned and orderly development pattern
which can be served by public facilities and service in a cost-effective
manner;



         (e)   Ensure uses can be accommodated by the
environmental capability of specific sites;



         (f)   Provide site design standards to diminish negative
impacts of potentially conflicting land uses; and



         (g)   Provide greater flexibility to integrate land uses
within the village.



   (B)   (1)   This subchapter provides both general standards for
all special land uses (§ 157.121) and specific location, site, or
operational standards for particular special land uses (§ 157.122). The
review of a special land use requires a public hearing before the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



      (2)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, then denies, approves, or approves with conditions, the proposed
special land use and site plan. Approval of any special land use receives a
zoning compliance permit.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.121  APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES; APPEALS.



   The procedure for special land use review shall be as follows:



   (A)   Application generally.



      (1)   An applicant for a special land use shall submit a
zoning compliance permit application for review and pay the required fee.



      (2)   The application presented for consideration shall
contain the following:



         (a)   Name of proposed development;



         (b)   Common description of the property and complete
legal description (also address, if available);



         (c)   Dimensions of land: width; length; acreage; and
frontage;



         (d)   Existing zoning classification and zoning of all
adjacent properties;



         (e)   Propped use of the land;



         (f)   Name, address, city, and phone number of:



            1.   Firm or individual who prepared the
application;



            2.   Legal owner of the property; and



            3.   Applicant (including basis of representation).



         (g)   Signature of the legal owner and the applicant; and



         (h)   A site plan, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review and
Approval”.



   (B)   Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
public hearing.



      (1)   If the Zoning Official finds all of the information
required above is in order, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall schedule a public hearing to review the request.



      (2)   (a)   The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall publish a
notice of the public hearing in a newspaper which circulates in the village
and copies of the notice shall be sent by mail to property owners and
occupants of structures within 300 feet of the property in question.



         (b)   The notice shall be given not less than five days
nor more than 15 days before the date of the public hearing and shall:



            1.   Describe the nature of the special land use
request;



            2.   Indicate the property which is the subject of
the special land use request;



            3.   State the date, time, and place of public
hearing; and



            4.   Indicate that written comments may be
submitted prior to or at the public hearing.



         (c)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall conduct the required public hearing.



         (d)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall review the application in terms of the requirements of the
special land use general standards listed in § 157.122 and any specific
standards of § 157.130.



         (e)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall approve, approve with conditions (as described in §
157.123) or deny the special land use and the accompanying site plan. The
decision on a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement of
conclusions relative to the land use under consideration. The decision shall
specify the basis for the decision, and other conditions imposed.



         (f)   Appeals of decisions of the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, to deny a special land use or to
approve a special land use with conditions shall not be appealed to the
Zoning Board Appeals and may only be appealed to Circuit Court.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.122  GENERAL REVIEW STANDARDS FOR ALL SPECIAL LAND USES.



   (A)   Prior to approving an application of zoning compliance permit
for special land use application, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, shall require the following general standards be
satisfied for the use at the proposed location.



   (B)   In addition to specific standards for individual special land
uses listed in § 157.130, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall require stipulation to ensure that the following are met:



      (1)   The special land use will be consistent with the goals,
objectives, and future land use plan described in the Village’s Master Plan;



      (2)   The special land use will be consistent with the stated
intent of the zoning district;



      (3)   The special land use will be designed, constructed,
operated, and maintained to be compatible with, and not significantly alter,
the existing or intended character of the general vicinity in consideration
of environmental impacts, views, aesthetics, noise, vibration, glare, air
quality, drainage, traffic, property, values, or similar impacts;



      (4)   The special land use will not significantly impact the
natural environment;



      (5)   The special land use can be served adequately by public
facilities and services such as police and fire protection, drainage
structures, water and sewage facilities, refuse disposal, and schools; and



      (6)   The proposed use shall be of a nature that will make
vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the
district involved, taking into consideration the following:



         (a)   Vehicular turning movements;



         (b)   Proximity and relationship to intersections;



         (c)   Adequacy of sight distances;



         (d)   Location and access of off-street parking; and



         (e)   Provisions for pedestrian traffic.



      (7)   The proposed use shall be of a nature that the location
and height of buildings or structures, and the location, nature, and height
of walls, fences, and landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or
unreasonably affect their value.



      (8)   The proposed use shall be designed, located, planned,
and operated to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.123  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
may impose conditions of approval, which will help ensure the special land
use meets the standards of this chapter; provided, that the conditions:



      (1)   Protect the health, safety, and welfare of those
affected;



      (2)   Are related to the valid exercise of the police power of
the village;



      (3)   Are necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this
chapter;



      (4)   Are related to the standards established in this chapter
for the land use or activity under consideration and are necessary to ensure
compliance with those standards; and



      (5)   Provide adequate protection to existing land uses so the
proposed land use will not be detrimental or injuries to the surrounding
neighborhood.



   (B)   Approval of a special land use, including conditions made part
of the approval, is attached to the property described in the application and
not to the owner of such property. A record of conditions imposed shall be
made a part of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
minutes and maintained by the Zoning Official. The conditions shall remain
unchanged, unless an amendment to the special land use permit is approved by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.124  VALIDITY OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Zoning Official may issue a zoning compliance permit in
conformity with the particular special land use so approved, in all cases
where a particular special land use has been granted as provided herein,
application for a zoning compliance permit must be made and received by the
village no later than 120 days thereafter, or such approval shall
automatically be revoked, unless an extension is granted. The Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may grant an extension of
the zoning compliance permit for special land use for good causes shown under
such terms and conditions for such a period of time not to exceed six months.



   (B)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
may require a performance guarantee to ensure completion of the improvements
(excluding the building). The performance guarantee may take the form of a
cash deposit, surety bond, certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of
credit.



   (C)   Where actual physical construction of a substantial nature of
structures authorized by a special land use has not commenced within one year
of issuance, and a written application for extension of the approval has not
been filed as provided below, the permit shall become null and void and all
rights thereunder shall terminate (note: it is the responsibility of the
applicant to request such an extension).



   (D)   Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the
one-year period as provided above, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, may authorize a single extension of the tune limit
for a further period of not more than one year. Such extension shall be
granted only based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a
reasonable likelihood of commencing construction during the one year
extension period.



   (E)   Any approved special land use shall be deemed a use permitted
in the district in which it is located and is not to be considered a
nonconforming use.



   (F)   If a use regulated as a special land use which has not
previously received a special land use permit ceases operations for more than
one year, the special land use permit shall become null and void, and a new
special land use permit shall be required to reopen the use. The time frame
shall be extended to two years for a use which was approved as a special land
use under this chapter amendment.



   (G)   The Zoning Official shall make periodic investigations of
development authorized by special land use permit to determine continued
compliance with all requirements imposed by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, and this chapter. Noncompliance with the
requirements and conditions approved for the special land use shall
constitute grounds to terminate said approval following a public hearing.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.125  INSPECTIONS.



   The Zoning Official shall make periodic investigations of developments
authorized by special land use permit to determine continued compliance with
all requirements imposed by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, and this chapter. Noncompliance with the requirements and
conditions approved for the special land use shall constitute grounds to
terminate said approval following a public hearing.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.126  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The revocation of a special land use may occur if its
recipient fails to continuously abide by its terms and conditions.



   (B)   The revocation procedure is as follows.



      (1)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, through its designated administrators, shall notify the recipient,
in writing, of any violations of village codes or provisions of the special
land use.



      (2)   The recipient shall have 30 days to correct all
deficiencies to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required.



      (3)   If after 30 days any deficiencies remain, the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may then revoke the special
land use, or if the conditions warrant, allow additional time.



      (4)   A repeat violation may cause immediate revocation of the
special land use.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.127  AMENDMENTS TO SPECIAL LAND USE PERMITS.



   Any person or agency who has been granted a zoning compliance permit
for special land use shall notify the Zoning Official of any proposed
amendment to the approved site plan of the special land use permit. The
Zoning Official shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a
minor or major amendment based on the determination standards for all site
plans in accordance with §§ 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review
and Approval”. A major amendment to a zoning compliance permit for special
land use shall comply with the application and review procedures contained in
this subchapter.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.128  SPECIAL LAND USE EXPANSIONS.



   The expansion, change in activity, reuse, or redevelopment of any use
requiring a zoning compliance permit for special land use shall require
re-submittal in manner described in this subchapter. A separate special land
use permit shall be required for each use requiring special land use review
on a lot, or for any expansions of a special land use which has not
previously received a zoning compliance permit for special land use.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.129  RESTRICTIONS ON RE-SUBMITTAL OF A SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT.



   No application for a special land use permit which has been denied
wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed
conditions relating to all of the reasons noted for the denial found to be
valid by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. A
resubmitted application shall be considered a new application.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.130  SPECIAL LAND USE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.



   The following sections identify specific requirements which shall be
complied with by individual special land uses, as determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, in addition to the general
standards of § 157.122.



   (A)   Listing. Special land uses with specific site and/or use
standards described on the following pages:



      (1)   Accessory above-ground fuel services and storage;



      (2)   Accessory use or storage of hazardous materials;



      (3)   Accessory commercial outdoor sales or storage (see
commercial outdoor sales);



      (4)   Adult regulated uses;



      (5)   Arcades and similar devices at public commercial
mechanical amusement device centers;



      (6)   Automobile service centers (minor repair) and major auto
repair establishments;



      (7)   Automobile service (gasoline) stations, including those
accessory to another use;



      (8)   Automobile towing;



      (9)   Automobile washes, automatic or self-service;



      (10)   Banks, credit unions, and savings and loan institutions
with over three drive-through lanes;



      (11)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (12)   Cemeteries;



      (13)   Churches;



      (14)   Commercial outdoor sales or storage, including
contractor’s yard (as permitted or accessory use);



      (15)   Composting centers;



      (16)   Essential public service buildings and structures;



      (17)   Essential public service storage yards;



      (18)   Adult foster care large group home (13 to 20 adults);



      (19)   Housing for the elderly, retirement villages, and the
like;



      (20)   Kennels, commercial;



      (21)   Nursing and convalescent homes;



      (22)   Open air business, see commercial outdoor display,
sales, and storage;



      (23)   Recreation: commercial outdoor establishments
(excluding golf related uses);



      (24)   Recreation: golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses;



      (25)   Recreation: indoor commercial recreation
(bowling-alleys, ice areas, skating rinks, and the like);



      (26)   Recreation: private, non-commercial institutional or
community recreation facilities, and swimming pool clubs;



      (27)   Recycling centers;



      (28)   Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or
drive-through facilities;



      (29)    Schools: public, parochial, and private intermediate
or secondary schools; and



      (30)   Shopping centers over 60,000 square feet.



   (B)   List of specific requirement by use.



      (1)   Accessory above-ground fuel services and storage.
Location of accessory fuel services related to the marine, aviation,
agriculture, mobile home parks, recreational uses, medical facilities, and
industrial uses shall be permitted subject to the following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size for above-ground fuel service or
storage shall be three acres;



         (b)   Above-ground storage tanks other than those
holding water shall be located not less than 75 feet from any occupied
building or any lot line and shall be mounted on a solid concrete slab to
prevent overturn and spilling, according to EPA specifications; and



         (c)   A pollution incidence prevention plan shall be
submitted and approved.



      (2)   Accessory use or storage of hazardous materials. The
applicant shall provide documentation for the following, with appropriate
correspondence from the State Department of Natural Resources (MDNR), State
Police Fire Marshal, the EPA, local fire department, and other applicable
local codes and ordinances:



         (a)   Description of any discharge of any type of
wastewater to a storm sewer, drain, lake, stream, wetland, other surface
water body, or into the groundwater;



         (b)   Description of storage of any salt, oil, or other
potentially hazardous materials, including common name, name of chemical
components, location, maximum quantity expected on hand at any time, type of
storage containers or base material, and anticipated procedure for use and
handling;



         (c)   Description of any transportation, on-site
treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste generated in quantities of
250 gallons or 2200 pounds per month;



         (d)   Description of any secondary containment measures
proposed, including design, construction materials and specifications,
volume, and security measures; and



         (e)   Name and phone number(s) of person(s) responsible
for materials and available 24 hours, in case of detected spill.



      (3)   Accessory commercial outdoor display, sales, or storage.
See commercial outdoor sales in division (B)(14) below.



      (4)   Adult regulated uses.



         (a)   Intent. In the development and execution of this
subchapter, it is recognized there are some uses that, because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under
certain circumstances, thereby causing a deleterious effect upon the adjacent
areas. The proximity of adult uses to certain uses considered particularly
susceptible to the negative impacts or the concentration of adult uses tends
to erode the quality of life, adversely affect property values, disrupt
business investment, encourage residents and businesses to move or avoid the
community, increase crime, and contribute to a blighting affect on the
surrounding area. This division (B)(4) describes the uses regulated and the
specific standards needed to ensure that the adverse effects of these uses
will not contribute to the deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood, to
prevent undesirable concentration of these uses and to require sufficient
spacing from uses considered most susceptible to negative impacts.



         (b)   Uses regulated. The following uses are regulated
by this division (B)(4)(b):



            1.   Adult book or supply store;



            2.   Adult model studio;



            3.   Adult motion picture arcade;



            4.   Adult motion picture theater or adult living
state performing theater;



            5.   Adult outdoor motion picture theater;



            6.   Adult physical cultural establishment;



            7.   Cabaret; or



            8.   Massage parlor, except those licensed by the
state and meeting the criteria outlined in the definitions section in §
157.008.



         (c)   Required spacing. The establishment of the types
of adult regulated uses listed in division (B)(4)(b) above shall meet all of
the following space requirements; with the distance between uses measured
horizontally between the nearest point of each property line:



            1.   At least 1,000 feet from any other adult
regulated use;



            2.   At least 1,000 feet from all churches,
convents, temples, and similar religious institutions;



            3.   At least 1,000 feet from all public, private
or parochial nursery, primary or secondary schools, public parks, and
hospitals;



            4.   At least 1,000 feet from any use defined as a
“care organization”;



            5.   At least 800 feet from any single-family or
multiple-family residential district or use; and



            6.   At least 800 feet from any pool or billiard
hall, coin-operated amusement center, indoor and outdoor recreation, such as
miniature golf; dance club catering primarily to teenagers, movie theaters,
ice or roller skating rinks, and similar uses frequented by children and
teenagers.



         (d)   Special site design standards.



               1.   Maximum size of the building shall be
5,000 square feet;



               2.   The building and site shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained so material such as a display,
decoration, or sign depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined in § 157.008) cannot be
observed by pedestrians, motorists on a public right-of-way, or from an
adjacent land use;



               3.   Adult regulated uses shall be located
within a freestanding building. A shared or common wall structure or shopping
center are not considered to be a freestanding building;



               4.   The color of the building materials
shall be approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required;



               5.   A six-foot high brick or masonry wall
shall be constructed to screen the parking lot. The Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may permit use of landscaping in place
of the wall; and



               6.   Access shall be from an arterial
roadway.



         (e)   Conditions of approval. Prior to the granting of
approval for the establishment of any regulated use, the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may impose any conditions or
limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or
operation of the regulated use as in its judgment may be necessary for the
protection of the public interest. Any evidence, bond, or other performance
and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in
connection therewith will be fulfilled.



         (f)   Specific penalties. No person operating an adult
entertainment business shall permit any person under the age of 18 to be on
the premises of said business either as an employee or customer.



      (5)   Arcades, mechanical amusement devices, and similar
devices.



         (a)   Any part of the lot occupied by such use shall not
be located within 300 feet of any residential district or within 500 feet of
the property line of any public, parochial, or other private school offering
courses in general education.



         (b)   Access to the site shall be directly from a
regional arterial or arterial street.



         (c)   All activities, except for off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings constructed
in accordance with all other applicable codes and village ordinances.



      (6)   Automobile service centers, including major auto repair.



         (a)   The site shall be separated a minimum of 300 feet
from a single-family residential district, school, or hospital.



         (b)   All repair work shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.



         (c)   The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet
plus 1,000 square feet of additional lot area for each additional service bay
over two and 300 square feet of additional lot area for each space intended
for storage of inoperable vehicles. The minimum lot width shall be 120 feet.



         (d)   Overhead doors shall not face a residential
district or other businesses or future businesses whose image requires a
positive atmosphere and setting. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, can modify this requirement upon determining there
is no reasonable alternative any poor visual impact will be diminished
through use of landscaping and screening beyond that required in §§ 157.165
through 157.176, “Landscaping Standards”.



         (e)   Access driveways shall be along an arterial or
major collector street. Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street,
unless the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
determines additional driveways are necessary and will not increase accident
or congestion potential.



         (f)   Where adjoining a non-single-family residential
district, a wall six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot
line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may require
landscaping as an alternative.



         (g)   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of
vehicle components and parts, materials, commodities for sale, supplies, or
equipment.



         (h)   Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled,
inoperable or other derelict vehicles, and vehicles for towing shall be
parked and stored in an area obscured from view at the lot lines.



         (i)   No vehicle shall be parked outside, unless it is
an employee’s vehicle or an operable vehicle waiting repair with a valid
work order.



         (j)   The applicant shall submit a written statement
describing measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by accidental
gasoline spills or leakage, such as, special check valves, drain back catch
basins and automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire Department.
Such measures also may include a location of the proposed facility where
accidental spills are not likely to easily contaminate surface or groundwater.



         (k)   Any portion of a building containing an automotive
body shop shall consist of a solid masonry wall or equivalent, with no
openings other than those required for access.



      (7)   Automobile service (gasoline) stations, including those
that perform minor repair work.



         (a)   All operations and minor repair work shall be
conducted completely within an enclosed building.



         (b)   The minimum lot area for gasoline service stations
shall be 10,000 square feet, plus 500 square feet for each additional pump
over four. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet.



         (c)   The outside storage or display of any parts or
products is prohibited.



         (d)   Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other
derelict vehicles is prohibited.



         (e)   Above-ground tanks for the storage of gasoline,
liquefied petroleum, kerosene, or other flammable liquids or oil or other
lubricants shall meet all applicable federal and state regulations.



         (f)   Vehicles shall not be parked outside, unless it is
an employee’s vehicle or an operable vehicle waiting repair with a valid
work order.



         (g)   Pump islands, tanks, propane, and petroleum
products shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any public right-of-way or lot
line.



         (h)   Overhead canopies shall be setback at least 15
feet from the right-of-way with materials consistent with the principal
building. The proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site
plan.



         (i)   Access driveways shall be along an arterial or
major collector street. Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street,
unless the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
determines additional driveways are necessary and will not increase accident
or congestion potential.



         (j)   Where adjoining residential district, a wall six
feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such wall shall be
continuously maintained in good condition. The Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, may require landscaping as an alternative.



         (k)   The applicant shall submit a written statement
describing measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by accidental
gasoline spills or leakage, such as special check valves, drain back catch
basins, and automatic shut off valves.



         (l)   In the event that an automobile service station
use has been abandoned or terminated for a period of more than one year, all
underground gasoline storage tanks shall be removed from the premises, as per
state requirements.



      (8)   Automobile towing.



         (a)   Any parking or outdoor storage of vehicles shall
be separated by a minimum of 300 feet from a single-family residential
district, school, or hospital.



         (b)   The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet
plus 300 square feet for each vehicle stored on-site.



         (c)   The minimum lot width shall be 120 feet, provided,
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may reduce the
minimum lot width requirement where the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, determines that such reduction will not negatively
impact adjacent land uses and traffic operations.



         (d)   Access driveways shall be along an arterial street.



         (e)   All tow trucks and vehicles for towing shall be
parked and stored in an area obscured from view at the lot lines by a wall or
fence six feet in height. Such wall or fence shall be continuously maintained
in good condition. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, may require landscaping as an alternative.



         (f)   No vehicle shall be parked outside the screening
wall, unless it is an employee’s personal vehicle.



         (g)   The applicant shall submit a written statement
describing measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by accidental
gasoline spills or leakage, such as special check valves, drain back catch
basins, and automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire Department.
Such measures also may include a location of the proposed facility where
accidental spills are not likely to easily contaminate surface or groundwater.



         (h)   All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with
asphalt or concrete and shall be graded and drained to dispose of stormwater
without negatively impacting adjacent property.



         (i)   The site shall include a building of at least 500
feet of gross floor area for office use in conjunction with the approved use.



         (j)   There shall be no repair or dismantling of
vehicles or sale of vehicle parts associated with such use.



         (k)   1.   Vehicles may be stored on-site for a
duration not to exceed 30 days.



            2.   The operator of the special land use shall be
responsible for maintaining a manifest that tracks the date each vehicle is
brought onto the site and the date each vehicle is removed from the site.



            3.   Such manifest shall be available for
inspection by the village for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this
section and the conditions of special land use approval.



      (9)   Automobile washes, automatic, or self-service.



         (a)   Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be
permitted on any single street, unless the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, determines additional driveways are necessary and
will not increase accident or congestion potential.



         (b)   Where adjoining a residential district, a solid
fence or wall six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line.
Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. The
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may require
landscaping, including a berm, as an alternative.



         (c)   All washing facilities shall be within a
completely enclosed building with no openings other than those required for
access.



         (d)   Vacuuming and drying may be located outside the
building, but shall not be in the required front yard and shall be set back
at least 50 feet from any residential district.



         (e)   All cars required to wait for access to the
facilities shall be provided stacking spaces fully off the street
right-of-way which does not conflict with vehicle maneuvering areas to access
gasoline pumps or vacuums, and as required in §§ 157.145 through 157.151,
“Parking and Loading”.



         (f)   Truck wash must be at least 100 feet from all
property lines and entirely screened using landscaping from residential uses.



      (10)   Banks, credit unions, and savings and loan institutions
with drive-through facilities with over three drive-through lanes.



         (a)   Only one ingress/egress driveway or one pair of
one-way driveways or one stand-alone ready teller structure shall be
permitted along any street.



         (b)   Exit and required stacking lanes shall not face
directly at a single-family residence zoned for residential use, unless the
alignment is designated or landscaped to prevent headline glare.



      (11)   Bed and breakfast inns.



         (a)   Must be operated entirety within the principal
dwelling and not within any garage or accessory building located upon the
premises, except for incidental storage in use of a residential type garage;



         (b)   Must be operated by the persons who own and occupy
the premises;



         (c)   Shall not have any exterior evidence, other than a
permitted sign, to indicate that the residence is being utilized for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling;



         (d)   Shall not involve alteration or construction not
customarily found in a residential dwelling;



         (e)   Must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the premises for residential purposes;



         (f)   Shall not constitute an annoyance or nuisance to
adjoining residents by reason of noise, smoke, odor, electrical disturbance,
night lighting, or the creation of unreasonable traffic to the premises;



         (g)   Must have a minimum of 100 square feet for each
unit of 100 square feet for two lodgers and 50 square feet for each
additional lodger;



         (h)   Shall not display or create outside the structure
any external evidence of the operation, except for one unanimated,
non-illuminated wall sign having an area of not more than four square feet.
Sign materials are to be comparable with the architecture of the building;



         (i)   Guests are not allowed to stay longer than 14
consecutive days or 30 days in any one calendar year at any bed and breakfast
location;



         (j)   All bed and breakfast operations shall maintain on
the premises a guest register, and all guests shall be legibly registered,
and such register is subject to inspection during reasonable hours by the
Village Manager or his or her designate;



         (k)   All bed and breakfast permit holders shall be
reviewed on an annual basis and shall be required to comply with all state
and local regulations and laws concerning bed and breakfast operations;



         (l)   Sufficient landscaping shall be used to screen
adjacent residences from parking areas or any outdoor eating area; and



         (m)   A sketch plan showing the floor plan shall be
submitted for approval.



      (12)   Cemeteries.



         (a)   Minimum property size shall be ten acres;



         (b)   All grave sites, buildings, and structures shall
be setback at least 100 feet from all property lines;



         (c)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall determine that the cemetery will have a “park like”
setting; or



         (d)   Uses such as crematoriums, mausoleums, casket
sales, and monument sales shall be permitted as an accessory use to a
cemetery. Setbacks and landscaping shall be compatible with adjacent uses; and



      (13)   Churches, temples, and similar places of worship.



         (a)   Minimum lot area shall be two acres, plus an
additional 15,000 square feet for each 100 persons of occupant load as
determined by Village Building Code;



         (b)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height
permitted in § 157.009 may be allowed provided the front, side, and rear
yard setbacks are increased above the minimum required by one foot for each
foot of building height that exceeds the maximum permitted;



         (c)   All vehicular access to the site shall be onto a
regional arterial, arterial, or collector street, as classified in the
Village Master Plan. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, may allow secondary access onto local (residential) streets if the
uses fronting the street which would be most impacted by traffic flow are
predominantly non-single-family homes;



         (d)   Wherever an off-street parking area is adjacent to
a residential district, a continuous obscuring wall, fence and/or landscaped
area at least five feet in height shall be provided. The Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may reduce this buffer based on the
standards of § 157.176; and



         (e)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, may require a traffic impact analysis, particularly if the
church is to have services or activities dining peak times on the roadway, or
if there are other religious institutions in the vicinity which could create
traffic conflicts (refer to § 157.048(B)(12)).



      (14)   Commercial outdoor sales or storage and open air
businesses. As a permitted or accessory use, including sales or storage of:
building/lumber supply; contractors yards; flea markets; auctions;
garden/landscape supplies; nurseries; greenhouses; stone; farm implement;
automobiles; trucks; recreational vehicles; mobile homes; boats; jet skis;
mowing equipment; construction equipment; and similar materials or equipment).



         (a)   Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer, or similar
loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to
prevent dust or blowing of materials.



         (b)   All outdoor storage areas shall be paved and
include a stormwater drainage system approved by the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



         (c)   No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the front
yard or in any required side yard or required rear yard of buildings for the
district in which the commercial outdoor display, sales, or storage use is
located.



         (d)   The site shall include a building of at least 500
feet of gross floor area for office use in conjunction with the approved use.



         (e)   The display and storage area shall be paved with a
permanent, durable, and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to
dispose stormwater without negatively impact adjacent property.



         (f)   All loading and truck maneuvering shall be
accommodated on-site.



         (g)   All outdoor storage areas adjacent to a
residential district shall provide a wall or buffer strip as described in §
157.175.



      (15)   Commercial composting centers.



         (a)   The applicant shall submit an impact assessment
(See § 157.048) describing the expected odors, aesthetics, environmental
impacts, vehicular, and truck traffic impacts associated with the use, and
any mitigation measures to be employed.



         (b)   The site plan which shall clearly illustrate the
layout of the composting operation, including: buildings; staging area;
parking; on-site truck maneuvering (truck turning radii shall be
illustrated); curing area; landscaped buffers; sales area; and fencing.



         (c)   Commercial composting operations shall be at least
1,000 feet from any residential district.



         (d)   All composting operations shall be at least 200
feet from boundary of any lake, stream, drain, wetland, or other surface
water body. The applicant shall describe procedures for managing stormwater
runoff and preventing pollution of surface water bodies or groundwater.
Groundwater quality monitoring devices shall be provided.



         (e)   Documentation shall be provided indicating that
the soils percolate and are not characterized by a high water table.



         (f)   The applicant shall describe acceptable methods
for control of odors.



         (g)   A landscaped buffer strip or wall, as described in
§ 157.175 shall be provided on all sides adjacent to a residential district.



         (h)   Access shall be provided solely on Class A truck
routes.



         (i)   All storage areas shall be enclosed in a building.



         (j)   Temporary signs shall be prohibited.



      (16)   Essential public service buildings and structures.



         (a)   Operating requirements necessitate that the
facility be located at the subject site to serve the immediate vicinity.



         (b)   Electric or gas regulator equipment and apparatus
shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from all lot lines or equal to district
setbacks, whichever is greater. They cannot be located in the district front
yard setback.



         (c)   Essential public service storage yards shall be
screened from any adjacent residential district by a buffer strip or berm.
(See § 157.175.)



         (d)   The buildings or structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and shall be of
brick construction.



      (17)   Essential public service storage yards.



         (a)   Requirements of division (B)(16) above;



         (b)   The minimum lot size shall be three acres; and



         (c)   An open air fence six feet in height shall be
constructed on the boundary property lines.



      (18)   Adult foster care large group home (13 to 20 adults).



         (a)   Shall have a minimum lot area of on-half acre
(21,780 square feet);



         (b)   An on-site drive shall be provided for drop
offs/loading. This drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without
affecting traffic flow on the public street; and



         (c)   There shall be a fenced, contiguous open space
with a minimum area of 5,000 square feet provided on the same premises as the
large group day care home. The required open space shall not be located
within a required front yard.



      (19)   Housing for the elderly.



         (a)   All sites shall be located within adequate walking
distance of food stores, shopping centers, restaurants, and drug stores, as
determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



         (b)   All dwelling units shall consist of at least 350
square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities).



         (c)   Passive recreation area(s) shall be provided at
the rate of 25 square feet per 250 square feet of living area.



         (d)   The minimum lot size shall be not less than one
acre.



         (e)   All units shall have at least one living room and
one bedroom, except that not more than 20% of the units may be of an
efficiency-type apartment.



         (f)   The gross density of the dwelling units shall not
exceed 20 units per acre, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of
either interior or bounding roads.



         (g)   Except as provided herein, all buildings and sites
shall be in compliance with RM requirements in § 157.009.



         (h)   No housing for the elderly shall be converted to
any other use without complying with the provisions of this chapter in effect.



         (i)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, may add any conditions it deems appropriate to ensure the
compatibility of the development with the surrounding area.



         (k)   All buildings permitted hereunder shall not exceed
40 feet in height.



      (20)   Kennels, commercial.



         (a)   For kennels housing dogs, the minimum lot size
shall be two acres.



         (b)   Building wherein dogs are kept, dog runs, and/or
exercise areas shall not be located nearer than 100 feet to property lines
and shall not be located in any required front, rear, or side yard setback
area.



         (c)   Such facilities shall be subject to other
conditions and requirements necessary to prevent possible nuisances (i.e.,
fencing, sound-proofing, and sanitary requirements).



         (d)   An operations/management plan shall be submitted
to the village.



      (21)   Nursing and convalescent homes.



         (a)   There shall be provided on the site, not less than
1,500 square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The 1,500 square
feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking,
service drives, loading space, yard requirement, and accessory uses, but
shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings.



         (b)   Principal buildings shall not be closer than 40
feet to any property line.



      (22)   Open air businesses. See commercial outdoor display,
sales, and storage in division (B)(14) above.



      (23)   Recreation: commercial outdoor recreation
establishments (excluding golf related uses).



         (a)   Such uses shall include, but are not limited to,
recreational fields, rinks or courts, including football, softball, soccer,
tennis, basketball, ice skating, and similar activities, swimming pools open
to the general public or operated by a private nonprofit organization,
archery and shooting ranges, commercial riding stables, animal racing,
go-cart, automobile, or motorcycle tracks, music concert pavilions and band
shells, amusement parks, and uses accessory to the above uses, such as
refreshment stands, retail shops selling items related to the above uses,
maintenance buildings, office for management functions, spectator seating,
and service areas, including locker rooms and rest rooms.



         (b)   The site shall be adequate to accommodate the
intended use(s), parking and adequate buffer areas without significant impact
on nearby properties in terms of noise, traffic, lighting glare, views,
odors, trespassing, dust, or blowing debris, as determined by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. The applicant shall provide
documentation that the site area is adequate using national facility
standards.



         (c)   The site shall be located on a paved street which
is classified as a regional arterial or arterial in the Village Master Plan.



         (d)   No building or spectator seating facility shall be
located within 100 feet of a property line.



         (e)   The site shall be periodically cleared of debris.



      (24)   Recreation: golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses.



         (a)   All traffic ingress and egress shall be from
regional arterial or arterial as classified in the Village Master Plan.



         (b)   Parking lots shall be set back at least 30 feet
from the street right-of-way and 100 feet from any property line abutting a
residential district.



         (c)   Any lot line abutting a residential district shall
provide a 50-foot wide, landscaped buffer strip with landscaping meeting the
standards of § 157.175.



         (d)   No building shall be constructed or located closer
than 200 feet from the property line of any abutting residential lot.



         (e)   The site plan shall illustrate expected trajectory
or ball dispersion patterns along fairways and for driving ranges where
adjacent to residential uses, buildings, parking lots, or public streets.



         (f)   Site size shall be sufficient to retain errant
balls within the site by means of landscaping, berms, or a six-foot high
fence. Netting shall be prohibited, unless the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, determines the netting would be compatible
with surrounding uses.



         (g)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, may restrict lighting and hours of operation for a driving range
in consideration of surrounding land uses and zoning.



         (h)   Tee areas for a driving range shall be clearly
distinguished by elevating the stations six inches to one and one-half feet
above the ground, or through use of short walls or alternate distinction to
separate tee stations.



      (25)   Recreation: indoor commercial recreation such as
bowling alleys, indoor golf, ice arenas, skating rinks, and the like).



         (a)   The principal and accessory buildings and
structures shall not be located within 100 feet of any residential district
or permitted use.



         (b)   All uses shall be conducted completely within a
fully enclosed building.



         (c)   The buildings shall be sound-proofed.



         (d)   A minimum eight-foot high, 20-foot wide berm
landscaped with evergreen trees to create a totally obscuring screen shall be
provided.



      (26)   Recreation: private, non-commercial institutional or
community recreation facilities, and swimming pool clubs.



         (a)   The proposed site shall have at least one property
line abutting a regional arterial or arterial roadway as classified in the
Village Master Plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all
ingress and egress directly onto or from said road.



         (b)   Front, side, and rear yards shall be at least 80
feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no
parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance
drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential
districts.



         (c)   Off-street parking shall be provided so as to
accommodate not less than one half of the member families and/or individual
members. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may
modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is
determined that the users will be pedestrian and originate from the
immediately adjacent areas. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or
zoning compliance permit, by-laws of the organization shall be provided in
order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street
parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization
does not have by-laws or formal membership, the off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, on the basis of usage.



         (d)   Swimming pools shall meet the applicable standards
of § 157.040(A)(2)(c), all applicable building and health codes.



      (27)   Recycling centers.



         (a)   Recycling stations shall be only for the
collection of recyclable materials for hauling to another site for
processing. A one or two yard dumpster may be provided for non-recyclable
waste, such as twine, lids, and the like.



         (b)   Paved loading and stacking spaces shall be
provided for at least three automobiles.



         (c)   All storage of recycled materials shall be within
appropriate containers, with access through doors on the sides of the
container.



         (d)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, may require a totally obscuring fence or wall around the
perimeter of the recycling center.



         (e)   The hours of operation and materials accepted
shall be clearly posted.



         (f)   Front, side, and rear yards shall be at least 80
feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no
parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance
drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential
districts.



      (28)   Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or
drive-through facilities.



         (a)   Principal and accessory buildings shall be setback
at least 75 feet from any adjacent public right-of-way line or property line.
Location shall be along a regional arterial or arterial, as classified in the
Village Master Plan.



         (b)   Only one access shall be provided onto any
regional arterial or arterial. Access points shall be located at least 60
feet from the intersection of any two streets.



         (c)   Such restaurants constructed adjacent to other
commercial developments shall have a direct vehicular access connection where
possible.



         (d)   A six-foot high wall which creates a completely
obscuring effect shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are
zoned residential, OS-1 or B-1.



         (e)   The applicant shall provide a traffic impact
assessment, including projected traffic generation according to §
157.048(B)(12).



      (29)   Schools: public, parochial and private intermediate
and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education.



         (a)   All vehicular access to the site shall be onto a
regional arterial, arterial or collector road, as classified in the Village
Master Plan.



         (b)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, may allow secondary access onto local (residential) streets if
the uses fronting the street which would be most impacted by traffic flow are
predominantly non-single-family homes.



      (30)   Shopping centers.



         (a)   Shopping centers over 60,000 square feet in any
Commercial District shall meet the standards below.



         (b)   For purposes of calculation, the principal
building and all outbuildings, including those on outlots, shall be included
in calculating the gross floor area threshold for this section.



            1.   A traffic impact analysis shall be submitted
(refer to § 157.048(B)(12)).



            2.   The principal building with front parking
shall be setback 250 feet from any public right-of-way or property line.



            3.   Such shopping centers shall have access to at
least one arterial road.



            4.   The design of regional shopping centers shall
ensure that vehicular circulation patterns are designed and regulated to
reduce conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians on-site, and the impacts of
traffic generated by the center on adjacent streets.



            5.   Internal circulation shall be designed such
that no intersection includes more than four aisles or drives.



            6.   Site entrances shall be restricted to
three-way movements, with unrestricted inbound movements.



            7.   Internal drives defined by the ends of aisles
shall have raised curbed islands at appropriate locations to define
circulation paths and control movements through the parking lot.



            8.   Loading facilities which serve the commercial
establishment in the principal building shall be screened from public view.



            9.   Any building side facing a public street or
residential district shall be constructed with brick, fluted block, or
similar decorative material.



            10.   Any outlot shall have circulation and
parking designed to complement the entire site.



            10.   Any outlot shall have circulation and
parking designed to complement the entire site.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 340, passed 5-27-2001; Ord. 407, passed
3-13-2011; Ord. passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 447, passed 1-10-2017)  Penalty,
see § 157.999




PARKING AND LOADING




§ 157.145  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide in all districts at
the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure,
automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces.



   (B)   Off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or
building uses shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed.



      (1)   Off-street parking spaces may be located within a front,
side, or rear yard setback, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.



      (2)   Off-street parking for other than residential use shall
be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended
to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest
point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or
parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant.



      (3)   Required residential off-street parking spaces shall
consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination
thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and
subject to the provisions for accessory uses, buildings, and structures (See
§§ 157.035 through 157.040(A)).



      (4)   Any area once designated as required off-street parking
shall not be changed to any other use, unless and until equal facilities are
provided elsewhere.



      (5)   Off-street parking existing at the effective date of
this chapter, in connection with the operation of an existing building or
use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a
similar new building or new use.



      (6)   In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which
depreciate aesthetic standards and contribute to high rates of stormwater
runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by greater than 10%
shall not be allowed, except as approved by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required. Documented evidence of the need for
additional parking on a typical day shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, for then review and
approval.



      (7)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide
the required off-street parking, in which case, the required number of
parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the
several individual uses computed separately.



      (8)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide
the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking
spaces for the uses calculated individually may be reduced if a signed
agreement is provided by the property owners, and the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, determines that the peak usage will
occur at significantly different periods of the day and/or there is potential
for a parker to visit two or more uses.



      (9)   Where two or more uses are present on the premises,
parking requirements shall be calculated for each use, unless specifically
provided otherwise herein.



      (10)   The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale,
trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited.



      (11)   For those uses not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use
which the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
considers similar in type.



      (12)   For uses not specifically listed in § 157.146, the
requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a
similar use or based on documentation regarding the specific parking needs
for the particular use, as determined by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required.



      (13)   When units or measurements determining the number of
required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over
one-half shall require one parking space.



      (14)   During construction, off-street parking shall be
provided on site for all construction vehicles and employees.



      (15)   (a)   Carports and garages for multiple-family
dwellings shall be calculated as parking spaces on a one-to-one basis.



         (b)   Carports and garages in multiple-family dwelling
developments shall have a maximum height of 14 feet, measured from the grade
to the peak of the structure.



         (c)   Carports shall be enclosed or obscured at least
25% along all sides visible from public streets, residential districts, or
vehicular drives within the site.



      (16)   All existing buildings and uses and all buildings
erected or uses established thereafter within the CBD (Central Business
District) may be exempt from the requirements of this section for privately
supplied off-street parking facilities.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 354, passed 12-15-2002; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.146  PARKING UNITS OF MEASUREMENT.



   (A)   Floor area.



      (1)   Where floor area is the unit for determining the
required number of off-street parking and loading spaces, said unit shall
mean the gross floor area (GFA), unless otherwise noted.



      (2)   (a)   Where the floor area measurement is specified
as gross leasable floor area (GLA), parking requirements shall apply to all
internal building areas, excluding the floor area used for incidental
service, storage, mechanical equipment rooms, heating/cooling systems, and
similar uses, and other areas not intended for use by the general public.



         (b)   Where these areas are not yet defined, leasable
floor area shall be considered to be 85% of the gross floor area.



      (3)   In calculating bench seating for places of assembly,
each 24 inches of benches, pews, or other such seating, shall be counted as
one seat.



      (4)   Where the number of spaces required is based on the
number of employees, calculations shall be based upon the maximum number of
employees likely to be on the premises during the peak shift.



      (5)   When units of measurements determining the number of
required parking or loading spaces results in a fractional space, any
fraction shall be counted as one additional space.



   (B)   Off-street parking spaces. The minimum number of off-street
parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the
following schedule.



 


Use

 

Number of Minimum Parking Spaces, Per Unit of Measure






Business and Commercial




Appliance Store

 

3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Auto service station and auto care centers without convenience goods

 

2 spaces, per each service bay, plus 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per
each tow truck, plus 1 space for each 500 square feet devoted to sales of
automotive goods




Auto wash (self-service or coin-operated)*

 

2 for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself




Automobile sales

 

1 space per 500 square feet gross leasable floor area, plus 2 spaces per
service bay




Automobile wash (automatic)*

 

2 spaces, plus 1 space per each employee on peak shift




Barber shop/beauty salon

 

2 spaces per each barber or beautician’s chair/station




Batting cages, go-cart track

 

3 spaces per each batting cage and/or go-cart




Bowling centers

 

4 spaces per lane, plus 25% of the required parking for any lounge




Convenience store, with or without gasoline sales*

 

3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Dry cleaners

 

2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Equipment repair

 

1 space per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Funeral home

 

1 space per 500 square feet of service parlors, chapels, and reception area,
plus 1 space per each funeral vehicle stored on the premises




Furniture/carpet store

 

1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Hardware or home improvement center

 

3 spaces per 1,0000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Health fitness centers without swimming pool

 

5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Ice skating/roller rink

 

4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Laundromat

 

1 space per each 2 washing machines




Motel/hotel with lounge, restaurant, conference or banquet rooms or exhibit

 

1 space per guest room, plus 8 spaces per 1,000 square feet of lounge,
restaurant, conference, or banquet rooms or exhibit space




Motel without restaurant/lounge; bed and breakfast inn

 

1 space per guest room, plus 2 spaces for employees




Other general retail uses not specified

 

3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable area




Planned commercial or shopping center or enclosed mails

 

1 for each 250 square feet of gross leasable floor area




Racquetball/tennis centers

 

1 space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area or 6 spaces per court,
whichever is greater




Restaurant/bar/nightclub with liquor license and dancing

 

12 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area, plus 1 space for
each employee per seat, plus 1 space for each employee, whichever is greater




Restaurant: sit-down type with or without drive through*

 

10 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area, plus 1 space for
each employee, or 0.5 space per seat, plus 1 space for each employee,
whichever is greater




Restaurant: take-out with seating for 25 or less patrons

 

6 spaces, plus 1 space for each employee on peak shift




Showroom of a plumber, decorator, or similar trade

 

1 space per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Supermarket

 

Four (3.5) spaces per 1,0000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Swimming pool

 

1 space per each 3 persons of capacity authorized by the Village Building Code




Veterinary clinic or veterinary hospital

 

2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Video arcade

 

1 spaces per 200 square feet leasable floor area with a minimum of 6 spaces




Video/audio rental/sales establishment

 

6 spaces per 1,0000 square feet gross leasable floor area




Industrial




Light industrial, manufacturing, testing labs, research and development
centers

 

1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area, or 1.2 spaces per employee
at peak shift, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for each corporate vehicle




Mini-storage, self-storage warehouse

 

4 spaces outside any fenced or secure area for office use




Warehousing

 

1 space per each 1,500 square feet gross floor area, or 1 space per employee
at peak shift, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for each corporate vehicle
(separate standard provided for mini-storage)




Institutional




Auditoriums, assembly halls, and outdoor arenas

 

1 per space per each 3 seats or 6 feet of bleachers




Child care centers

 

2 spaces, plus 1 additional space per each 8 children of licensed authorized
capacity




Churches, places of worship

 

1 space per each three seats or 6 feet of pews




Dance and union halls, fraternal orders, civic clubs, banquet rooms, and
similar uses or facilities

 

1 space per every 2 persons of capacity authorized by the Village Building
Code




Fraternity or sorority

 

1 for each 5 permitted active members, or 1 for each two beds, whichever is
greater




Golf course driving range

 

1 space per every 2 tee boxes or tee areas




Golf course, open to the general public or country club, except miniature or
par-3 courses

 

6 spaces for each 1 golf hole and one for each 1 employee, plus spaces
required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar or banquet rooms




Golf courses, par-3 or miniature

 

3 spaces per each course hole




Hospitals, including emergency rooms, but excluding areas devoted to
outpatient care

 

2.5 spaces per each licensed bed or 1 space per each two licensed beds, plus
1 space per each staff doctor and employee during peak shifts, whichever is
greater (requirements for outpatient care listed separately)




Primary schools (elementary and junior high schools)

 

10 space per each instructor, plus 1 space per each employee and
administrator, plus spaces required for any assembly hall, auditorium, and/or
outdoor arena




Public libraries

 

1 for each 350 square feet of usable floor area




Public recreation centers

 

5 spaces per 1,000 square feet or gross floor area




Secondary (high) schools, commercial schools, colleges

 

1 per each instructor, plus 1 per each employee and administrator, plus 5
spaces per each classroom, plus parking required for any assembly hall,
auditorium, or outdoor arena




Theaters

 

1 for each 3 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees




Office




Branch bank, credit union, or savings and loans*

 

1 space per 200 square feet gross floor area, plus 2 spaces per each 24-hour
teller




General office building

 

3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area




Government office building/courthouse

 

3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area




Medical/dental clinic office

 

7 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross area




Residential




Convalescent homes, nursing home units, sanitariums, rest homes, and the like

 

1 space per each 3 beds or 2 rooms, whichever is less, up to 120 beds, plus 3
spaces per each additional 8 beds over 120 beds




Manufactured homes in a mobile home park

 

2 spaces per each manufactured/mobile home unit or site




Multiple-family dwellings

 

1.5 spaces per each efficiency or 1-bedroom dwelling unit



2 spaces per each 2-bedroom unit and



3 spaces for each 3- or 4-bedroom unit




Senior independent units

 

1.5 spaces per unit




Senior interim care and intermediate care units, retirement villages, and the
like

 

1 space per each room or 2 beds, whichever is less, plus 1 space per each
employee expected during the peak shift




Single- and two-family dwellings

 

2 spaces per dwelling unit



Notes:

* See § 157.147 for required stacking spaces




 



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 354, passed 12-15-2002; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.147  STACKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Separate, outdoor, stacking spaces which will not conflict
with traffic accessing the use, and each 25 feet in length, shall be provided
for the following uses.



 




Automatic or semi-automatic car wash

 

5 spaces per bay




Automobile repair station

 

1 space per bay




Automobile service station

 

2 spaces per pump island




Convenience store drive-through

 

2 spaces




Drive-through financial institution

 

4 spaces per window




Drive-through food service

 

10 spaces




Dry cleaning drop-off station

 

2 spaces




Self serve car wash

 

2 spaces per bay





 



   (B)   Stacking spaces shall not block access to parking spaces.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 354, passed 12-15-2002; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.148  BARRIER-FREE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Handicapped parking space(s) shall be located as
close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways, and entrances so that the
physically handicapped are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars
to reach them.



      (2)   Access from the parking lot to the principal use and all
accessory uses shall be by means of ramping consisting of asphalt and/or
concrete material constructed to the engineering specifications and standards
of the village.



   (B)   (1)   (a)   On each site proposed for use, additions,
and/or redevelopment for which the zoning ordinance requires submission of a
site plan, designated handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the table in division (B)(12) below.



         (b)   The number of barrier free spaces may be increased
if needed to comply with the State Department of Labor, Construction Code
Commission, Barrier Free Design Division, or the Americans with Disabilities
Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., or for which the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, determines may have a higher demand
for such spaces.



      (2)   (a)   Such space(s) shall be a minimum of eight feet
wide with an adjacent five-foot wide access isle and 20 feet in depth,
clearly depicted upon the site plan, and clearly indicated by a sign and/or
pavement markings.



         (b)   A 16-foot wide space for vans is also required at
a rate of one for every eight barrier-free parking spaces installed.



 




Total Spaces

 

Number Required




1-25

 

1




26-50

 

2




51-75

 

3




76-100

 

4




101-150

 

5




151-200

 

6




201-300

 

7




301-400

 

8




401-500

 

9




501-1,000

 

2% of total parking spaces





 







 



   (B)   Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a
sidewalk entrance, an inclined approach or curb cut with a gradient of not
more than a 1:12 slope and width of a minimum four feet shall be provided for
wheelchair access.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 354, passed 12-15-2002l Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.149  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUTS, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION, AND
MAINTENANCE.



   Whenever the off-street parking requirements found in this subchapter
require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1
Vehicular Parking Districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall
be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following
standards and regulations.



   (A)   No parking lot shall be constructed until a permit is issued
by the Zoning Official. Applications for a permit shall be submitted in a
form specified by the Zoning Official. Applications shall be accompanied with
two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking
lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with.



   (B)   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be
in accord with the following minimum requirements.



 


Parking Pattern

 

Maneuvering Lane Width

 

Parking Space Width

 

Parking Space Length




0 (parallel parking)

 

12 feet

 

8 feet

 

23 feet




30 to 53

 

12 feet

 

8 feet 6 inches

 

20 feet




54 to 74

 

15 feet

 

8 feet 6 inches

 

20 feet




75 to 90

 

24 feet

 

9 feet

 

18 feet



Note:

Where a parking space is curbed, the vehicle overhang of the curb maybe
credited as 2 feet if abutting landscaping or abutting a sidewalk at least 7
feet wide



 



   (C)   (1)   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means
of maneuvering lanes.



      (2)   Parking lots shall be designed to prevent vehicles from
backing into the street or requiring use of the street for maneuvering
between parking rows.



   (D)   (1)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by
means of clearly defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Adequate
ingress and egress to the parking facility shall be provided by clearly
defined driveways. All driveways and parking lots shall have a concrete or
asphalt surface in accordance with specifications of the village. The parking
area shall be surfaced within one year of the date the occupancy permit is
issued.



      (2)   Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area
zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land
zoned for single-family residential use.



   (E)   All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic
movement, except that the 90 pattern may permit two-way movement.



   (F)   Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot
located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall
be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any
Single-Family Residential District.



   (G)   See §§ 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscaping Standards”,
and § 157.170 for required parking lot screening walls and internal
landscaping.



   (H)   Off-street parking areas shall be drained away from buildings
and adjacent property.



   (I)   All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
shall be installed to be shielded within and directed onto the parking area
only. All parking lot or display lighting shall be designed, located, and/or
shielded to prevent spillover onto adjacent properties, and shall be arranged
to prohibit adverse affect on motorist visibility on adjacent public
roadways. (See § 157.043, “exterior lighting”.)



   (J)   Cement curbing shall be provided where maneuvering lanes or
parking spaces abut landscaping, property lines, sidewalks or required
setback areas. Asphalt curbing is prohibited. (See § 157.170, “parking lot
landscaping”).



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 354, passed 12-15-2002; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.150  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.



   On-premises space for standing, loading, and unloading vehicles shall
be provided for each use involving the receipt or distribution of goods.



   (A)   All spaces shall be provided as required in § 157.009.



   (B)   Loading docks and loading areas facing a residential district
shall be adequately screened by a wall and/or landscaping as described in
§§ 157.165 through 157.167, “Landscaping Standards”.



   (C)   All required loading and unloading spaces shall be laid out in
the dimension of at least ten by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a
clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be
provided with a pavement having an asphalt or Portland cement binder so as to
provide a permanent, durable, and dustless surface.



   (D)   All loading and unloading in an I District shall be provided
off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance
be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards
have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public
thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard
when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet. Required loading areas shall
not be included in calculations for off-street parking space requirements.



   (E)   The minimum number of loading spaces provided shall be in
accordance with the following table.



      (1)   Industrial uses.



 


Up to 1,400 square feet GFA

 

0




1,401 to 20,000 square feet GFA

 

1 space




20,001 to 100,000 square feet GFA

 

1 space, plus 1 space per each 20,000 square feet GFA in excess of 20,000
square feet




100,001 square feet

 

5 spaces




 



      (2)   Institutional, commercial, and office uses.



 


Up to 5,000 square feet GFA

 

1 space




5,001 to 60,000 square feet GFA

 

1 space, plus 1 space per each 20,000 square feet GFA




60,001 square feet GFA and over

 

4 spaces, plus 1 space for each additional 60,000 GFA




 



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.151  PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   The off-street parking and/or storage of any recreational vehicle on
any residential property shall be subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, all recreational
vehicles shall be parked and/or stored:



      (1)   In the rear yard or interior side yard of a property; and



      (2)   In a front yard if the recreational vehicle is setback
from the front property line by at least the required building setback for
zoning district, and is completely obscured from view at the street by
landscaping materials.



   (B)   On a residential property with lake frontage, recreational
vehicles may also be parked and/or stored in the yard between the house and
the street on a hard surface such as concrete or asphalt. No landscape
screening shall be required for lake front properties.



   (C)   Recreational vehicles parked and/or stored on a property shall
be subject to the height provisions of § 157.045, accessory buildings.



   (D)   Recreational vehicles may also be parked and/or stored in a
garage.



   (E)   Recreational vehicles may be parked anywhere on a residential
property not to exceed 48 hours for unloading and loading purposes.



   (F)   At no time shall any recreational vehicle be parked and/or
stored on a residential lot that has no principal building; provided,
however, that this division (F) shall not apply if:



      (1)   Said lot is adjacent to a lot on which there is an
occupied residence;



      (2)   Both lots are under common ownership; and



      (3)   The recreational vehicle parked and/or stored on the
vacant lot is owned by and licensed and/or registered to the occupant of the
residence on said adjacent lot.



   (G)   Recreational vehicles parked and/or stored on a residential
premises shall be kept in good repair and carry a current license plate
and/or registration.



   (H)   At no time shall any recreational vehicle be used for living
or housekeeping purposes, nor shall it be connected to water or sanitary
sewer facilities.



   (I)   The parking and/or storage of recreational vehicles on any
residential property shall be limited to only vehicle owned by and licensed
and/or registered to the occupant of the dwelling on the residential lot on
which the vehicle is stored.



   (J)   In the case of a multiple-family dwelling, a complex of
multiple-family dwellings or a manufactured home park, the village may
require a screened area, in addition to off-street parking-spaces be provided
on the site for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2002; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999




LANDSCAPING STANDARDS




§ 157.165  INTENT.



   (A)   The intent of this subchapter is to establish minimum
standards for the design, installation, and maintenance of landscaping along
public streets as buffer areas between uses on the interior of a site, within
parking lots and adjacent to buildings. Landscaping is viewed as a critical
element contributing to the aesthetics, development quality, stability of
property values, and the overall character in the village. The standards of
this subchapter are also intended to provide incentives to preserve quality
mature trees, screen headlights to reduce glare, integrate various elements
of a site, help ensure compatibility between land uses, assist in directing
safe and efficient traffic flow at driveways and within parking lots, and
minimize negative impacts of stormwater runoff and salt spray.



   (B)   The landscape standards of this section are considered the
minimum necessary to achieve the intent. In several instances, the standards
are intentionally flexible to encourage flexibility and creative design.
Applicants are encouraged to provide additional landscaping to improve the
function, appearance, and value of their property.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.166  REQUIREMENTS AND TIMING OF LANDSCAPE.



   (A)   Plan required. Landscaping shall be included with any site
plan or plot plan application reviewed by the village. A separate landscape
plan shall be submitted at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet. The
landscape plan shall clearly describe the location, type, size, and spacing
of all plant materials. It shall also include planting details and
specifications clearly describing planting technique, material installation,
planting mixtures, mulch, material depth, seed blends, and other necessary
information.



   (B)   Installation and inspection.



      (1)   Wherever this chapter requires landscaping or plant
materials, it shall be planted within six months from the date of issuance of
a certificate of occupancy and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with
permanent plant materials which may be supplemented with other plantings. The
Administrative Official may require a performance guarantee to cover the cost
of landscaping prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   (a)   Landscaping shall be installed in a sound
manner according to generally accepted planting procedures with the quality
of plant materials as hereinafter described.



         (b)   Landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular
encroachment by use of curbing.



         (c)   Landscaped areas shall be elevated above the
pavement to a minimum height of eight inches to protect plant materials from
snow removal operations, salt, and other hazards.



         (d)   If building or paving construction is completed in
an off-planting season, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
only after the owner provides a performance bond to ensure installation of
required landscaping in the next planting season.



      (3)   An inspection of plant materials will be conducted by
the Administrative Official within three months of written notification of
installation to release the performance guarantee.



   (C)   Plant material standards.



         (1)   It is the intent of this subchapter that an
interesting and thoughtful mixture of plantings shall be provided. Therefore,
all required landscaping shall comply with the following minimum plant
material standards, unless otherwise specified within this subchapter.



         (2)   These standards may be varied by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, when these established
minimums will not serve the purpose and intent of this subchapter.



      (1)   Plant quality. Plant materials permitted in required
landscaped areas shall be nursery grown, hardy to the climate of southeast
Michigan, long lived, resistant to disease and insect attack, and shall have
orderly growth characteristics.



      (2)   Plant size specifications.



         (a)   Trees. Required trees shall be of the following
sizes at the time of planting, unless otherwise stated in this subchapter.



            1.   Deciduous trees. Two and one-half-inch
caliper minimum trunk measurement at four feet off the ground, with a minimum
eight feet in height above grade when planted.



            2.   Evergreen trees. Eight feet in height, with a
minimum spread of three feet and the size of the burlapped root ball shall be
at least ten times the caliper of the tree measured six inches above grade.



            3.   Deciduous ornamental trees. One-inch caliper
minimum at three feet off the ground, with a minimum height of six feet above
grade when planted.



         (b)   Shrubs. Minimum 24 inches in height above planting
grade;



         (c)   Hedges. Planted in such a manner as to form a
continuous unbroken visual screen within two years after planting;



         (d)   Vines. Minimum of 30 inches in length after one
growing season;



         (e)   Ground cover. Planted in such a manner as to
present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage after one
complete growing season;



         (f)   Grass.



            1.   Planted in species normally grown as
permanent lawns in the county.



            2.   Grass may be plugged, sprigged, seeded, or
sodded, except that rolled sod, erosion reducing net, or suitable mulch shall
be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion.



            3.   Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free
of weeds, noxious pests, and disease; and



         (g)   Mulch material. Minimum of six inches deep for
planted trees, shrubs, and vines, and shall be installed in a manner as to
present a finished appearance.



      (3)   Approved plant species. Unless otherwise provided
herein, or specifically permitted by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, all required plant materials shall be of the
following species:



         (a)   Deciduous trees. Hard Maple, Oak, Beech, Ash,
Ginko, Bradford Pear, or Linden, Honey Locusts;



         (b)   Evergreen trees. Fir, Spruce, Pine, or Hemlock;



         (c)   Deciduous ornamental trees. Amur Maple, Dogwood,
Redbud, Magnolia, Hicks Yew, Pfitzer Juniper, Ornamental Cherry, or Viburnum,
Flowering Crabapple;



         (d)   Shrubs. Honeysuckle, Lilac, Cotoneaster,
Forsythia, Euonymus, Hydrangea, Privet, Alpine Currant, Barberry, Flowering
Quince, Spreading Yews, Juniper, Burning Bush, Spiraea, or Mugo Pine,
Bayberry; and



         (e)   Ground cover. Pachysandra, Spreading Juniper,
Wintercreeper, Periwinkle, or English Ivy.



      (4)   Prohibited plant materials. The following plant
materials shall not be used for landscaping purposes under any circumstances
because of susceptibility to storm damage, disease, or other undesirable
characteristics: Box Elder; Silver Maples; American Elm; Horse Chestnut;
Poplar; Aspen; Ailanthus; Catalpa; or European Barberry.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.167  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING SITES.



   (A)   (1)   Special provision is made for applying these
standards to developed sites which existed prior to the village adopting
landscaping requirements.



      (2)   Therefore, when an existing site is undergoing
improvement, a change in use or expansion, the objective of these standards
is to gradually bring the existing site into compliance with the minimum
standards of this subchapter in relation to the extent of expansion or change
on a site.



   (B)   When reviewing plans for a change in use or expansion which
requires site plan review, the Administrative Official or body reviewing the
plan shall require an upgrade in landscaping, using the following as
guidelines.



      (1)   Each building expansion of 1% of gross floor area should
include at least 2% of the landscaping required for new developments, or a
minimum of 30% of the landscaping required for new developments, whichever is
greater.



      (2)   (a)   Landscaping along the street and as a buffer
between adjacent land uses should take priority over parking lot and site
landscaping.



         (b)   Where parking lot landscaping can not be provided,
additional landscaping along the street or in the buffer areas should be
considered.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.168  REQUIRED LANDSCAPING ALONG PUBLIC STREETS.



   One of the following street landscaping options is required on land
abutting village street rights-of-way or where otherwise referenced.



   (A)   Greenbelt. A greenbelt meeting the following standards:



      (1)   Minimum width of ten feet. The Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may permit the width of the greenbelt
to be reduced in cases where existing conditions do not permit a ten-foot
width and in the Central Business District where it is desirable to maintain
a shallow front setback in keeping with the character of the Central Business
District. In such cases, the greenbelt requirement may be met through the
provision of street trees within the four-foot street furniture zone at the
curb, or the provision of landscaping as required below;



      (2)   At least one deciduous tree (minimum two and
one-half-inch caliper) and four minimum 24-inch high shrubs per each 40
lineal feet of street frontage. Location of the trees and shrubbery is
discretionary (refer to § 157.173). In the Central Business District,
additional canopy trees may be provided in lieu of the requirement for shrubs
at the rate of one additional canopy tree for every four required shrubs;



      (3)   The greenbelt area shall contain grass, vegetation
ground cover, six-inch shredded bark mulch, or six-inch deep crushed stone on
a weed barrier, excluding marble chips or lava rock, and curbed or edged as
necessary. Steel, aluminum, or black plastic edging shall be used for any
planting beds; and



      (4)   Where headlights from parked vehicles will shine into
the roadway, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
may require use of a totally obscuring hedge with a minimum height of 24
inches and a maximum height of 36 inches.



   (B)   Berms. A combination of a raised earth berm and plantings
meeting the following standards:



      (1)   Minimum height of two feet with a crest at least three
feet in width. The height of the berm may meander if the intent of this
subchapter is met and an appropriate screen is provided;



      (2)   The exterior face of the berm shall be constructed as an
earthen slope, with a slope not to exceed one foot of vertical rise to three
feet of horizontal distance (1:3). The interior face of the berm may be
constructed as an earthen slope or retained by means of a wall, terrace, or
other means acceptable to the Administrative Official;



      (3)   At least one deciduous tree (minimum two and a one-half
inch caliper) shall be provided for each 30 feet of lineal street berm length;



      (4)   At least one minimum 24-inch high shrub shall be
provided for each 100 square feet of berm surface area (calculated from a
plan view);



      (5)   Berm slopes shall be protected from erosion by sodding
or seeding. If slopes are seeded, they shall be protected, until the seed
germinates and a permanent lawn is established by a straw mulch,
hydro-mulching of netting specifically designed to control erosion; and



      (6)   The base of any signs placed within the berm shall be
at, or below, the average grade along the berm.



   (C)   Buffer strip.



      (1)   A buffer strip may be required, particularly where the
adjacent uses and those across the street are residential in character or
less intense than the use of the subject site. The intent of the buffer strip
is to have a minimum five-foot high obscuring area alongside or rear lot
lines, and an appropriate landscaped strip along front lot lines.



      (2)   A buffer strip shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)   Minimum width of ten feet;



         (b)   All trees shall be evergreens a minimum eight feet
high at planting;



         (c)   The buffer planting area shall contain grass,
vegetation ground cover, six-inch shredded bark mulch, or six-inch deep
crushed stone on a weed barrier, excluding marble chips or lava rock, and
curbed or edged as necessary. Steel, aluminum, or black plastic edging shall
be used for any planting beds; and



         (d)   The following species and planting spacings are
recommended.



 


Common Name

 

Scientific Name

 

Feet on Center






“Burki” Red Cedar

 

Juniperus in Virginia “B”

 

4




Canadian Hemlock

 

Tsuga Canadensis

 

12




Dark Green

 

Thuga Nigra

 

3




Irish Juniper

 

Juniperus Communis

 

3




Ketleeri Juniper

 

Juniperus Chinensis “Ketleeri”

 

5




Mugo Pine

 

Pinus Mugo

 

5




Serbian Spruce

 

Picea Omoriac

 

10




White Fir

 

Abies Concolor

 

10




White Pine

 

Pinus Strobos

 

10





 



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.169  INTERIOR LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   For every new development, except in the R1A and R1B
Single-Family Districts, and the MHP-Mobile Home Park District, there shall
be interior landscaping areas exclusive of any other required landscaping
consisting of at least 10% of the total lot area.



   (B)   This landscaped area should be grouped near building
entrances, along building foundations, along pedestrian walkways, and along
service areas. All interior landscaping shall conform to the following.



      (1)   One deciduous (minimum two and one-half- inch caliper)
or ornamental tree (minimum two-inch caliper) or evergreen tree (minimum
five-foot height) shall be provided for every 400 square feet of required
interior landscaping area.



      (2)   One 24-inch high shrub shall be provided for every 250
square feet of required interior landscaping area.



      (3)   The interior landscaping area shall contain grass,
vegetation ground cover, six-inch shredded bark mulch, or six-inch deep
crushed stone on a weed barrier, excluding marble chips or lava rock, and
curbed or edged as necessary. Steel, aluminum, or black plastic edging shall
be used for any planting beds.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.170  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Within every parking area containing ten or more proposed
spaces, at least one deciduous tree (two and one-half-inch minimum caliper)
and ornamental tree (minimum two-inch caliper if tree form, six foot minimum
height if clump form) with at least 100 square feet of planting area shall be
used for every ten parking spaces, in addition to any other landscaping
requirements.



   (B)   This landscaping shall meet the following standards.



      (1)   Landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking
lot in order to break up large expanses of pavement and help direct smooth
traffic flow within the lot.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be planned and installed such that,
when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access
to fire hydrants, nor interfere with adequate motorist sight distance.



      (3)   All landscaped areas, when adjacent to streets, driveway
aisles, or parking areas, shall be curbed. Dimensions of separate landscaped
areas within the interior of or adjacent to parking areas shall be shown on
the site plan. Minimum width of such areas shall be ten feet; minimum radii
shall be ten feet at ends facing main aisles and a minimum one foot for radii
not adjacent to main circulation aisles. The length of these areas shall be
two feet shorter than adjacent parking space to improve maneuvering. A
parking space overhang of two feet may be used to widen a landscaped area and
reduce the length of a parking space by two feet less than required by the
zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.171  WASTE RECEPTACLE AND MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING.



   Waste receptacles shall be located and screened in accordance with the
standards of § 157.036, “waste receptacles”. Ground-mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened with plant materials or a wall, when deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.172  PLANT MATERIALS AND MINIMUM SPACING.



   (A)   All plant material shall be hardy to the area, free of disease
and insects, and conform to the American Standards for Nursery Stock of the
American Association of Nurserymen. The overall landscape plan shall not
contain more than 33% of any one plant species.



   (B)   The use of trees native to the area and southeast Michigan,
and mixture of trees from the same species association, is encouraged.



      (1)   Trees and shrubs for parking areas (or comparable
species).



         (a)   London Plane;



         (b)   Tree Snowdrift Crabapple;



         (c)   Sweetgum;



         (d)   Marshal Seedless Green Ash;



         (e)   Linden Tree;



         (f)   Junipers (Spreading);



         (g)   Hawthorns;



         (h)   Spiraea;



         (i)   Dwarf Callery Pear; and



         (j)   Honey Locust.



      (2)   Trees and shrubs for greenbelt and interior landscape
areas (or comparable species).



         (a)   Amur Maple;



         (b)   Sweetgum;



         (c)   Goldenrain Tree;



         (d)   Viburnum;



         (e)   London Plane Tree;



         (f)   Scarlet Oak;



         (g)   Hawthorns;



         (h)   Pin Oak;



         (i)   European Linden;



         (j)   White Ash (seedless);



         (k)   Sugar Maple;



         (l)   Little Leaf Linden;



         (m)   Honeylocust (thornless);



         (n)   Zelkova;



         (o)   Dense Yew;



         (p)   Pine Border Privet;



         (q)   Red Maple;



         (r)   Hicks Yew;



         (s)   Junipers;



         (t)   Gingko;



         (u)   Mugo Pine;



         (v)   Serbian Spruce;



         (w)   Mockorange;



         (x)   Euonymus;



         (y)   Cottoneaster;



         (z)   Snowdrift Crabapple;



         (aa)   Hedge Maple;



         (bb)   Dwarf Callery Pear (Bradford); and



         (cc)   European Hornbean.



      (3)   Salt-resistant trees and shrubs (or comparable species).



         (a)   Pinus Nigra;



         (b)   Sweetgum;



         (c)   Tamarix;



         (d)   Black Locust;



         (e)   Juniper (all species);



         (f)   Bayberry; and



         (g)   Honey Locust.



      (4)   Trees and shrubs for shady areas (or comparable species).



         (a)   Euonymus;



         (b)   Honey Locust;



         (c)   Arborvitea (all species);



         (d)   Mabonia Aquifolium;



         (e)   Alpine Currant;



         (f)   Dogwoods;



         (g)   Amelanchier;



         (h)   Mountain Laurel;



         (i)   Viburnums; and



         (j)   Cottoneasters.



      (5)   Trees not permitted. Except where they are considered
appropriate for the ecosystem, such as in a wetland environment not in
proximity to any existing or proposed buildings or structures.



         (a)   Box Elder;



         (b)   Soft Maples (Silver);



         (c)   Elms;



         (d)   Poplars;



         (e)   Willows;



         (f)   Horse Chestnut (nut bearing);



         (g)   Tree of Heaven;



         (h)   Catalpa;



         (i)   Buckthorn; and



         (j)   European Alder.



      (6)   Plant material spacing.



         (a)   Plant materials shall not be placed closer than
four feet from the fence line or property line.



         (b)   Plant materials used together in informal
groupings shall meet the following on-center spacing requirements.



 


Evergreen

 

Narrow Evergreen Trees

 

Large Deciduous Trees

 

Small Deciduous Trees

 

Large Shrubs

 

Small Shrubs



Min. 10 feet Max. 20 feet
 
Min. 12 feet
 
Min. 20 feet
 
Min. 12 feet
 
Min. 6 feet
 
Min. 5 feet


Min. 20 feet
 
Min. 15 feet
 
Min. 20 feet Max. 30 feet
 
Min. 15 feet
 
Min. 5 feet
 
Min. 3 feet.


Min. 6 feet
 
Min. 5 feet
 
Min. 5 feet
 
Min. 6 feet
 
Min. 4 feet Max. 6 feet
 
Min. 5 feet


Min. 12 feet
 
Min. 5 feet

Max. 10 feet
 
Min. 15 feet
 
Min. 10 feet
 
Min. 5 feet
 
Min. 4 feet


Min. 12 feet
 
Min. 10 feet
 
Min. 15 feet
 
Min. 8 feet

Max. 15 feet
 
Min. 6 feet
 
Min. 3 feet


Min. 5 feet
 
Min. 4 feet
 
Min. 3 feet
 
Min. 3 feet
 
Min. 5 feet
 
Min. 3 feet Max. 4 feet



 



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.173  GENERAL LAYOUT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Landscaped areas and plant materials required by this chapter
shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Plant materials, including lawn,
shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat, and orderly in
appearance. If any plant material required by this chapter dies or becomes
diseased, they shall be replaced within 30 days of written notice from the
village or within an extended time period as specified in said notice.



   (B)   Tree stakes, guy wires, and tree map are to be removed after
one year.



   (C)   All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily
available and acceptable water supply, or with at least one outlet located
within 100 feet of all planted material to be maintained. Frontage
landscaping, boulevard medians, interior parking lot landscaped areas, and
other curbed landscaped areas shall be irrigated via an underground sprinkler
system.



   (D)   Landscaping materials and arrangement shall ensure adequate
sight visibility for motorists, adequate clearance for pedestrians and
vehicles, and accessibility to fire hydrants and shall not interfere with or
obstruct the view of public view sheds and sight lines from rights-of-way and
public property to streams, lakes, and other waterways, (see also § 157.049,
“clear-vision zone”).



   (E)   Cul-de-sacs, site entrances, and boulevard medians shall be
landscaped with species tolerant of roadside conditions in southeast Michigan.



   (F)   Landscape within the site shall be approved in consideration
of sight distance, size of planting area, location of sidewalks, maintenance
of adequate overhead clearance, accessibility to fire hydrants, visibility to
approved signs of adjacent uses, compatibility with the visual character of
the surrounding area, maintenance-performance guarantee, curbing around
landscape areas.



   (G)   Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller
than six inches at maturity.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.174  INCENTIVES TO PRESERVE EXISTING TREES.



   (A)   The village encourages the preservation of quality and mature
trees by providing credits toward the required trees for greenbelts, buffer
strips, interior landscaping, and within parking lots. Trees intended to be
preserved shall be indicated with a special symbol on the site plan and be
protected during construction through use of a fence around the drip line.
Tree species, location, and caliper must be shown on the landscape plan. Tree
protection measures must be shown and noted on the landscape plan. To obtain
credit, the preserved trees shall be of a high quality and at least two and
one-half caliper. Trees to be preserved shall be counted for credit only if
they are located on the developed portion of the site as determined by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. Trees over 12
inches in caliper to be removed shall be noted on the landscape plan.



   (B)   (1)   The credit for preserved trees shall be as follows.
Any preserved trees receiving credit which are lost within two years after
construction shall replaced by the land owner with trees otherwise required.



 


Caliper of Preserved Tree (In Inches)

 

Numbers of Trees Credit




2.5 to 8

 

1




8 to 12

 

2




Over 12

 

3



Note:


Caliper measurement for existing trees is the diameter at a height of four
and one-half feet above the natural grade. (Diameter at Breast Height, D.B.H.)










      (2)   The following trees are not eligible for preservation
credits:



         (a)   Box Elder;



         (b)   Apple;



         (c)   Willows;



         (d)   Hawthorn;



         (e)   Poplars;



         (f)   Malus (all species);



         (g)   Hackberry;



         (h)   Silver Maple;



         (i)   Locust (all species);



         (j)   Autumn Olive;



         (k)   Scotch Pine;



         (l)   Buckthorn;



         (m)   Red Pine;



         (n)   European Alder;



         (o)   Norway Maple; and



         (p)   Siberian Elm.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.175  WALLS AND BUFFER STRIPS BETWEEN LAND USES.



   In those instances where the following conditions occur, the need for
the wall or berm or similar type of landscaped buffer strip shall be
determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
or the Administrative Official, as appropriate.



   (A)   For those use districts and uses listed below, there shall be
provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential
district an obscuring wall as required below (except as otherwise required).



 


Use

 

Requirements





Auto wash, drive-in restaurants
 

6-foot-high wall



C, CBD, and O Districts and commercial or offices uses in an NOC District
 

5-foot-high wall



Hospital, ambulance and delivery areas
 

6-foot-high wall



M Districts, open storage areas, loading or unloading areas, service areas
 

5-foot to 8-foot-high wall or fence, plus buffer



Off-street parking area (other than P-1 Districts)
 

5-foot-high wall



P-1 vehicular parking district
 

5-foot-high wall



Utility buildings, stations, and or sub-stations
 

6-foot-high wall





 



   (B)   Required walls shall be located on the lot line, except where
underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter
requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential
districts where there is an established wall height and material acceptable
to the village, the wall shall be continued on the subject site.



   (C)   (1)   Such walls and screening barrier shall have no
openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter and, except such openings as may be approved by the
Administrative Official. All walls herein required shall be constructed of
materials approved by the Administrative Official to be durable,
weather-resistant, rust-proof, and easily maintained; and wood or wood
products shall be specifically excluded. Materials shall be compatible with
surrounding building materials, including, but not limited to, brick or stone.



      (2)   Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do
not in any square section (height and width) exceed 20% of the surface. Where
walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the
obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height
requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved
by the Administrative Official.



   (D)   The village may approve a three to four-foot high heavily
landscaped berm (as determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required) as an alternative to a wall upon finding the
landscaped berm will provide a similar screening effect.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.176  WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL SITUATIONS.



   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may
determine existing landscaping or screening intended to be preserved, or a
different landscape design, would provide all or part of the required
landscaping and screening, in making such a determination to waive or reduce
the landscape and screening requirements of this subchapter, the following
may be considered:



   (A)   Extent that existing natural vegetation provides desired
screening;



   (B)   There is a steep change in topography which would limit the
benefits of required landscaping;



   (C)   The presence of existing wetlands;



   (D)   Existing and proposed building placement;



   (E)   The abutting or adjacent land is developed or planned by the
village for a use other than residential;



   (F)   Building heights and views;



   (G)   The adjacent residential district is over 200 feet away from
the subject site; and



   (H)   Similar conditions to the above exist such that no good
purpose would be served by providing the landscaping or screening required.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)




SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL




§ 157.190  INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that each
proposed development and its components, appearance, and function are in
compliance with this chapter, other village; ordinances, and state and
federal laws. These purposes apply to development of previously improved
sites; to the redevelopment, expansion, contraction, or alteration of
existing sites; and to the alteration or replacement of existing uses.



   (B)   Further purposes of site plan approval shall include: privacy;
efficiency for the public and local government servicing; preservation of the
natural landscape; emergency access; effective drainage; vehicular and
pedestrian safety and conveniences; prevention of air, water, and noise
pollution; provision of screening and shade; and limitation of obnoxious
odors, glare, and exposure to dangerous or toxic substances and wastes. The
site plan review procedures and standards in this section are intended to
provide a consistent and uniform method of review of proposed development
plans.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.191  SITE PLAN AND APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION AND/OR ZONING
COMMISSION REQUIRED.



   Submittal of a site plan and approval by the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, shall be required for any of the following.



   (A)   Any development or use for which submission of a site plan is
required by provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in § 157.192, any proposal to
construct, move, relocate, convert, or structurally alter a nonresidential
building, or an addition to a nonresidential building, including
nonresidential accessory buildings, that affects a gross building area
greater than 500 square feet. A structural alteration shall be defined as one
that changes the location of the exterior walls and/or increases the area of
the building;



   (C)   Any multiple-family residential development;



   (D)   Any condominium development;



   (E)   Any proposal to fill, excavate, or grade land which causes
more than a cumulative 100 cubic yards of earth to be disturbed within a
six-month period; and



   (F)   Any proposal to create, expand, or alter a use or structure
which involves using, storing, or generating hazardous substances.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 280, passed 8-26-1997; Ord. 338, passed
4-15-2001; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.192  SITE PLAN NOT REQUIRED.



   Submission of a site plan shall not be required for:



   (A)   Any proposal to reconstruct, move, relocate, convert, or
structurally alter a single-family or two-family detached house in a
residential district; or



   (B)   Any proposal to construct a portion of a nonresidential
building, including nonresidential accessory buildings damaged by casualty
where such reconstruction will not expand, add to, or otherwise modify the
building as it existed prior to the casualty loss. All construction shall
conform to § 157.198.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 280, passed 8-26-1997; Ord. 338, passed
4-15-2001; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.193  APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Application for a zoning compliance permit requiring site plan
review and approval shall be made to the village on such forms and in such
number as required by the village by administrative directive. No application
shall be accepted without the appropriate fee as established by Council.



   (B)   Those site plans requiring a public hearing prior to review
and any subsequent action shall be submitted to the Zoning Official no later
than 20 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, at which the plan will be
first considered. All other site plans shall be submitted to the Zoning
Official no later than 15 days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, at which it will
be first considered.



   (C)   (1)   The Zoning Official shall examine the application to
determine that it contains all the necessary information. If found
substantially incomplete, the Zoning Official shall return the application
and all supporting material to the applicant along with 80% of the fee
submitted with the application. Otherwise, the application and supporting
documentation will be forwarded for review by the Village Planner.



      (2)   Each application shall be supported by the following
information:



         (a)   The applicant’s name, address, and telephone
number;



         (b)   The address and legal description of the site;



         (c)   A signed statement that the applicant is the owner
of the property or officially acting on the owner’s behalf;



         (d)   The name and address of the owner(s) of record if
the applicant is not the owner of record (or firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the land), and the signature of the owner(s);



         (e)   Project title;



         (f)   Project description, including the total number of
structures, units, bedrooms, offices, square feet, total and usable floor
area, parking spaces, carports or garages, employees by shift, amount of
recreation and open space, and other pertinent information;



         (g)   The gross and net acreage of all lots or parcels
in the project;



         (h)   Existing zoning classification, land uses, and
structures on the subject lot and all lots within 100 feet;



         (i)   Name and address of developer (if different from
the applicant), engineer, architect, and/or land surveyor;



         (j)   Project completion schedule/development phases; and



         (k)   Written statements relative to project impacts on
existing infrastructure (including traffic capacity of streets, schools, and
existing-utilities) and on the natural environment of the site and adjoining
lands.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.194  SITE PLAN INFORMATION.



   (A)   Each submittal for site plan review shall be accompanied by a
detailed site plan which shall consist of an accurate drawing, showing the
entire site and all land within 100 feet of the site. The scale of the site
plan shall be not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject property
is less than three acres, and one inch equals 100 feet if three acres or
more. If multiple sheets are used, each shall be labeled and the preparer
identified. If there is an accurate site plan for the lot filed with the
village within the previous 180 days, the Zoning Official may waive the
requirement for a site plan.



   (B)   The following information shall be shown on the detailed site
plan:



      (1)   Name of development and general location sketch;



      (2)   Name, address, and phone number of owner(s), developer,
and designer;



      (3)   North arrow, scale, and date of original drawing and
each revision;



      (4)   The seal of one of the following professionals
registered in the state: registered architect; registered civil engineer;
registered landscape architect; registered land surveyor; or registered
professional community planner on the site plan;



      (5)   A legal description and address of the property in
question;



      (6)   The area of the site in square feet and acres, excluding
all existing and proposed public rights-of-way;



      (7)   The dimensions of all lots and subject properties,
showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties,
including lots across rights-of-way and easements. The boundaries of the
subject property shall be clearly indicated on the site plan, differentiated
from other contiguous property. If the parcel is a part of a larger parcel,
boundaries of total land holding shall be indicated;



      (8)   Existing topographic elevations at two-foot intervals,
including ground elevations of all existing buildings, drives and/or parking
lots, and any adjacent unusual surface conditions. Indicate direction of
drainage flow;



      (9)   The location and elevations of existing watercourses and
water bodies, including county drains and human-made surface drainage ways,
floodplains, and wetlands;



      (10)   Location and type of significant existing vegetation,
including location of all existing trees over eight inches in diameter,
stands rather than individual trees may be indicated;



      (11)   Any significant site amenities and unique features;



      (12)   Existing land uses and zoning classification of the
subject parcels and adjacent parcels;



      (13)   All required minimum setbacks from the existing or
proposed right-of-way and from adjacent lots;



      (14)   The location and dimensions (length, width, height) of
all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing
structures within 100 feet of the subject property;



      (15)   The location and width of all existing public roads,
rights-of-way, or private easements of record, abutting streets, alleys, and
driveway locations to abutting streets;



      (16)   With residential proposals, a site summary indicating
the number and location of one bedroom units, two-bedroom units, and the
like; typical floor plans with the square feet on floor areas; density
computation, recreation facilities, open spaces, street names, and lot
coverage;



      (17)   With nonresidential proposals, the number of offices,
number of employees, the number of floors, and typical floor plans and cross
sections;



      (18)   Proposed parking lots including layout and typical
dimensions of parking spaces, number of spaces provided (including how
computed per ordinance requirements), and type of surfacing;



      (19)   Location of and dimensions of proposed streets, drives,
curb cuts, and access easements, as well as acceleration, deceleration, and
passing lanes (if any) serving the development;



      (20)   Proposed traffic and pedestrian circulation patterns,
both within the site and on public streets adjacent to the site and the
proposed location and dimensions of any required pedestrian sidewalks.
Designate loading and unloading areas, barrier free access, any fire lanes,
and carports;



      (21)   All proposed screening and freestanding architectural
walls, including typical cross-sections and the height above ground on both
sides;



      (22)   The dimensions and location of all signs, both wall
signs and free-standing signs and of lighting structures and shielding;



      (23)   Location, size, and specifications for screening of all
trash receptacles and other solid waste disposal facilities, if required by
the standards of this chapter;



      (24)   Location and specifications for any existing or
proposed outdoor or below ground storage facilities as well as any screening
or containment structures or clear zones required by government authorities;



      (25)   Notation of any variances which have been or must be
secured;



      (26)   Notation of performance guarantees to be provided
including amounts, types, and terms;



      (27)   Statement that applicant will comply with state, local,
and federal laws, as applicable to the site or intended use;



      (28)   Information and special data which may be critical to
the adequate review of the proposed use and its impacts-on the site or
village. Such data requirements may include traffic studies, market analysis,
environmental assessments (including inventory and impact data on flora,
fauna, natural resources, hazardous materials, erosion control, and
pollution), demands on public facilities and services, impact on historical
or cultural resources, displacement of people or other uses as a result of
the proposed development, alterations of the character of the surrounding
area, effect on the village’s tax base, and adjacent property values;



      (29)   Other data which the village may reasonably deem
necessary for adequate review;



      (30)   The site plan shall indicate size, location, and
description of any proposed interior or exterior areas or structures for
storing, using, loading, or unloading of hazardous substances. A listing of
types and quantities of hazardous substances which will be used or stored
on-site in quantities of hazardous substances which will be used or stored
on-site in quantities greater than 100 kilograms or 25 gallons per month;



      (31)   Delineation of areas on the site which are known or
suspected to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of the
cleanup;



      (32)   For developments that are of a scale to warrant phased
development, the phasing of construction shall be indicated;



      (33)   Proposed finish grade of buildings, driveways,
walkways, and parking lots;



      (34)   Proposed type of building materials, roof design,
projections, canopies, and overhangs, roof-located mechanical equipment, such
as: air conditioning, heating units, and transformers that will be visible
from the exterior. The architectural plans of the buildings shall be prepared
by and bear the seal of a registered architect. A site plan for an alteration
or addition to existing structures may be prepared by licensed builder or
contractor;



      (35)   Proposed water service including any proposed tap-ins,
main extensions or extensions for adequate fire hydrant spacing, and/or
considerations for extensions to loop other public water mains.



      (36)   Proposed sanitary sewer facilities and location of all
existing utilities, easements, vacations, and the general placement of lines,
manholes, tap-ins, pump stations, and lift stations;



      (37)   Proposed stormwater management plan, including design
of sewers, outlets (enclosed or open ditches), and retention or detention
ponds. Sufficient data regarding site run-off estimates and off-site drainage
patterns shall be provided to permit review of feasibility and permanency of
drainage detention and/or retention as well as the impact on local surface
and groundwater. The plan shall indicate location and status of any floor
drains in structures on the site. The point of discharge for all drams and
pipes should be specified on the site plan;



      (38)   Locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants with
reasonable access thereto for firefighting, police and other emergency
equipment;



      (39)   Location of all other utilities on the site, including,
but not limited to, natural gas, electric, cable television, and telephone;



      (40)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures;



      (41)   Detailed landscaping plan, indicating location,
quantity, types, and sizes of material. A landscaping maintenance plan and
schedule for pruning, mowing, watering, fertilizing, irrigating, and
replacement of dead and diseased materials shall be provided. Also,
cross-sections of any berms shall be provided; and



      (42)   Easements for proposed public rights-of-way, utilities,
access, shared access, and drainage; and



      (43)   The information listed in divisions (B)(34) through
this division (B)(43) may be required by the Zoning Official to be submitted
with the site plan prior to Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, review, or submitted prior to final site plan approval and/or
required as a condition of final site plan approval.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.195  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.



   (A)   A pre-application conference may take place to review a
generalized site plan presented by a prospective applicant for consideration
of the overall idea of the development. The purpose of the conference is to
discuss basic questions regarding use, density, integration with existing
development in the area, and impacts on and the availability of public
infrastructure. Also, the applicant may be presented with the applicable
procedures required by the ordinance for approval of the proposed development
and with any special problems or steps that might have to be followed, such
as requests to the Board of Appeals for a variance.



   (B)   The conference may be scheduled by a prospective applicant
with the Zoning Official and such other village representatives, as
appropriate.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.196  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   Site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with the following
procedures.



   (A)   Department review. The Zoning Official shall secure comments
from all relevant Village Departments and the Village Engineer and Planner,
and forward all comments to the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, for its review. The Planning Commission shall review the plans
and may solicit further comments from the Engineer, Planning Consultant, and
other agencies, groups, or persons, as appropriate.



   (B)   Preliminary site plan review.



      (1)   An applicant may request a preliminary site plan review
by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, prior to
the submittal of a complete site plan review application. The purpose of the
preliminary review is to allow the applicant to receive comment and concerns
from the Planning Commissioners and/or Zoning Commissioners, as required, in
regards to potential locations of buildings, egress and ingress,
compatibility of the architecture as it relates to the historic nature of the
village, and to indicate any other possible concerns of the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, that would be necessary to
meet this chapter’s and/or site plan approval.



      (2)   Generally, the preliminary review submittal should
include the building(s) footprint, general parking layout, location of
ingress and egress, existing and proposed grades, proposed landscaping,
building elevations, and other items pertinent to the site plan. The comments
and concerns expressed by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, are non-binding and are only to assist the applicant in
preparing a plan for submittal requiring Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, review and approval.



   (C)   Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
review.



      (1)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, is hereby authorized to review and approve, with or without
conditions, or to review and deny approval all site plans submitted under
this chapter. Decisions rejecting, approving or conditionally approving a
site plan shall be based upon standards and requirements contained in this
chapter and in other applicable ordinances. A site plan shall be approved if
it contains the information required by this chapter and is in compliance
with this chapter and the conditions imposed under this chapter, other
applicable ordinances, and state and federal law.



      (2)   When the Commission approves a site plan with
conditions, the applicant shall submit a revised site plan in three copies
showing a revision date and the conditions directly on what becomes the final
site plan.



      (3)   If the Commission denies a site plan, the Commission
shall so note the action taken by marking the plan “denied” and showing
the date of the date of the action. The Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, Chair and Secretary and the Zoning Official shall
sign three copies of the denied site plan. The village retains two copies
with the applicant receiving the third as part of the notification of denial
for a zoning compliance permit described in § 157.010(C).



   (D)   Record of action. Each action taken with reference to site
plan review and approval shall be duly recorded in minutes of the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



   (E)   Final site plan.



      (1)   No zoning compliance permit shall be issued until the
Chair and Secretary of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, and the Zoning Official or then designates sign three copies of the
final site plan with all revised information shown on it marking the plan
“approved” and the date the action was taken. The Village retains two
copies with the third being returned to the applicant.



      (2)   If a site plan is approved by an action of the Board of
Appeals, the Chair and Secretary of the Board of Appeals and the Zoning
Official or their designates sign the three copies of the final site plan.
Any conditions coming as a result of the Board’s action shall be shown on
the plan prior to any person affixing their signature.



   (F)   Notice to surrounding property. Notice shall be sent to
property owners and occupants of property within 300 feet of commercial or
industrial property for which a site plan is to be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. The written notice shall be
sent not less than five days nor more than 15 days before the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, meeting at which the site
plan is to be considered, unless the plan was tabled from a previously
noticed meeting.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 361, passed 7-13-2003; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.197  CRITERIA FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.



   (A)   Each site plan shall conform to all applicable provisions of
this chapter. The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, as a basis upon which site plans will
be reviewed and approved.



   (B)   The village shall adhere to sound planning principles, yet may
allow for design flexibility in the administration of the following standards.



      (1)   All elements shall be harmoniously and efficiently
designed in relation to the topography, size, and type of land, and the
character of the adjacent properties and the proposed use. The site shall be
developed so as not to impede the reasonable and orderly development or
improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted on such property.



      (2)   The site plan shall comply with the district
requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, open
space, density, and all other requirements as set forth in the “schedule of
regulations”, see § 157.009, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.



      (3)   The existing natural landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state as much as possible, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by
topographic modifications that result in maximum harmony with adjacent
properties.



      (4)   The site plan shall provide reasonable visual and sound
privacy. Fences, walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as
appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the safety
and privacy of occupants and users. Where landscaping is provided, there must
be provision for maintaining all plantings through a regular program of
fertilizing, irrigating, pinning, mowing, and replacing all dead and diseased
materials.



      (5)   All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so
arranged as to permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access.



      (6)   There shall be a pedestrian circulation system that is
separate from the vehicular circulation system. In order to ensure public
safety, pedestrian underpasses or overpasses may be required in the vicinity
of schools, playgrounds, local shopping facilities, and other uses that
generate considerable amounts of pedestrian movement.



      (7)   (a)   All streets shall be developed in accordance
with the Village’s Subdivision Control Regulations and Standard
Specifications for Street Construction. The arrangement of public or common
ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the pattern of
existing or planned streets or pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the vicinity
of the site. Streets and drives that are part of an existing or planned
street system serving adjacent developments shall have a width adequate to
accommodate the anticipated volume of traffic and shall have a dedicated
right-of-way equal to that specified in a village recognized source of
reference.



         (b)   The applicant may be required to dedicate adequate
land and improvements to the village in order to achieve access which is safe
and convenient.



      (8)   Special attention shall be given to proper site
drainage. Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that the removal of
surface waters will not adversely affect adjacent lots or the capacity of the
public or natural storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made for a
feasible storm drainage system, the construction of storm-water facilities,
and the prevention of erosion and dust. Surface water on all paved areas
shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of
vehicles or pedestrian traffic and will not create nuisance ponding in paved
areas. Where possible and practical, drainage design shall recognize existing
natural drainage patterns.



      (9)   All off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, and
outside storage areas, including areas for storage of trash, that face or are
visible from adjacent residential districts, or public thoroughfares, shall
be screened by walls or landscaping of effective height, if required by the
standards of this chapter. Building entrances designed for vehicular access
shall not access any building through the front yard of a development.



      (10)   Exterior lighting shall be so arranged and limited in
intensity and height so that it is deflected away from adjacent lots and so
that it does not impede vision of drivers along adjacent streets.



      (11)   Adequate sendees and utilities, including sanitary
sewers, and improvements shall be available or provided, located, and
constructed with sufficient capacity and durability to properly serve the
development.



      (12)   Any use permitted in any zoning district must comply
with all applicable requirements of state, local, and federal statutes,
including health and pollution laws and regulations with respect to noise,
smoke, and particulate matter, vibration, noxious and odorous matter, glare
and heat, fire and explosive hazards, gases, electromagnetic radiation and
drifting and airborne matter, toxic and hazardous materials, erosion control,
floodplains, wetlands, and requirements of the State Fire Marshal. Site plan
approval may be conditioned on the applicant receiving necessary state and
federal permits before final site plan approval or an occupancy permit is
granted.



      (13)   An objective of site plan review shall be to protect
and to promote public health, safety, and general welfare by requiring the
screening, buffering, and landscaping of sites and parking lots which will
serve to reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare of
automobile lights; to preserve underground water reservoirs and return
precipitation to the groundwater strata; to act as a natural drainage system
and solve stormwater drainage problems; to prevent soil erosion; to provide
shade; to conserve and stabilize property values; to relieve the stark
character of parking lots; to conserve energy, provide visual and sound
privacy and to otherwise facilitate the preservation and creation of a
healthful, convenient, attractive, and harmonious community.



      (14)   It is an objective of site plan review to improve the
quality of existing developments as they are expanded, contracted,
redeveloped, or changed in keeping with sound site development standards of
the village and with the Village Master Plan. Site plans should conform with
the village design standards in § 157.198.



      (15)   A major objective shall be to retain, enhance, and
protect the quality, value, and privacy of single-family land uses.



      (16)   All development phases shall be designed in logical
sequence to ensure that each phase will independently function in a safe,
convenient, and efficient manner without being dependent upon improvements of
a subsequent development potential of lands.



      (17)   All sites shall be designed to comply with state and
local barrier-free requirements and to reasonably accommodate the handicapped
and elderly.



      (18)   (a)   In the case of the expansion or redevelopment
of sites with existing improvements, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, shall evaluate existing conditions of the site that
are not proposed to be brought up to current minimum standards of the
ordinance.



         (b)   Upon its evaluation, the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may require that existing conditions
or improvements be brought up to current minimum standards for landscaping,
circulation, parking, and other site development standards in §§ 157.025
through 157.057, “General Regulations”, to ensure the protection of
public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.198  VILLAGE DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of the following architectural and site
design standards is to evaluate proposed buildings and site improvements
during site plan review to ensure that certain design and appearance
standards are maintained. These standards provide a means of evaluating
whether the proposed building design and site layout meet the overall intent
of site plan review and this chapter.



      (2)   These standards shall be used to ensure all proposed
buildings and site improvements meet the intent of this chapter.



   (B)   These standards also are intended to protect the general
health, safety, welfare, and harmony of the village by ensuring that the
village’s appearance, character, and historic and natural resources are
preserved and respected by achieving high quality design; reducing the visual
and physical dominance of the automobile; providing for pedestrian access and
orientation; providing public open spaces; providing landscaping and seasonal
color; and adding distinctive architectural features and roofline to the
viewscapes of the village.



      (1)   Architectural standards in the C, CBD, O, and NOC
Districts.



         (a)   Building form. Building mass, height, bulk, and
width-to-height ratio must be similar in scale and in proportion to buildings
within 500 feet for buildings in the C, CBD, O, and NOC Districts, unless
existing buildings do not meet the standards of this section as determined by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



            1.   Walls and facades. A single uninterrupted
length of a building facade shall not exceed 100 feet. Recesses, off-sets,
angular forms, curved or stepped walls, projecting vestibules from the plane
of the wall, or other features shall be used to provide a changing and
visually interesting shape. Vertical elements such as towers, cupolas, and
chimneys are recommended.



            2.   Windows.



               a.   The approximate size, orientation, and
spacing of windows should match that of buildings within 500 feet, unless
existing buildings do not meet the standards of this section as determined by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. Window shapes
shall be rectangular, square, or palladian (mostly rectangular with
semi-circular top). Circular, octagonal, or diamond shaped windows are not
permitted other than for decorative gable windows. Horizontal windows are
permitted with a recommended width-to-height ratio of between one to one and
four to one. Vertical windows are permitted with a maximum width-to-height
ratio of one to two.



               b.   Windows shall be recessed and include
visually obvious sills. Spaces between windows shall be formed by columns,
mullions, or material found elsewhere on the facade. Clear window glass is
recommended; green, blue, bronze, or smoke tints are permitted.



               c.   The first floor of front facades of
nonresidential buildings shall include at least 30% windows, and remaining
floors of front facades shall include at least 20% windows.



            3.   Roofline.



               a.   Roofline shall be consistent with the
surrounding neighborhood character as determined by the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required. Pitched roof forms (gable, hip, shed)
with overhanging eaves shall be used within the C, O, and NOC Districts with
between four inches of vertical rise to 12 inches of horizontal run and 12
inches of vertical rise to 12 inches of horizontal run. Standing seam metal
roofs may also be permitted within the C, O, and NOC Districts. Flat roofs
should be used in the CBD. Mansard, mock mansard, or barrel roofs are not
permitted.



               b.   Dormer windows are recommended.
Distinctively shaped roof forms, detailed parapets, and exaggerated cornice
lines shall be incorporated into roofline along building facades greater than
100 feet. Roof-top mechanical equipment must be screened by the roof form.



            4.   Main entrances. Main entrances shall be
emphasized with larger doors and framing devises such as deep overhangs,
recesses, peaked roof forms, porches, or arches.



         (b)   Building content. Buildings in the C, CBD, O, and
NOC Districts should possess architectural variety, but must enhance the
overall cohesiveness of the neighborhood’s character and appearance as
determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



            1.   Architectural features.



               a.   Building facades greater than 100 feet
shall contain architectural features, details and ornaments that are
consistent with predominating architectural styles found within the
neighborhood such as: arches; roof cornices; contrasting bases; contrasting
masonry courses, water tables, or molding; pilasters or columns; corbeling;
contrasting bands or color; stone or ceramic accent tiles; colonnades; or
porches. All sides of a building shall be similar in design, details, and
materials to present a cohesive appearance to neighboring properties.



               b.   Elements such as wall clocks,
decorative light fixtures, and door or window canopies are also recommended.
Canopies should be of metal or canvas; vinyl canopies are not recommended.
All nonresidential buildings must have interior downspout and gutter systems;
exterior downspouts and gutters are not permitted for nonresidential
buildings, except for those originally constructed for single-family
residential purposes.



            2.   Entrance details. Main entrances to buildings
shall incorporate devises such as canopies, overhangs, raised parapets over
the door, larger door openings and display windows, accent colors, and
architectural details such as tile work, moldings, and distinctive door
pulls. Canopies should be of metal or canvas; vinyl canopies are not
recommended.



            3.   Building materials. Building materials must
be consistent with the surrounding neighborhood character, as determined by
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. Building
materials on the front facade or any facade visible from a public
right-of-way must be primarily of natural materials conveying permanence, as
determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.
Each front facade, any facade visible from a public right-of-way, and any
facade with a dedicated public entrance into the building should contain at
least 60% of the recommended materials listed below, excluding window areas.



               a.   Recommended materials. Brick masonry,
clear and reflective glass, stone, concrete slab (poured-in-place, tilt-up
construction).



               b.   Acceptable materials. Split face,
scored, or ground face block; beveled wood siding (lap, board and batter,
shake); exterior finish insulation systems (EIFS).



               c.   Discouraged materials.



                  i.   Smooth face block; vinyl siding;
metal siding (standing seam panels, aluminum siding); T-111 and other wood
panel siding; and



                  ii.   Acceptable or discouraged
materials, or similar synthetic or highly, reflective materials should not be
used except for decorative or accent features only. Exterior insulation
finish systems (EIFS) may be used for decorative or accent features, and may
also be a primary facade material provided it is placed at a height of eight
feet or greater and provided it is no more than 20% of the total facade area.



               d.   Colors. The following natural colors
shall be used for the main portions of building facades and roof forms;
neutral earth tones (sand to brown); shades of gray; traditional colors
(e.g., brick red, forest green, navy blue); light, subdued hues (e.g.,
salmon); or white. Contrasting, accent colors which are compatible with the
primary colors listed above are encouraged for trim, accent, and other
decorative architectural features. The use of bright or fluorescent colors
(e.g., purple, orange, pink, lime, yellow) is discouraged. Colors should be
natural to the material or pigmented, and not painted on the material
whenever possible.



         (c)   Historic District buildings.



            1.   New buildings and building renovations within
the village’s historic districts must have architectural features, details,
and ornaments such as arches, colonnades, cornices, or porches that are
consistent with predominating architectural styles found within the district.



            2.   New buildings within the CBD must also
contain the following elements.



               a.   New buildings in the CBD must be placed
along the front property line with no front setback and must contain a second
story if an adjacent building is built to the front property line and
contains a second story. Building height, story levels, and window sizes are
proportions must remain consistent with those of existing, adjacent buildings.



               b.   Although rear and side accessory
entrances are encouraged where possible, new buildings in the CBD must
contain a main front entrance fronting upon a public street.



      (2)   Architectural standards in other districts.



         (a)   Multiple-family residential developments. The
architectural standards listed above in division (B)(1) for the C, CBD, O,
and NOC Districts shall apply to multiple-family residential developments in
the RM District.



         (b)   Industrial developments. Architectural standards
within the M Districts shall be as follows:



            1.   Building materials.



               a.   Building materials for an attached
office/main entrance portion of a building within an M District must be
primarily of natural materials conveying permanence, as determined by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, such as: brick
masonry; stone; concrete slab (poured-in-place, tilt-up construction); split
face, scored, or ground face block; or clear or reflective glass. Exterior
insulation finish systems (EIFS) may also be a primary facade material
provided it is placed at a height of eight feet or greater. If a building
within a M District does not have an attached office/main entrance portion,
the above standards shall apply to the front facade of the building to a
height of 12 feet.



               b.   The following materials, along with
those listed above, may be used for all other facades of a building within an
M District; smooth face block; and metal siding (standing seam panels,
aluminum siding). The following materials shall not be used: beveled wood
siding (lap, board and batter, shake); vinyl siding; and T-111 and other
panel siding.



            2.   Colors. Buildings within an M District shall
comply with the standards of division (B)(1)(b)1. above regarding color.



            3.   Garages. At least 25% of individual garages
on residential units within new residential subdivisions or planned unit
developments should be side entry or recessed at least ten feet behind the
front building line (living area).



            4.   Porches and awnings. The location, size, and
types of architectural projections such as porches or awnings should be
compatible with buildings within 500 feet in the same designated district as
determined by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



      (3)   Signs.



         (a)   Signs and other site features should be designed
and located on the site so that the proposed development is. aesthetically
pleasing and harmonious with nearby developments. Site features such as
decorative entry signs, ornamental lighting, and/or pedestrian furniture are
desirable.



         (b)   Signs should be integrated with the architecture
of the main building and should not appear to be tacked onto the building.



         (c)   Location, scale, and design of signs should be
consistent with the character and appearance of other signs, streetscape
improvements, and uses located along the same street.



      (4)   Open space, pedestrian circulation, and view protection.



         (a)   Site design should provide a pedestrian
circulation system separate from that provided for vehicles and should ensure
pedestrian safety.



         (b)   The location and design of landscaping and
pedestrian areas should be compatible with and enhance the pedestrian and
open space network in the area. Whenever possible, the location and design of
open spaces should form a continuation of open space areas within the
immediate vicinity so that open spaces are linked together in a connected
system.



         (c)   The location, size, and use of yards should
maintain the unobstructed view of lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams for
adjacent properties and from nearby public rights-of-way and public parks or
open spaces. The placement of accessory structures in yard areas which block
the view of waterways, lakes, and wetlands from adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way should be avoided.



         (d)   Sidewalks at least five feet wide and at least
seven feet wide where abutting parking should be provided along all public
streets and private roads. Multiple-purpose pathways for pedestrian and
bicycle use meeting the design standards of the American Society of
Transportation Officials may be required along major arterial roads.



         (e)   Multiple-purpose pathways are intended to connect
with existing or planned multiple-purpose pathways and to link residential
areas to recreational facilities and commercial and institutional
destinations.



         (f)   All developments should provide pedestrian
walkways between public sidewalks and building entrances.



         (f)   A consistent type of ornamental lighting designed
to illuminate pedestrian areas should be provided along all sidewalks.



      (5)   Parking and loading.



         (a)   The amount of parking for nonresidential uses in
the CBD District required under §§ 157.145 through 157.151, “Parking and
Loading”, may be reduced by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, by up to 50% upon a finding that patrons will be
able to walk to the use from nearby residential areas, patrons are parked at
other uses and visiting several uses, and/or on-street parking is available.



         (b)   Parking lots visible from the public right-of-way
should be screened from view by an evergreen hedge row or masonry wall which
is consistent with other elements of the site and adjacent sites and should
be at least three feet in height.



         (c)   Loading/unloading from secondary streets may be
permitted by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
rather that the required on-site loading, upon demonstration by the applicant
that through traffic flow and access to neighboring uses will not be
disrupted.



         (d)   Parking lot lighting should not be greater than 30
feet in height.



      (6)   Street and access design.



         (a)   The road system should be designed to balance the
distribution of internal traffic so that no one road or access point is
overburdened and relied on as the only path for a large number of vehicles.
This objective should be accomplished by providing a collector road system in
addition to local streets that is connected at frequent intervals to the
arterial road network.



         (b)   Shared access or connections between adjacent uses
as a means to limit conflict points and preserve capacity on adjacent roads
may be required.



         (c)   In designing the road system, the objective should
be to limit blocks to a maximum length of 600 feet.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 318, passed 11-17-1998; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.199  LENGTH OF TIME APPROVAL VALID.



   Site plan approval hereunder shall be valid for one year from the date
of approval. If an applicant does not obtain a building permit within one
year after site plan approval, the site plan approval expires and is of no
force or effect, unless extended by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required. Revocation of an approved site plan shall be
communicated in writing by certified mail to the property owner.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.200  CONFORMITY TO APPROVED SITE PLANS; SANCTIONS FOR NOT CONFORMING
TO APPROVED SITE PLAN.



   The applicant shall construct site plan improvements in complete
conformity with the approved final site plan. Failure to do so is a violation
of this chapter and in addition to the penalties contained in this chapter,
the Zoning Official may issue an order to cease and desist. The Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, may take additional action
to revoke the permit following a due process hearing. Upon finding a
preponderance of evidence, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, shall revoke the zoning compliance permit at issue. The hearing
standards used for this process shall be those established for the Board of
Appeals.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.201  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   The purpose of the Architectural Review Committee shall be to meet on
short notice to review and act on minor changes to a previously approved site
plan under the following provisions.



   (A)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
Chairperson shall designate three members of the Commission to



serve on the architectural review Committee. Committee appointments shall be
made every six months with not more than one member serving consecutive terms
on the Committee.



   (B)   The Architectural Review Committee shall meet as required to
review minor changes to site plans that have been approved by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required.



   (C)   Items that would be taken to the Architectural Review
Committee for review and approval include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   A minor color change in the finished exterior of a
proposed building;



      (2)   A change in the trim materials to be used on a building;



      (3)   A variance from the approved landscaping and lighting
plan for a project;



      (4)   Minor changes to parking lots, sidewalks, and driveways;
and



      (5)   Minor architectural changes to the facade of a building.



   (D)   The Architectural Committee would meet as necessary and report
their actions in writing to the full Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, at the next regular Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, meeting.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 339, passed 4-15-2001; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.202  SUBMITTAL OF AS BUILT PLANS.



   Upon completion of the installation of required improvements as shown
on the approved final site plan, the property owner shall submit to the
Zoning Official two copies of an “as built” site plan, certified by an
engineer or architect, at least one week prior to the final inspection
leading to a certificate of zoning compliance. A certificate of zoning
compliance shall be withheld by the Zoning Official in any case where the
final site plan and major conditions as approved by the Planning Commission
and/or Zoning Commission, as required, have not been complied with. Any minor
variations may be approved by the Zoning Official, and shall be reported to
the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, within 30 days
after the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 339, passed 4-15-2001; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.203  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.



   (A)   To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
any conditions imposed thereunder, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Commission, as required, or Board of Appeals may require that a performance
guarantee be deposited with the village to ensure the faithful completion of
improvements in accordance with of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public
Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., as amended.



   (B)   Improvements for which the village may require a performance
guarantee include, but are not limited to, landscaping, berms, walls,
lighting, surfacing of drives, parking, and acceleration/ deceleration lanes,
traffic-control devices, sewer or water line expansion, stormwater retention
areas, and land reclamation activities.



      (1)   Scope of requirement. The performance guarantee can
apply only to those specific features and actions which the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, or Board of Appeals
considers necessary to protect natural resources or the health, safety, or
welfare of residents, project users, or the general public. A performance
guarantee may not be required for the entire project. The guarantee is
limited to those project components specifically designated by the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, or Board of Appeals.



      (2)   General requirements.



         (a)   A performance guarantee shall be required by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, on the applicable
portion(s) of a site plan under any of the following circumstances:



            1.   To meet the costs of improvements required to
be made by the applicant to public facilities owned by the village as a
condition of site plan approval;



            2.   To ensure completion of common elements of
site plan affecting two or more parties; and



            3.   To ensure the completion of those portions of
a site plan which will not be completed by the applicant prior to a request
for occupancy.



         (b)   The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission,
as required, or Board of Appeals may require a performance guarantee on any
other specific improvement when determined by resolution that the guarantee
is necessary to protect the natural resources of the village or the health,
safety, or welfare of residents, project users, or the general public.



      (3)   General conditions.



         (a)   The performance guarantee shall be submitted at
the time of issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. No
building permit or related village permit shall be issued, unless the
Building Inspector is satisfied that the guarantee is in full compliance with
this subchapter.



         (b)   The performance guarantee shall be in the form of:



            1.   A cash deposit or deposit by certified check
drawn on a bank authorized to do business in the state;



            2.   An irrevocable letter of credit issued on
behalf of the village by a bank authorized to do business in the state; or



            3.   A surety bond in a form and manner acceptable
to the Village Attorney. The costs of the review of a surety bond by the
Village Attorney shall be paid by the applicant as part of the issuance of a
permit.



         (c)   The amount of the performance guarantee shall be
sufficient to cover the estimated cost of the improvements for a project
which has received site plan approval or zoning variance. The applicant shall
provide an itemized listing of estimated costs and a proposed time schedule
to complete all of the improvements determined to require a performance
guarantee. The Zoning Official shall review the submitted costs and shall
determine an accurate amount for the performance guarantee. In determining
the amount, the Zoning Official may consider signed contracts or subcontracts
supplied by the applicant or the Zoning Official may secure or require that
the applicant secure a sealed statement from a licensed architect or engineer
verifying the estimates.



         (d)   Cash funds or a certified check made payable to
the village shall be deposited by the village into an interest-bearing
account in a financial institution with which the village regularly conducts
business.



         (e)   In the case of a guarantee exceeding $2,000, and
by request of the applicant, the guarantee may be released to the applicant
in an amount proportional to the work completed on various elements;
provided, that a minimum of 10% shall be retained on each element until the
satisfactory completion of the entire project. The amount of work completed
shall be based upon an inspection and determination by the Zoning Official.



         (f)   An amount not to exceed the actual cost of the
installation of landscape materials may be retained by the village for at
least one year following the installation of said materials to ensure proper
maintenance and, if necessary, replacement. This amount shall be released to
the applicant upon certification by the Zoning Official that all landscape
materials are being maintained in good condition.



         (g)   Prior to the acceptance of a public improvement by
the village and upon the recommendation of the Village Engineer, the Zoning
Official shall require a maintenance bond for the public improvement in an
amount not to exceed 35% of the total cost of the Improvement to remain in
effect for a period not to exceed three years.



         (h)   The unexpended balance of a performance guarantee,
including interest accrued, shall be returned to the applicant following
inspections by the appropriate village officials and a positive determination
by the Zoning Official that the required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed and that all other requirements of this subchapter
are met.



      (4)   Unsatisfactory completion of improvements.



         (a)   When required improvements are not installed or
maintained within the time stipulated or are not completed in accordance with
the standards set forth within this chapter or as agreed upon between the
applicant and the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required,
or Board of Appeals, the Zoning Official may order the improvements completed
by the village or by an independent contractor, or may order that the site be
returned to its original condition.



         (b)   The Zoning Official shall order the completion of
the improvements and so notify the applicant by certified mail at least 14
calendar days prior to the undertaking of completion. During this time
period, the applicant may seek an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction to prevent the action by the village. All costs incurred by the
village for the completion of the improvements or the restoration of the
site, including direct administrative costs, shall be assessed against the
performance guarantee, including any interest accrued on any funds deposited
in escrow.



      (5)   Subdivision improvements. This subchapter shall not be
applicable to improvements for



which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or
surety bond has been deposited with the village by the applicant pursuant to
the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being §§ 560.101
through 560.293, as amended.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 339, passed 4-15-2001; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.204  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   The requirement for the submission of an environmental impact
assessment, in accordance with § 157.048 during the rezoning, special land
use, and/or site plan review process is to provide relevant information
concerning the environmental, economic, social, and cultural effects a
project may have on the community.



   (B)   (1)   Also, this information should provide the data needed
by the village to make a rational determination on the request.



      (2)   Such data is necessary to minimize pollution, retain
environmental resources, and to investigate the adequacy of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, water, and transportation system.



   (C)   An environmental assessment providing the information and data
specified herein, shall be submitted by the applicant and prepared and
reviewed at the expense of the applicant:



      (1)   Whenever a request for rezoning or site plan approval is
submitted, whichever shall occur first, for parcels having an area of 20
acres or greater;



      (2)   Whenever a request for rezoning is not consistent with
the Village’s Master Plan;



      (3)   Whenever a development of 150,000 square feet of gross
floor area or greater is submitted for site plan review;



      (4)   Whenever a development of 200 dwelling units or greater
is submitted for site plan review;



      (5)   For any special land use in the M Industrial District;



      (6)   Whenever required for a special land use; or



      (7)   For a site containing significant wetlands, steep slopes
or other natural features, as determined by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 339, passed 4-15-2001; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)




NONCONFORMANCE




§ 157.215  INTENT.



   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming
lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival.



   (B)   It is recognized that there exists within the districts
established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed
or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the
terms of this chapter or future amendments.



   (C)   Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this
chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.



   (D)   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of
land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or
enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by
addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in
the district involved.



   (E)   (1)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated
use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which
actual building construction has been diligently carried on.



      (2)   ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided,
work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.216  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EFFECTIVE DATE. Includes the effective date of any amendments to this
chapter if the amendments created a nonconforming situation.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof which was
lawfully in existence at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, that does not meet the limitations on building size, location on a
lot, or other regulations for the district in which such building is located.



   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which was lawfully in existence at the
effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that does not meet the
minimum area or lot dimensional requirements of the district in which the lot
is located.



   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which was lawfully in existence at the
effective date of this chapter, or amendment thereto, and which does not now
conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the zoning district in
which it is now located.



   STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITY: A nonconformity that exists when the height,
size, or minimum floor space of a structure, or the relationship between an
existing building and other buildings or lot lines, does not conform to the
standards of the district in which the property is located. Also sometimes
referred to as a DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.217  NONCONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any nonconforming lot shall be used only for a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.



      (2)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter.



      (3)   This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to
meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform
to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard
requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the Board of
Appeals.



   (B)   Upon application, the Administrative Official may permit the
combination, in whole or in part, of nonconforming lots of record into
building sites less than the size requirements established by this chapter;
provided, that the combination of lots reduces the degree of nonconformity
and results in a parcel which is capable of accommodating a structure that is
in conformance with the building area, setback, and side yard requirements of
this chapter.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.218  NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms
of this chapter as enacted or amended such use may be continued, so long as
it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.



   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part
to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.



   (C)   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.



   (D)   Where nonconforming off-street parking, landscaping, signage,
fences, and other similar land uses exist, those uses shall be made to
conform to the terms of this chapter when any use, principal or accessory, is
expanded either by expansion of the main building or the addition of an
accessory building, necessitating site plan changes.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.219  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or
other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.



   (A)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity. Such structures may be enlarged or altered in a
way which does not increase any nonconformities; provided, that all additions
or enlargements to principal structures conform with the current maximum
height and setback requirements of the district in which the structure is
located. Nonconforming accessory structures may be enlarged or altered in
conformance with the provisions of § 157.035(C).



   (B)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent
of more than 50% of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it
shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is removed.



   (D)   Any nonconforming structure or any structure or portion
thereof containing a nonconforming use, may be altered if such alteration
serves to decrease the nonconforming nature of the structure or use. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine if a proposed alteration will
decrease the degree of nonconformity.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 364, passed 2-12-2004; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.220  NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND.



   If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this
chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which
it is located.



   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of
a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the tune of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.



   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use
of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to
another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification;
provided, that the Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may
require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of
this chapter. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure
and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it
shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.



   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on
which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is
located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.



   (E)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structures and
land in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for 180 consecutive
days the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not
thereafter be used, except in conformance with the regulations of the
district in which it is located. structures occupied by seasonal uses shall
be excepted from this provision.



   (F)   Where nonconformity use status applies to a structure and land
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 364, passed 2-12-2004; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.221  NONCONFORMING SITES.



   (A)   The intent of this section is to permit improvements and minor
modifications, as described in §§ 157.165 through 157.176, “Landscape
Standards” and §§ 157.190 through 157.204, “Site Plan Review and
Approval”, to a conforming use and building which does not meet all of the
various site improvement related regulations of this chapter. The purpose is
to allow gradual compliance with the site related requirements for sites
which predate the various zoning ordinance standards for landscaping, paving,
and other non-safety site related items.



   (B)   Such improvements or expansions may be permitted without a
complete upgrade of all site elements under the following conditions:



      (1)   The applicant is proposing reasonable site improvements
in relation to the scale and construction cost of the building improvements
or expansion;



      (2)   The applicant has addressed safety related site issues;



      (3)   The applicant has upgraded the site landscaping
consistent with § 157.167; and



      (4)   The improvements or minor expansion will not increase
noncompliance with site requirements.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.222  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50% of the assessed value of
the building; provided, that the cubic content of the building as it existed
at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.223  USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES.



   Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this
chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further
action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.224  CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.



   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any
existing nonconforming uses of land, structures, and land in combination.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.225  DECLARATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE.



   (A)   Survey. The Zoning Official shall, upon the discretion of the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, compile a list of
existing nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses within a category as
of a specific date. Structures, buildings, and uses in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or a section of this chapter shall be considered
existing legal nonconforming uses.



   (B)   Maintenance of record.



      (1)   The Zoning Official shall maintain a record of such
nonconforming uses, structures, and buildings, which shall be organized by
survey sections, and wherever possible, by named plats within sections.



      (2)   Periodic review shall be made of this record.
Abandonment of buildings, structures, or uses shall be reported to the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, and the Village
Council by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)




BOARD OF APPEALS




§ 157.240  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Appeals, which shall
perform its duties and exercise its power as provided in the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq.,
as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this subchapter shall be
served, public safety served, and substantial justice done.



   (B)   (1)   (a)   The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven
members, each to be appointed for a term of three years. The terms of the
seven members shall be staggered in such manner so as to provide for the
appointment of no less than one, nor more than three members each year. One
member may be a member of the Village Council and one member shall be a
member of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required. In
the event a member of the Board of Appeals is elected to the Village Council
and such election increases the number of Council persons serving on the
Board of Appeals to more than one, then such member’s seat on the Board of
Appeals shall be deemed vacant.



         (b)   Such vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term by appointment in the same manner as for regular
appointments for full terms. The former Council member shall be eligible to
be appointed to such vacancy, but such appointment shall not be deemed to be
the appointment of a Council member.



      (2)   The Village Council may appoint two alternate members
for three-year terms. The alternate members may be called on a rotating
basis, as specified in the rules of procedure of the Board of Appeals, to sit
as regular members of the Board of Appeals in the absence of then regular
members. An alternate member may also be called on to serve in the place of a
regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the
regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The
alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final
decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting
rights as a regular member of the Board of Appeals. Members of the Board of
Appeals may be removed from office by the Village Council for cause upon
written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by
resolution of the Village Council.



(Ord. 268, passed 8-13-1996; Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.241  MEETINGS.



   (A)   All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such times as the Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The Secretary,
or his or her representative, shall keep minutes of the proceedings,
recording the vote of each member upon each question, and indicating absences
and abstentions, and shall keep records of hearings and other official action.



   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall have the power to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, and compel testimony
and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to
the matters before it.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.242  APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person,
firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau
affected by a decision of the Zoning Official charged with enforcement of the
ordinance.



   (B)   Appeals to the Board of Appeals concerning interpretation or
administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, board, or bureau of the village affected by any decision of the
Zoning Official. Such appeals shall be taken with a reasonable time of the
aggrieved action, not to exceed 21 days, by filing with the Zoning Official a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Official shall
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.



   (C)   Appeals shall be submitted at least 20 working days before a
scheduled meeting of the Board. A fee, as established by the Village Council,
shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time the notice of appeal
is filed. Appeals shall be initiated by a person filling out an application
to the Board of Appeals on forms and in such number as required by the
village administrative directive. Applications involving a specific site
shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale that includes the
following information, where applicable:



      (1)   Applicant’s name, address, and telephone number;



      (2)   Property Identification (Sidwell), number, scale,
north-point, and dates of submission and revisions;



      (3)   Zoning classification of petitioner’s parcel and all
abutting parcels;



      (4)   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking
areas, driveways, and other improvements on the site and within 50 feet of
the site;



      (5)   For variances requested from any dimensional standards
of these regulations, the plot plan shall include verification measurements
of existing conditions and the proposed dimensions or calculations regarding
the specific standards from which the variance is sought; and



      (6)   Any additional information required by the Zoning
Official or the Board of Appeals to make the determination requested herein.



   (D)   The Zoning Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board of
Appeals the application and all the documents and records pertaining to the
action being appealed. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Official certifies to the Board
of Appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with the Zoning Official,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or
her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by a court of record.



   (E)   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing, not to exceed 60 days from the filing of the notice of appeal, and
give due written notice of the hearing, to be personally delivered or mailed,
at least 15 days thereof to the appellant and all owners of any real property
within 300 of the premises in question according to the last assessment role.
At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and
offer testimony if called as part of the proceedings.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.243  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or
change the zoning district classification of any property, or to make any
change in terms of this chapter, but shall have power to act on those matters
where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation, or
exception permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and
laws of the state.



   (B)   Said powers include the following:



      (1)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the person or body charged with administering or
enforcement of this chapter; and



      (2)   Variance.



         (a)   To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the
strict application of the provisions of this chapter where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, or area of a specific piece of
property at the time of enactment of this chapter, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations
enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property, provided, such
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter.



         (b)   In granting or denying a variance, the Board of
Appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character,
and other features of the proposed uses as it deems reasonable in furtherance
of the purpose of this chapter. In granting or denying a variance, the Board
of Appeals shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting or
denying of a variance. A variance to permit a use not otherwise permitted
within a zoning district (i.e., a “use variance”) may be permitted by the
Board of Appeals.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 395, passed 12-7-2008; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)



§ 157.244  STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   Variances and appeals shall be granted only in accordance with Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et
seq., as amended, and based on the findings set forth in this section. The
Board of Appeals shall review each case under at least one of the following
provisions, as determined by the Board of Appeals.



   (A)   Criteria applicable to variances. Variances to the standards
of this chapter shall be granted only where the Board of Appeals finds that a
request for a variance satisfactorily meets all of the following criteria.



      (1)   Practical difficulties. Compliance with the strict
letter of the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk,
density, or other dimensional provisions would create practical difficulties,
unreasonably prevent the use of the property for a permitted purpose, or
render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. The
showing of mere inconvenience is insufficient to justify a variance.



      (2)   Substantial justice. Granting of a requested variance or
appeal would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other
property owners in the district; or, as an alternative, granting of lesser
variance than requested would give substantial relief to the owner of the
property involved and be more consistent with justice to other property
owners.



      (3)   Public safety and welfare. The requested variance or
appeal can be granted in such fashion that the spirit of these regulations
will be observed and public safety and welfare secured.



      (4)   Extraordinary circumstances. There are exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved
or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other
properties or other similar uses in the same zoning district. The conditions
resulting in a variance request cannot be self-created. The nonconforming
condition of adjacent or nearby properties does not constitute a circumstance
justifying the granting of a variance.



      (5)   No safety hazard or nuisance. The granting of a variance
or appeal will not increase the hazard of fire or otherwise endanger public
safety or create a public nuisance.



      (6)   Relationship to adjacent land uses. The development
permitted upon granting of a variance will relate harmoniously in a physical
and economic sense with adjacent land uses and will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood, in evaluating this criterion, consideration
shall be given to prevailing shopping patterns, convenience of access for
patrons, continuity of development, and the need for particular services and
facilities in specific areas of the village.



   (B)   Criteria applicable to appeals.



      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall reverse an order of the
Zoning Official or other Enforcement Official only if it finds that the
action or decision appealed meets one or more of the following conditions:



         (a)   The action or decision was arbitrary or capricious;



         (b)   The action or decision was based on an erroneous
finding of a material fact;



         (c)   The action or decision constituted an abuse of
discretion; or



         (d)   The action or decision was based on erroneous
interpretation of this chapter or zoning law.



      (2)   Appeals to a denial of Board of Appeals may be taken to
County Circuit Court.



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map,
and for situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the Board of
Appeals to act;



      (2)   Any exception shall be subject to such conditions as the
Board of Appeals may require to preserve and promote the character of the
zoning district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this
chapter, including the following:



         (a)   Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a
way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the
zoning map fixing the use districts accompanying and made part of this
chapter, where sheet layout actually on the ground varies from the street
layout as shown on the map aforesaid;



         (b)   Permit the modification of the automobile parking
space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such
modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such
requirements;



         (c)   Permit such modification of the height and area
regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot
which is shaped such or so located with relation to surrounding development
or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately
improved without such modification;



         (d)   Permit modification of obscuring wall requirements
only when such modification will not adversely affect or be detrimental to
surrounding or adjacent development; and



         (e)   Permit, upon proper application, the following
character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted by § 157.052, not to
exceed 12 months with the granting of one 12-month extension being
permissible for uses which do not require the erection of any capital
improvement of a structural nature.



      (3)   The Board of Appeals, in granting permits for the above
temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions.



         (a)   The granting of the temporary use shall in no way
constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the
property wherein the temporary use is permitted.



         (b)   The granting of the temporary use shall be granted
in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development
permitted, and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said
temporary permit.



         (c)   All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking,
lighting, and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public
health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of
the inhabitants of the village, shall be made at the discretion of the Board
of Appeals.



         (d)    In classifying uses as not requiring capital
improvement, the Board of Appeals shall determine that they are either
demountable structures related to the permitted use of the land; recreation
developments, such as, but not limited to: golf-driving ranges and outdoor
archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating
systems, or sanitary connections.



         (e)   The use shall be in harmony with the general
character of the district.



         (f)   No temporary use permit shall be granted without
first giving notice to owners of adjacent property and all owners of record
listed in the latest assessment roll of the village located within 300 feet
of the area of the request of the time and place of a public hearing to be
held as further provided for in this chapter. Further, the Board of Appeals
of Zoning Appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, prior to the taking of any
action.



   (D)   Votes required.



      (1)   The concurring votes of four members of the Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of applicant in matter upon which is authorized by this chapter
to render a decision.



      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to give or
grant to the Board of Appeals the power or authority to alter or change this
chapter or the zoning map.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. 275, passed 5-13-1997; Ord. passed
2-1-2012)  Penalty, see § 157.999



§ 157.245  ORDERS.



   In exercising the above powers, the Board of Appeals may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from and may make such an order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have
all the powers of the Zoning Official from whom the appeal is taken.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.246  NOTICE.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall make no determination on a specific
case until after a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given as
required by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2008, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., as amended). Notice shall be given to all
owners or tenants of property within 300 feet. Such notices shall be
delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and
tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll.



   (B)   The Board of Appeals may require any party applying to the
Board of Appeals for relief to give notice to such other interested parties
as it shall prescribe.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.247  ORDER VALIDITY; JURISDICTION OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   No order of the Board of Appeals permitting the erection of a
building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building
permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and
such erection or alteration is started and completed in accordance with the
terms of such permit.



   (B)   No order of the Board of Appeals permitting a use of a
building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless
such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where
such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a
building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit
for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such
erection or alteration is started and completed in accordance with the terms
of such permit.



   (C)   The Board of Appeals shall not have any jurisdiction to
consider any decision by the Village Council regarding a request for special
land use Approval.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)




CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS




§ 157.260  INTENT.



   (A)   The intent of this subchapter is to provide regulatory
standards for condominiums and site condominiums similar to those required
for projects developed under other forms of ownership.



   (B)   This subchapter is not intended to prohibit or treat a
proposed or existing condominium project different than a project developed
under another form of ownership.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.261  APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The definitions contained in § 157.008, Definitions, are
intended to make comparison possible between the definitions of terms in this
chapter for lots, conventional platted lots, and subdivisions and to ensure
that the standards in the zoning ordinance are properly and uniformly applied
to condominiums and site condominium projects.



   (B)   Site condominium projects in single-family residential
districts shall comply with all setback, height, coverage, and area
restrictions in § 157.009 in the same manner as these standards would be
applied to lots and platted lots in a subdivision. Site condominium projects
also shall conform to the design layout and improvement standards in Ch. 153,
however, the plat review and approval process required by Ch. 153 shall not
apply to site condominiums. Multiple-family residential buildings shall meet
the standards for multiple-family developments.



   (C)   The relocation of boundaries as defined in § 148 of the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 559.148, shall
conform to all setback requirements of § 157.009 for the district in which
the project is located, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Commission, as required, for review and approval and these
requirements shall be made a part of the by-laws and recorded in the master
deed.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.262  APPROVAL OF PLANS.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, all condominium plans
must be approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as
required, following the site plan review process in §§ 157.190 through
157.204, “Site Plan Review and Approval”, in reviewing the project, the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, shall consult with
the Village Attorney, Village Planner, and the Village Engineer regarding the
adequacy of the master deed, deed restrictions, utility systems, streets,
project design and layout and compliance with the Condominium Act, Public Act
59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 et seq.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.263  STREETS AND NECESSARY EASEMENTS.



   Condominium projects with streets shall comply with all street
requirements found in this code of ordinances. Projects which connect to
public streets shall have the project street dedicated to the public. The
condominium plan shall include all easements granted to the village necessary
to construct, operate, inspect, maintain, repair, alter, replace, and/or
remove pipelines, mains, conduits, and other installations of a similar
character for the purpose providing public utilities. Public utilities shall
include, but not limited to, conveyance of sewage, water and stormwater
runoff across, through and under the property subject to such easement, and
excavating and filling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of
such structures.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.264  SUBDIVISION OF UNIT SITES.



   Subdivision of condominium unit sites or lots is permitted subject to
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, approval and the
submittal of the amended by-laws and master deed to determine the effect of
the subdivision on conditions of zoning or site plan approval, and shall be
made as part of the by-laws and recorded as part of the master deed.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.265  WATER AND WASTEWATER.



   The condominium project shall comply with and meet all federal, state,
and county standards for a fresh water system and wastewater disposal.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.266  MASTER DEED.



   (A)   The project developer shall furnish the Administrative
Official with one copy of the proposed consolidated master deed, one copy of
by-laws and two copies of the proposed plans.



   (B)   The master deed and by-laws shall be reviewed for compliance
with this code of ordinances to ensure that an assessment mechanism has been
included to guarantee the financing of adequate maintenance of common
elements.



   (C)   Master deeds submitted to the village for review shall not
permit contraction of the condominium (whereby co-owners can withdraw from
the condominium and responsibility for maintenance of common elements)
without re-submittal of the master deed and by-laws to the Village Planning
Commission and/or Zoning Commission, as required, for review and approval.
Fees for these reviews shall be as established, from time to time, by the
Village Council.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.267  AS BUILT PLAN AND OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   (1)   Submission of an as built plan of a condominium
project is required prior to occupancy.



      (2)   The Administrative Official may allow occupancy of the
project before all improvements required are installed; provided, that a bond
is submitted to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, sufficient in amount and type to
provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the
temporary occupancy permit without expense to the city.



   (B)   The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Village
Council based on an estimate of the city engineers.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.268  FINAL BY-LAWS, CONSOLIDATED MASTER DEED, AND SITE PLAN.



   Upon approval of the condominium site plan, the applicant shall furnish
the Village Clerk-Treasurer a copy of the by-laws and consolidated master
deed. A site plan shall be provided on a Mylar sheet of at least 24 inches by
36 inches.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)



§ 157.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Municipal civil infraction. A person, corporation, or
firm who, as a result of violating any provision of this chapter, is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction shall pay a civil fine of not
more than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines a set forth below. As used in
this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second or any subsequent municipal civil
infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this chapter:



         (a)   Committed by a person, corporation or firm within
any 24-month period; and



         (b)   1.   For which the person admits responsibility
or is determined to be responsible.



            2.   The increased fine for a repeat offense under
this chapter shall be as follows.



               a.   The fine for any offense which is a
repeat offense shall be no less than $100, plus costs and other sanctions.



               b.   The fine for any offense which is a
second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than
$200, plus costs and other sanctions.



      (2)   Fines for violation notices. A person, corporation, or
firm who, as a result of violating any provision of this chapter, receives a
municipal civil infraction violation notice, upon a determination of
responsibility thereon, shall pay a civil fine at the village Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau as follows:



         (a)   Fifty dollars for the first violation;



         (b)   One hundred dollars for the second violation
within a 12-month period; and



         (c)   Two hundred for the third or subsequent violation
within a 24-month period.



   (B)   Deviation of approved PUD site plans. Pursuant to § 157.105,
any deviation from the approved PUD site plan, except as authorized in this
chapter, shall be considered a violation of this subchapter and treated as a
misdemeanor. Further, any such deviation shall invalidate the PUD designation.



(Ord. 259, passed 10-24-1995; Ord. passed 2-1-2012)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



      II.   FRANCHISES



      III.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



TABLE I:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


352
 
11-10-2002
 
Agreement with S-HQZ, L.L.C., Holly Residential Limited Partnership, and
Silverman Holly Properties, L.L.C. to provide water and sanitary services to
properties outside the village boundaries
(1984 Code, § 7-01-01-010)


453
 
6-12-2018
 
Granting Consumers Energy Company, its successors and assigns, the right,
power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and
services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges,
waterways and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the
village for 30 years.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE II:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-
 
- -
 
Consumers Power Company Gas franchise
(1984 Code, Ch. 8-15)


148
 
10-8-1985
 
Cable franchise agreement with Comcast Cable
(1984 Code, Ch. 8-08)


176
 
5-24-1988
 
Consumers Power Company gas franchise
(1984 Code, Ch. 8-09)


342
 
6-17-2001
 
Cable franchise agreement with Comcast Cable
(1984 Code, Ch. 8-08)


430
 
6-18-2014
 
Adopting the franchise agreement between the village and Michigan Bell
Telephone Company d/b/a/ AT&T Michigan


 
 



 



TABLE III:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


175
 
5-21-1988
 
Tax increment financing plan; development plan number 2


175-A
 
7-12-1988
 
Tax increment financing plan; development plan number 2


341
 
5-27-2001
 
Approving the tax increment financing plan and downtown development plan of
the Downtown Development Authority dated 5-22-2001
(1984 Code, § 6-05-170)


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated





References to 1984 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED



 

M.C.L.A. Section
 
Code Section




15.231
 
10.18, 111.078


15.231 et seq.
 
152.08


15.231—15.246
 
31.62, 111.091, 155.05, 155.08


15.261 et seq.
 
152.08


15.261—15.275
 
31.38, 31.59, 31.60, 155.08


15.262
 
93.01


24.201—24.315
 
70.03


117.4i(k)
 
10.99


123.161 et seq.
 
51.14


123.162
 
51.02, 51.14


123.1191
 
111.116


125.271 et seq.
 
152.11


125.311
 
157.070


125.581—125.590
 
157.008, 157.011


125.1501 et seq.
 
150.01


125.1501—125.1531
 
150.01


125.1508b(6)
 
150.01


125.1509
 
31.01


125.1651—125.1681
 
31.50


125.1667
 
31.52


125.2301—125.2350
 
157.073


125.2311 et seq.
 
157.073


125.3101 et seq.
 
152.01, 152.11, 157.008, 157.011, 157.073, 157.203, 157.240, 157.244, 157.246


125.3801
 
153.02


125.3801 et seq.
 
152.01, 152.02, 152.10


141.101 et seq.
 
51.14, 52.24, 53.04, 153.02, 153.05


141.121
 
51.02, 51.14, 52.24


153
 
157.008


205.93
 
70.03


205.422
 
130.04


247.61 et seq.
 
92.056, 92.081


247.651 et seq.
 
111.087


257.1—257.923
 
70.05, 72.99


257.19a
 
72.19


257.212
 
70.03


257.226a
 
70.03


257.226b
 
70.03


257.319b(l)(c)
 
70.03


257.319b(l)(d)
 
70.03


257.322
 
70.03


257.323
 
70.03


257.625a(6)
 
70.03


257.625d
 
70.03


257.625b
 
70.03


257.625f
 
70.03


257.625g
 
70.03


257.625m(3)
 
70.03


257.625n
 
70.03


257.675(5)
 
72.19


257.710b
 
70.03


257.727c
 
32.36


257.743
 
32.36


257.803d
 
72.19


257.803f
 
72.19


257.904d
 
70.03


257.907
 
70.99


257.941 et seq.
 
72.15


257.951—257.954
 
70.01


286.569
 
97.23


299.501—299.551
 
97.21


299.831—299.850
 
97.21


323.1—323.5b
 
156.04, 156.09


324.11101 et seq.
 
97.02, 97.03


324.11501 et seq.
 
97.02, 97.03, 157.008


324.30301 et seq.
 
157.008, 157.040


324.32803
 
156.04, 156.09


324.80101—324.80104
 
95.01


324.80122—324.80124
 
95.01


324.80141
 
95.01


324.80144—324.80153
 
95.01


324.80166—324.80172
 
95.01


330.1100a
 
130.99


333.1101 et seq.
 
52.24


333.6103
 
130.04


333.12905
 
93.01


333.20106(1)
 
93.01


338.3511
 
52.21


380.1—380.1852
 
130.04


380.171—380.187
 
130.04


399.201—399.215
 
155.08


400.701 et seq.
 
157.008


418.101 et seq.
 
32.08


418.355 et seq.
 
32.08


436.1703
 
130.02


445.481 et seq.
 
116.01, 116.07, 116.08


484.11 et seq.
 
74.01, 74.02


484.2102
 
111.077


484.2251
 
111.078


484.3101 et seq.
 
111.075, 111.078


484.3103
 
111.077


484.3104(2)
 
111.090


484.3104(3)
 
111.080, 111.081


484.3105(1)
 
111.078


484.3105(3)
 
111.078


484.3105(4)
 
111.078


484.3106(1)
 
111.078, 111.079


484.3106(2)
 
111.078, 111.079


484.3106(5)
 
111.078


484.3106(6)
 
111.079


484.3106(7)
 
111.082


484.3106(8)
 
111.082


484.3108
 
111.084, 111.085, 111.086


484.3110(4)
 
111.087


484.3110(5)
 
111.088


484.3113(1)
 
111.085


484.3113(4)
 
111.085


484.3113(5)
 
111.086


484.3113(6)
 
111.089


484.3115
 
111.079


484.3115(2)
 
111.090


484.3115(3)
 
111.079


484.3115(4)
 
111.079


484.3115(5)
 
111.083


559.101 et seq.
 
157.055, 157.262


559.101—559.276
 
157.008


559.148
 
157.261


560.101 et seq.
 
152.13, 153.07, 157.008, 157.054


560.101—560.293
 
153.02, 153.05, 153.22, 153.24, 157.008, 157.204


560.112—560.118
 
153.23


560.112(4)
 
153.22


560.120(a)
 
153.23


560.143
 
153.07


560.143(d)
 
153.07


560.144
 
153.07


560.245
 
153.24


560.258
 
153.22


600.2919
 
96.47


600.8395
 
32.35


600.8396
 
32.20


600.8701 et seq.
 
157.010


600.8701—600.8735
 
32.20


600.8705
 
32.22


600.8707(6)
 
32.20


691.1416(1)
 
52.02


712A.2
 
130.01, 130.03, 130.05


722.111—722.128
 
157.008


750.234
 
131.05


750.520b
 
130.02


750.520g
 
130.02


752.361—752.374
 
111.116


760.1—776.22
 
70.03


764.15(a)
 
131.26


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1984 CODE



 

1984 Code Section
 
2016 Code Section




1-01-01-010
 
31.01


1-01-02-010
 
31.02


1-01-02-020
 
31.02


1-01-02-030
 
31.02


1-02-01-010
 
32.01


1-02-01-020
 
32.02


1-02-01-030
 
32.03


1-02-01-040
 
32.04


1-02-01-050
 
32.05


1-02-01-060
 
32.06


1-02-01-070
 
32.07


1-02-01-080
 
32.99


1-02-01-090
 
32.08


1-02-01-100
 
32.09


1-02-02-010
 
32.20


1-02-02-020
 
32.21


1-02-02-030
 
32.22


1-02-02-040
 
32.23


1-02-03-020
 
32.36


1-02-04-010
 
32.50


1-02-04-020
 
32.51


1-02-04-030
 
32.52


1-04-01-010
 
96.01


1-04-01-020
 
96.02


1-04-01-030
 
96.03


1-04-01-040
 
96.04


1-04-01-050
 
96.05


1-04-01-060
 
96.06


1-04-01-070
 
96.07


1-04-01-080
 
96.08


1-04-01-090
 
96.09


1-04-01-100
 
96.10


1-04-01-110
 
96.11


1-04-01-120
 
96.12


1-04-01-130
 
96.13


1-04-01-140
 
96.14


1-04-01-150
 
96.15


1-04-01-160
 
96.16


1-04-01-170
 
96.17


1-04-01-180
 
96.18


1-04-01-190
 
96.19


1-04-01-200
 
96.20


1-04-01-210
 
96.21


1-04-01-220
 
96.22


1-04-01-230
 
96.23


1-04-01-240
 
96.24


1-04-01-250
 
96.25


1-04-01-260
 
96.26


1-04-01-270
 
96.99


1-04-02-020
 
31.35


1-04-02-030
 
31.36


1-04-02-040
 
31.37


1-04-02-050
 
31.38


1-04-03-001
 
96.40


1-04-03-002
 
96.41


1-04-03-003
 
96.42


1-04-03-004
 
96.43


1-04-03-005
 
96.44


1-04-03-006
 
96.45


1-04-03-007
 
96.46


1-04-03-008
 
96.47


1-04-03-009
 
96.48


1-04-03-010
 
96.99


1-04-03-011
 
96.49


1-05-010.1
 
33.015


1-05-010.2
 
33.016


1-05-020
 
33.017


1-05-030
 
33.018


1-05-040
 
33.019


1-05-050
 
33.020


1-05-060
 
33.021


1-05-070
 
33.022


1-05-080
 
33.023


1-05-090
 
33.024


1-05-100
 
33.025


1-05-110
 
33.026


1-05-120
 
33.027


1-05-130
 
33.028


1-05-140
 
33.029


1-05-150
 
33.030


1-05-160
 
33.031


1-05-170
 
33.032


1-05-180
 
33.033


1-05-190
 
33.034


1-05-200
 
33.035


1-05-210
 
33.036


1-05-220
 
33.037


1-05-230
 
33.038


1-05-240
 
33.039


1-05-250
 
33.040


1-06-010
 
97.01


1-06-020
 
97.02


1-06-030
 
97.03


1-06-040
 
97.04


1-06-050
 
97.05


1-06-060
 
97.06


1-06-070
 
97.99


1-06-080
 
97.07


1-07-010
 
33.055


1-07-020
 
33.056


1-07-030
 
33.057


1-07-040
 
33.058


1-07-050
 
33.059


1-07-060
 
33.060


1-07-070
 
33.061


1-07-080
 
33.062


1-07-090
 
33.063


1-07-110
 
33.064


1-07-120
 
33.065


1-08-010
 
30.01


1-08-020
 
30.02


1-09-010
 
33.080


1-09-020
 
33.081


1-09-030
 
33.082


1-09-040
 
33.083


1-09-050
 
33.084


2-01-010
 
70.01


2-01-020
 
70.02


2-01-030
 
70.03


2-01-040
 
70.04


2-01-050
 
70.05


2-01-060
 
70.06


2-02-020
 
71.01


2-02-050
 
71.02


2-02-060
 
71.03


2-02-070
 
71.04


2-02-071
 
71.04


2-02-072
 
71.05


2-02-080
 
Ch. 76, Sch. II


2-02-080
 
75.99


2-02-090
 
71.06, 71.99


2-03-010
 
72.15


2-03-020
 
72.16


2-03-030
 
72.17


2-03-040
 
72.99


2-03-050
 
72.18


2-03-060
 
72.19


2-04-010
 
72.01


2-04-020
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


2-04-030
 
72.02


2-04-040
 
72.03


2-04-050
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


2-04-060
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


2-04-070
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I, 72.99


2-04-080
 
72.04


2-04-090
 
72.99


2-05-010
 
114.01


2-05-020
 
114.02


2-05-030
 
114.03


2-05-040
 
114.04


2-05-050
 
114.05


2-05-060
 
114.06


2-05-070
 
114.07


2-05-080
 
114.08


2-05-090
 
114.09


2-05-100
 
114.10


2-05-110
 
114.11


2-05-120
 
114.12


2-05-130
 
114.99


2-06-010
 
73.01


2-06-020
 
73.02


2-06-030
 
73.99


2-07-010
 
74.01


2-07-020
 
74.99


2-07-030
 
74.02


3-01-010
 
90.01


3-01-020
 
90.02


3-01-030
 
90.03


3-01-040
 
90.04


3-01-050
 
90.05


3-01-060
 
90.06


3-01-070
 
90.07


3-01-080
 
90.99


3-01-090
 
90.08


3-02-010
 
92.001


3-02-020
 
92.999


3-03-010
 
93.01


3-03-020
 
93.02


3-03-030
 
93.03


3-03-040
 
93.04


3-03-050
 
93.05


3-03-060
 
93.99


3-03-070
 
93.06


3-03-080
 
93.07


3-04-010
 
92.015


3-04-020
 
92.016


3-04-030
 
92.017


3-04-040
 
92.018


3-04-050
 
92.019


3-04-060
 
92.020


3-04-070
 
92.999


3-05-010
 
92.035


3-05-020
 
92.036


3-05-030
 
92.037


3-05-040
 
92.038


3-05-050
 
92.039


3-05-060
 
92.040


3-05-080
 
92.038


3-05-090
 
92.041


3-05-100
 
92.999


3-05-110
 
92.042


3-06-010
 
92.055


3-06-020
 
92.056


3-06-030
 
92.057


3-06-040
 
92.058


3-06-050
 
92.059


3-06-060
 
92.060


3-06-070
 
92.061


3-06-080
 
92.999


3-06-090
 
92.062


3-07-01-010
 
94.01


3-07-01-020
 
94.02


3-07-01-021
 
94.03


3-07-01-022
 
94.04


3-07-01-023
 
94.05


3-07-01-024
 
94.06


3-07-01-025
 
94.07


3-07-01-026
 
94.08


3-07-01-027
 
94.09


3-07-01-028
 
94.10


3-07-01-029
 
94.11, 94.99


3-07-01-040
 
94.99


3-07-03-010
 
31.15


3-07-03-020
 
31.16


3-07-03-030
 
31.17


3-07-03-040
 
31.18


3-07-03-050
 
31.19


3-07-03-060
 
31.20


3-07-04-010
 
33.001


3-07-04-020
 
33.001


3-07-04-030
 
33.001


3-09-010
 
92.075


3-09-020
 
92.076


3-09-030
 
92.077


3-09-040
 
92.078


3-09-050
 
92.079


3-09-060
 
92.080


3-09-070
 
92.081


3-09-080
 
92.082


3-09-090
 
92.083


3-09-100
 
92.084


3-09-110
 
92.085


3-09-120
 
92.086


3-09-130
 
92.087


3-09-140
 
92.088


3-09-150
 
92.089


3-09-160
 
92.090


3-09-170
 
92.091


3-09-180
 
92.092


3-09-190
 
92.093


3-09-200
 
92.094


3-09-210
 
92.095


3-09-220
 
92.096


3-09-230
 
92.097


3-09-240
 
92.098


3-09-250
 
92.099


3-09-260
 
92.100


3-09-270
 
92.101


3-09-271
 
92.102


3-09-272
 
92.103


3-09-280
 
92.104


3-09-290
 
92.999


3-09-310
 
92.999


3-09-320
 
92.105


3-09-330
 
92.106


3-09-340
 
92.107


3-10-010
 
54.01


3-10-020
 
54.02


3-10-030
 
54.03


3-10-040
 
54.04


3-10-050
 
54.05


3-10-060
 
54.06


3-10-070
 
54.07, 54.99


4-01-01-010
 
130.01


4-01-01-020
 
130.01


4-01-01-030
 
130.01


4-01-01-040
 
130.01, 130.99


4-01-02-010
 
130.02, 130.99


4-01-02-020
 
130.02, 130.99


4-01-02-030
 
130.02


4-01-03-010
 
130.03


4-01-03-020
 
130.99


4-01-05-010
 
130.05


4-01-05-020
 
130.05


4-01-05-030
 
130.99


4-02-01-010
 
131.01


4-02-01-020
 
131.01


4-02-01-030
 
131.01


4-02-01-040
 
131.01


4-02-01-050
 
131.99


4-02-02-010
 
131.20


4-02-02-020
 
131.21


4-02-02-030
 
131.22


4-02-02-040
 
131.23


4-02-02-060
 
131.24


4-02-02-070
 
131.25


4-02-02-071
 
131.26


4-02-02-080
 
131.27


4-02-02-081
 
131.28


4-02-02-100
 
131.29


4-02-02-110
 
131.30


4-02-02-130
 
131.31


4-02-02-140
 
131.32


4-02-02-141
 
131.33


4-02-02-150
 
131.34


4-02-02-160
 
131.35


4-02-02-170
 
131.36


4-02-02-180
 
131.37


4-02-02-190
 
131.38


4-02-02-200
 
131.39


4-02-02-210
 
131.40


4-02-02-240
 
131.41


4-02-02-250
 
131.42


4-02-02-260
 
131.43


4-02-02-270
 
131.44


4-02-02-280
 
131.45


4-02-02-290
 
131.46


4-02-02-300
 
131.47


4-02-02-310
 
131.48


4-02-02-320
 
131.49


4-02-02-330
 
131.50


4-02-02-340
 
131.51


4-02-02-350
 
131.52, 131.99


4-02-03-010
 
131.02


4-02-03-020
 
131.02


4-02-03-040
 
131.02


4-02-03-050
 
131.02


4-02-03-060
 
131.02


4-02-04-010
 
131.03


4-02-04-020
 
131.03


4-02-04-030
 
131.03


4-02-05-010
 
131.04


4-02-05-020
 
131.04


4-02-05-030
 
131.99


4-02-06-010
 
131.05


4-02-06-020
 
131.05


4-02-06-030
 
131.05


4-02-06-040
 
131.99


4-02-07-010
 
131.06


4-02-07-020
 
131.06


4-02-07-030
 
131.99


4-03-010
 
132.01


4-03-020
 
132.01


4-03-030
 
132.03


4-03-040
 
132.99


4-04-010
 
133.01


4-04-020
 
133.02


4-04-030
 
133.03


4-04-040
 
133.04


4-04-050
 
133.99


4-04-050-01
 
133.05


4-05-010
 
134.01


4-05-020
 
134.01


4-05-030
 
134.99


5-01-010
 
150.01


5-01-020
 
150.02


5-01-030
 
150.03, 150.99


5-02-01
 
151.01


5-02-02
 
151.02


5-02-03
 
151.03


5-02-04
 
151.04


5-02-05
 
151.05


5-02-06
 
151.06


5-02-07
 
151.07


5-02-08
 
151.08


5-02-09
 
151.09


5-02-11
 
151.99


5-02-12
 
151.10


5-03-010
 
150.30


5-03-020
 
150.31


5-03-030
 
150.99


5-04-010
 
150.15


5-04-02
 
150.16


5-04-03
 
150.17


5-04-04
 
150.99


6-02-01-010
 
153.01


6-02-01-020
 
153.02


6-02-01-030
 
153.03


6-02-01-040
 
153.04


6-02-02-010
 
153.05


6-02-03-010
 
153.20


6-02-03-020
 
153.21


6-02-03-030
 
153.22


6-02-03-040
 
153.23


6-02-03-050
 
153.24


6-02-04-010
 
153.35


6-02-04-020
 
153.36


6-02-04-030
 
153.37


6-02-04-040
 
153.38


6-02-04-050
 
153.39


6-02-04-060
 
153.40


6-02-05-010
 
153.55


6-02-05-020
 
153.56


6-02-05-030
 
153.57


6-02-06-010
 
153.06


6-02-06-040
 
153.58


6-02-07-010
 
153.07


6-03
 
154.01—154.13


6-04-010
 
155.01


6-04-020
 
155.02


6-04-030
 
155.03


6-04-040
 
155.04


6-04-050
 
155.05


6-04-060
 
155.06


6-04-070
 
155.07


6-04-080
 
155.08


6-04-090
 
155.09


6-04-100
 
155.10


6-04-110
 
155.11


6-04-120
 
155.12


6-04-130
 
155.13


6-04-140
 
155.99


6-04-150
 
155.14


6-04-160
 
155.15


6-05-010
 
31.50


6-05-020
 
31.51


6-05-030
 
31.52


6-05-040
 
31.53


6-05-050
 
31.54


6-05-060
 
31.55


6-05-070
 
31.56


6-05-080
 
31.57


6-05-090
 
31.58


6-05-100
 
31.59


6-05-110
 
31.60


6-05-120
 
31.61


6-05-130
 
31.62


6-05-140
 
31.63


6-05-150
 
31.64


6-05-160
 
31.65


6-05-170
 
TSO Table III


6-06-010
 
156.01


6-06-020
 
156.02


6-06-030
 
156.03


6-06-040
 
156.04


6-06-050
 
156.05


6-06-060
 
156.06


6-06-070
 
156.07


6-06-080
 
156.08


6-06-090
 
156.09


6-06-100
 
156.10


6-07
 
TSO Table III


7-01-01-010
 
50.01, TSO Table I


7-01-01-020
 
50.02


7-01-02-010
 
51.01


7-01-02-020
 
51.02


7-01-02-030
 
51.03


7-01-02-040
 
51.04


7-01-02-050
 
51.05


7-01-02-060
 
51.06


7-01-02-070
 
51.07


7-01-02-080
 
51.08


7-01-02-090
 
51.09


7-01-02-100
 
51.10


7-01-02-120
 
51.11


7-01-02-130
 
51.12


7-01-02-140
 
51.13


7-01-02-160
 
51.14


7-01-03-010
 
52.01


7-01-03-020
 
52.02, 52.03


7-01-03-030
 
52.20


7-01-03-040
 
52.21


7-01-03-050
 
52.22


7-01-03-060
 
52.23


7-01-03-070
 
52.24


7-01-03-080
 
52.25


7-01-03-085
 
52.26


7-01-03-090
 
52.40


7-01-03-100
 
52.41


7-01-03-110
 
52.42


7-01-03-120
 
52.43


7-01-03-150
 
52.99


7-01-04-010
 
53.01


7-01-04-020
 
53.02


7-01-04-030
 
53.03


7-01-04-040
 
53.04


7-01-04-050
 
53.05


7-01-04-060
 
53.06


7-01-04-070
 
53.07


7-01-04-080
 
53.08


7-01-04-090
 
53.09


7-01-04-100
 
53.10


7-01-04-110
 
53.11


7-01-04-120
 
53.12


7-01-04-130
 
53.99


7-02-01-010
 
91.20


7-02-01-020
 
91.21


7-02-01-030
 
91.22


7-02-01-040
 
91.23


7-02-01-050
 
91.24


7-02-01-060
 
91.25


7-02-01-070
 
91.26


7-02-01-080
 
91.27


7-02-01-090
 
91.28


7-02-01-100
 
91.29


7-02-01-101
 
91.30


7-02-01-102
 
91.31


7-02-01-103
 
91.32


7-02-01-110
 
91.99


7-03-010
 
91.01


7-03-020
 
91.02


7-03-030
 
91.03


7-03-040
 
91.04


7-03-050
 
91.05


8-02-010
 
112.01


8-02-020
 
112.02


8-02-030
 
112.03


8-02-040
 
112.04


8-02-050
 
112.05


8-02-060
 
112.99


8-03-010
 
111.020


8-03-020
 
111.021


8-03-030
 
111.999


8-03-040
 
111.022


8-04-010
 
113.01


8-04-020
 
113.02


8-04-030
 
113.03


8-04-040
 
113.04


8-04-050
 
113.05


8-04-060
 
113.06


8-04-070
 
113.07


8-04-080
 
113.08


8-04-090
 
113.09


8-04-110
 
113.10


8-04-120
 
113.99


8-06-010
 
111.035


8-06-020
 
111.036


8-06-030
 
111.037


8-06-040
 
111.038


8-06-050
 
111.039


8-06-060
 
111.040


8-07-010
 
111.055


8-07-020
 
111.056


8-07-030
 
111.057


8-07-040
 
111.058


8-07-050
 
111.059


8-07-060
 
111.060


8-07-070
 
111.061


8-07-080
 
111.062


8-07-090
 
111.999


8-08
 
TSO Table II


8-09
 
TSO Table II


8-10-010
 
115.01


8-10-020
 
115.02


8-10-030
 
115.03


8-10-040
 
115.04


8-10-050
 
115.05


8-10-060
 
115.06


8-10-070
 
115.07


8-10-080
 
115.08


8-10-090
 
115.09


8-10-100
 
115.10


8-10-110
 
115.11


8-10-120
 
115.12


8-10-130
 
115.13


8-10-140
 
115.14


8-10-150
 
115.15


8-10-160
 
115.16


8-10-180
 
115.17


8-11-010
 
111.075


8-11-020
 
111.076


8-11-030
 
111.077


8-11-040
 
111.078


8-11-050
 
111.079


8-11-060
 
111.080


8-11-070
 
111.081


8-11-080
 
111.082


8-11-090
 
111.083


8-11-100
 
111.084


8-11-110
 
111.085


8-11-120
 
111.086


8-11-130
 
111.087


8-11-140
 
111.088


8-11-150
 
111.089


8-11-160
 
111.090


8-11-170
 
111.091


8-11-180
 
111.092


8-11-200
 
111.093


8-11-210
 
111.999


8-12-010
 
75.01


8-12-020
 
75.02


8-12-030
 
75.03


8-12-040
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


8-12-050
 
75.04


8-12-060
 
75.05


8-12-070
 
75.06


8-12-080
 
75.07


8-12-090
 
75.99


8-13
 
111.124


8-13-010
 
111.110


8-13-020
 
111.111


8-13-030
 
111.112


8-13-040
 
111.113


8-13-050
 
111.114


8-13-060
 
111.115


8-13-070
 
111.116


8-13-080
 
111.117


8-13-090
 
111.118


8-13-100
 
111.119


8-13-110
 
111.120


8-13-120
 
111.121


8-13-130
 
111.122


8-13-140
 
111.123


8-14-01
 
110.01


8-14-02
 
110.02


8-14-03
 
110.03


8-14-04
 
110.04


8-14-05
 
110.05


8-14-06
 
110.06


8-14-07
 
110.07


8-14-08
 
110.08


8-14-09
 
110.09


8-14-010
 
110.10


8-14-011
 
110.11


8-14-012
 
110.12


8-14-013
 
110.13


8-14-014
 
110.14


8-14-015
 
110.15


8-14-016
 
110.16


8-14-017
 
110.17


8-14-018
 
110.18


8-14-019
 
110.19


8-14-020
 
110.20


8-14-021
 
110.21


8-14-022
 
110.22


8-14-023
 
110.23


8-14-031
 
110.35


8-14-032
 
110.36


8-14-033
 
110.37


8-14-040
 
110.38


8-14-041
 
110.39


8-14-042
 
110.40


8-15
 
TSO Table II


8-16
 
TSO Table II


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
95.01, 95.99


-
 
- -
 
111.001—111.005


-
 
- -
 
152.01—152.14


-
 
8-8-1922
 
92.015—92.020 , 92.999


57
 
1-12-1937
 
113.01—113.10


4
 
11-18-1962
 
114.12, 114.99


3
 
10-23-1962
 
73.01, 73.02, 73.99


5
 
4-27-1965
 
73.02


6
 
3-15-1966
 
111.020—111.022, 111.999, 130.01, 130.99


11
 
8-26-1969
 
153.01—153.07, 153.20—153.24, 153.35—153.40, 153.55—153.58


13-A
 
10-13-1970
 
131.29, 131.30


13
 
10-19-1970
 
92.001, 92.999, 131.20—131.25, 131.29, 131.30—131.32, 131.34, 131.35,
131.37—131.52, 131.99


19
 
8-31-1971
 
91.01—91.05, 91.99


23
 
3-28-1972
 
92.035


24
 
4-25-1972
 
132.01—132.03, 132.99


27
 
1-1-1973
 
94.01, 94.02


28
 
1-30-1973
 
111.035—111.040, 111.999


31
 
6-8-1973
 
112.01—112.05


33
 
8-21-1973
 
92.055


41
 
3-21-1974
 
33.015—33.040


43
 
4-16-1974
 
131.02, 131.99


45
 
7-9-1974
 
31.02


44
 
7-11-1974
 
131.41, 131.99


53
 
2-17-1976
 
131.02


54
 
9-28-1976
 
150.30, 150.31, 150.99


55
 
1-25-1977
 
31.37


58
 
8-9-1977
 
96.01—96.26, 96.99


61
 
8-9-1977
 
31.02


65
 
1-10-1978
 
131.30


71
 
7-25-1978
 
131.03, 131.99


76
 
12-12-1978
 
155.01—155.15, 155.99


77
 
1-21-1979
 
131.04, 131.99


85
 
10-23-1979
 
155.07—155.09, 155.13


87
 
12-11-1979
 
111.055, 111.999


95
 
4-8-1980
 
31.37


98
 
9-30-1980
 
52.02—52.06, 52.20—52.23, 52.25, 52.41, 52.42


105
 
12-9-1980
 
131.03, 131.99


109
 
2-10-1981
 
131.05


113
 
6-16-1981
 
150.01—150.03, 150.99


115
 
6-16-1981
 
70.01, 70.02, 70.04


116
 
6-16-1981
 
70.03


119
 
10-13-1981
 
71.01, 71.02


121
 
11-24-1981
 
131.25, 131.99


122
 
11-24-1981
 
131.06


124
 
12-8-1981
 
130.02, 130.99


126
 
2-2-1982
 
154.99


127
 
7-27-1982
 
92.075—92.107, 92.999


130
 
11-9-1982
 
155.03


133
 
3-29-1983
 
70.03


137
 
5-8-1984
 
31.50—31.65


139
 
6-12-1984
 
154.99


143
 
7-24-1984
 
31.01, 31.02, 31.37, 33.016, 33.027, 72.15—72.18, 72.99, 73.02, 73.99,
91.01—91.05, 91.99, 92.016, 92.017, 92.019, 92.056, 92.999, 94.99, 96.03,
96.07, 96.21, 96.99, 111.021, 111.022, 111.038, 111.056, 111.058, 111.059,
111.061, 111.062, 111.999, 112.02—112.04, 113.01, 113.04—113.07, 113.09,
113.99, 114.03, 114.05, 114.06, 114.10, 114.12, 114.99, 130.01, 130.99,
131.41, 131.99, 132.99, 150.03, 150.99, 154.99, 155.03, 155.99


144
 
11-13-1984
 
72.01, 72.03


145
 
11-20-1984
 
156.01—156.10


146
 
1-29-1985
 
52.01—52.03, 52.07, 52.25, 52.41, 52.42


147
 
4-9-1985
 
154.99


148
 
10-8-1985
 
TSO Table II


149
 
10-29-1985
 
72.04, Ch. 77, Sch. I, Ch. 77, Sch. III, Ch. 77, Sch. IV


150
 
11-12-1985
 
131.01, 131.99


154
 
9-9-1986
 
131.36


155
 
12-16-1986
 
154.99


157
 
2-10-1987
 
93.01—93.07, 93.99


162
 
6-23-1987
 
154.99


163
 
7-16-1987
 
97.01—97.07, 97.99


165
 
8-25-1987
 
150.03, 150.99


168
 
2-9-1988
 
130.01, 130.99


173
 
4-12-1988
 
72.19, 72.99, 92.056


175
 
5-21-1988
 
TSO Table III


175-A
 
7-12-1988
 
TSO Table III


179
 
1-10-1989
 
92.081, 92.100


181
 
3-28-1989
 
131.27, 131.28, 131.99


182
 
4-11-1989
 
94.03—94.11, 94.99


183
 
5-9-1989
 
154.99


184
 
5-9-1989
 
154.99


190
 
8-22-1989
 
92.035—92.042, 92.999, 150.03


191
 
9-12-1989
 
33.055—33.065


192
 
9-26-1989
 
112.02


194
 
10-24-1989
 
72.04


204
 
10-9-1990
 
150.01, 150.99


206
 
10-9-1990
 
33.015, 72.99, 130.01


209
 
12-18-1990
 
54.01—54.07, 54.99


215
 
8-27-1991
 
130.01


218
 
11-12-1991
 
131.25


219
 
12-10-1991
 
71.03, 71.04, 71.06, 71.99, 72.99, Ch. 76, Sch. II


220
 
1-28-1992
 
70.03


221
 
2-25-1992
 
52.20


223
 
4-14-1992
 
31.37


225
 
8-11-1992
 
32.01—32.09, 32.99


226
 
8-11-1992
 
72.01


229
 
12-8-1992
 
33.061


227
 
1-26-1993
 
52.01—52.07, 52.20, 52.21, 52.23, 52.25, 52.40—52.43


235
 
6-22-1993
 
50.01, 50.02


238
 
8-3-1993
 
72.01, 72.03, 72.04, Ch. 77, Sch. II, Ch. 77, Sch. III, Ch. 77, Sch. IV


239
 
9-7-1993
 
155.01—155.15, 155.99


240
 
10-19-1993
 
115.01—115.17


241
 
12-7-1993
 
130.02, 130.99


247
 
7-5-1994
 
154.99


253
 
11-22-1994
 
70.03


255
 
4-11-1995
 
70.03


256
 
7-25-1995
 
72.02—72.04, Ch. 77, Sch. II, Ch. 77, Sch. III, Ch. 77, Sch. IV


259
 
10-24-1995
 
157.001—157.011, 157.025—157.057, 157.070—157.080, 157.095—157.108,
157.120—157.130, 157.145—157.151, 157.165—157.176, 157.190—157.204,
157.215—157.225, 157.240—157.247, 157.260—157.268, 157.999


260
 
10-24-1995
 
30.01, 30.02


261
 
11-7-1995
 
90.08


262
 
2-27-1996
 
32.20—32.23, 32.36, 32.50—32.52


266
 
6-25-1996
 
153.39


257
 
8-13-1996
 
31.53, 31.54


268
 
8-13-1996
 
157.240


269
 
8-13-1996
 
72.99


272
 
1-28-1997
 
154.99


274
 
4-8-1997
 
91.20—91.29, 91.99


275
 
5-13-1997
 
157.244


277
 
6-10-1997
 
51.01—51.04, 51.09—51.14, 52.24—52.26, 52.99, 53.01—53.12, 53.99


280
 
8-26-1997
 
157.191, 157.192


282
 
11-18-1997
 
96.40—96.49


283
 
12-16-1997
 
51.06


288
 
4-28-1998
 
150.03, 150.99


291
 
7-14-1998
 
96.99


292
 
7-14-1998
 
97.99


293
 
7-14-1998
 
114.99


294
 
7-14-1998
 
73.99


295
 
7-14-1998
 
90.99


297
 
7-14-1998
 
93.99


298
 
7-14-1998
 
92.999


300
 
7-14-1998
 
94.99


301
 
7-14-1998
 
92.999


302
 
7-14-1998
 
54.07, 54.99


303
 
7-14-1998
 
150.99


304
 
7-14-1998
 
131.99


305
 
7-14-1998
 
155.99


306
 
7-14-1998
 
154.99


307
 
7-14-1998
 
91.99


324
 
7-14-1998
 
157.008


308
 
7-14-1998
 
132.99


310
 
7-14-1998
 
111.999


311
 
7-14-1998
 
113.99


312
 
7-14-1998
 
111.999


313
 
7-14-1998
 
111.999


316
 
10-27-1998
 
51.12


317
 
11-17-1998
 
154.99


318
 
11-17-1998
 
157.198


261
 
12-1-1998
 
90.01—90.08


319
 
12-15-1998
 
157.035


320
 
12-24-1998
 
131.25


321
 
4-13-1999
 
157.080


324
 
5-11-1999
 
157.008


326
 
9-2-1999
 
131.25, 131.26


327
 
9-23-1999
 
157.041, 157.054


328
 
9-23-1999
 
70.03


329
 
11-4-1999
 
70.03


330
 
1-1-2000
 
51.05, 51.07


332
 
3-28-2000
 
154.07


333
 
9-7-2000
 
51.05, 51.06


335
 
12-14-2000
 
71.04, 71.05


336
 
1-18-2001
 
31.51


338
 
4-15-2001
 
157.191, 157.192


339
 
4-15-2001
 
157.201—157.204


340
 
5-27-2001
 
157.057, 157.078, 157.130


341
 
5-27-2001
 
TSO Table III


342
 
6-17-2001
 
TSO Table II


344
 
9-2-2001
 
150.01—150.03, 150.99


343
 
9-15-2001
 
51.05


346
 
9-16-2001
 
91.30—91.32, 91.99


347
 
1-27-2002
 
157.151


349
 
1-30-2002
 
157.036


350
 
6-16-2002
 
92.001, 92.999


351
 
7-14-2002
 
157.054


352
 
11-10-2002
 
51.02, 51.05—51.12, 52.02, 52.03, 52.20, 52.24—52.26, 53.02—53.04,
53.09, TSO Table I


353
 
11-10-2002
 
111.999


355
 
12-8-2002
 
51.05


354
 
12-15-2002
 
157.145—157.149


356
 
1-19-2003
 
157.076


357
 
3-16-2003
 
157.030


360
 
5-28-2003
 
70.03


361
 
7-13-2003
 
157.196


362
 
9-14-2003
 
157.035


363
 
12-28-2003
 
70.05, 70.06


364
 
2-12-2004
 
157.219, 157.220


366
 
7-1-2004
 
33.058


367
 
7-1-2004
 
31.15—31.20


369
 
10-21-2004
 
33.001


370
 
12-23-2004
 
154.99


371
 
1-20-2005
 
157.043


373
 
3-24-2005
 
51.04, 51.09


375
 
8-4-2005
 
150.99


376
 
9-1-2005
 
53.99


378
 
1-19-2006
 
130.02, 130.99


377
 
2-23-2006
 
154.01, 154.06


380
 
7-30-2006
 
31.51


381
 
8-27-2006
 
150.01


382
 
12-17-2006
 
75.99


383
 
2-18-2007
 
30.02


385
 
3-18-2007
 
150.15, 150.99


386
 
6-17-2007
 
154.09, 154.11


387
 
9-2-2007
 
31.51


390
 
3-2-2008
 
94.01


-
 
6-15-2008
 
51.13


392
 
6-15-2008
 
51.02, 51.04, 51.09, 51.13


393
 
7-13-2008
 
112.02


394
 
8-17-2008
 
51.13


395
 
12-7-2008
 
157.243


396
 
12-21-2008
 
90.02


397
 
12-21-2008
 
131.36


399
 
12-21-2008
 
90.99


400
 
5-17-2009
 
72.01


401
 
5-31-2009
 
133.99


402
 
5-31-2009
 
74.02


403
 
7-19-2009
 
111.124


404
 
9-6-2009
 
131.33


405
 
1-17-2010
 
51.13


406
 
2-28-2010
 
151.05


407
 
3-13-2011
 
157.008, 157.077, 157.130


409
 
7-31-2011
 
94.01


410
 
11-2-2011
 
94.02, 94.05, 94.10


411
 
1-18-2012
 
131.26


412
 
1-18-2012
 
130.03, 130.99


-
 
2-1-2012
 
157.001—157.011, 157.025—157.057, 157.070—157.080, 157.095—157.108,
157.120—157.130, 157.145—157.151, 157.165—157.176, 157.190—157.204,
157.215—157.225, 157.240—157.247, 157.260—157.268, 157.999


414
 
4-2-2012
 
110.40


415
 
8-22-2012
 
90.99


416
 
8-22-2012
 
92.055, 92.062


417
 
10-3-2012
 
131.52


418
 
10-3-2012
 
130.04


419
 
10-3-2012
 
71.02


420
 
10-31-2012
 
130.99


421
 
10-31-2012
 
131.01


424
 
12-12-2012
 
110.35


428
 
11-20-2013
 
33.080—33.084


429
 
2-16-2014
 
112.04


430
 
6-18-2014
 
TSO Table II


432
 
2-15-2015
 
133.99


433
 
3-18-2015
 
130.99


434
 
8-2-2015
 
31.35—31.38


437
 
1-17-2016
 
157.008


438
 
1-17-2016
 
157.078


439
 
1-17-2016
 
154.06


440
 
3-8-2016
 
116.01—116.08


441
 
8-23-2016
 
157.058


444
 
8-9-2016
 
Adopting Ordianance


446
 
10-11-2016
 
97.20—97.27


447
 
1-10-2017
 
157.130


448
 
7-25-2017
 
54.03


449
 
7-25-2017
 
150.30


450
 
7-25-2017
 
90.03


451
 
2-13-2018
 
130.02


452
 
5-8-2018
 
72.01


453
 
6-12-2018
 
TSO Table I


454
 
10-23-2018
 
157.080


455
 
10-23-2018
 
151.99


456
 
2-12-2019
 
117.01


 
 
 
 
 




 


